Click here to access the print version. Fill the grid using the numbers 1 to 9. Each number must appear just once in every row, column and 3x3 box. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Click here to access the print version The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. Special announcement We regret to announce that, until further notice, we are unable to offer prizes for solvers of the Azed weekly crosswords. The special monthly Azed clue writing competitions are not affected and will continue as normal. Entry rules for these will appear as usual.Click here to access the print version. Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.The government’s plans for a post-Brexit scheme to support British farming are based on little more than “blind optimism” and risk increasing the UK’s reliance on food imports, a parliamentary inquiry has warned. The EU’s scheme of subsidies – known as the common agricultural policy (CAP) and worth £3bn-a-year to UK farmers – was one of the long-running complaints of Eurosceptics, who saw the ability of Britain to draw up its own scheme of payments as one of the major benefits of Brexit. Ministers had said the new scheme would be used to increase the environmental benefits of agriculture. However, MPs on the powerful cross-party public accounts committee (PAC) found there remained a crippling lack of detail around the environmental land management schemes (ELMs) designed to replace EU payments. They said that by the government’s own admission, “its confidence in the scheme looks like blind optimism”. The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) had given no explanation of how the new scheme’s impact on English farmers would be mitigated, warning that some would see their income from direct payments reduce by more than half by 2024-25. Geoffrey Clifton-Brown, the Tory deputy chair of PAC and a long-term Brexit supporter, said there were still “no clear plans” to replace CAP, more than five years after the EU referendum. He warned some small farms on “wafer-thin margins” could go out of business. “Farmers, especially the next generation who we will depend on to achieve our combined food production and environmental goals, have been left in the dark. It is simply wrong that Defra’s own failures of business planning should undermine the certainty crucial to a critical national sector,” he said. “The UK is also already a large net importer of food and we heard in evidence that the ELMs’ vague ambition to ‘maximise the value to society of the landscape’ may in reality mean that that increases further. The recent energy price crisis should be a salutary warning of the potential risks to the availability and affordability of food if the UK becomes even more reliant on imports.” The new scheme aims to supply “public money for public goods”, with farmers funded to restore nature, nurture the soil, improve air and water quality, and provide habitats for wildlife through ELMs. The National Farmers’ Union, however, said the report should mark a “wake-up call” for the government and said farmers had been left in an untenable position through a lack of information. “We have considerable concerns that not all farmers will be able to get involved,” said Tom Bradshaw, the union’s vice-president. “The government has still not made clear how food production fits in with its proposed new schemes. This must be addressed now, if they expect farmers to join. As the PAC highlights, we could simply end up increasing imports of food produced to lower environmental standards. “It’s crucial Defra carries out and publishes the results of impact assessments to understand the true impact of the proposed changes, something we have repeatedly asked for but has not been forthcoming.” Dustin Benton, policy director at the Green Alliance environmental thinktank, said it was not clear that the new scheme would help the government meet its own climate and nature targets. “We need ministers to say how ELMs will add up to achieving net zero carbon and restoring nature so farmers can plan their businesses,” he said. “Without this, the government’s promised green Brexit looks increasingly out of sight.” Doug Parr, Greenpeace UK’s chief scientist, said the scheme could have unintended consequences for consumers and the planet: “The big danger is that we end up with an even more divided two-tier food system, where cheaper food from abroad, with huge environmental costs, replaces food that could be grown in nature-friendly ways here.” “Working in this way is inefficient, unhelpful to UK land managers and increases the potential of perverse outcomes, such as driving increased deforestation abroad,” he said. George Eustice, the environment secretary, said: “We disagree with many of the points made by the committee which fail to take account of recent developments. Farm incomes have improved significantly since the UK voted to leave the EU in 2016 and there will never be a better time to improve the way we reward farmers. “In December, I set out comprehensive details of the sustainable farming Incentive including full payment rates and we published an in-depth analysis of UK food security and agricultural output. In the past week we’ve shared further details of the local nature recovery and landscape recovery schemes and announced a major increase in payment rates for those farmers involved in existing agri-environment schemes.”Bankruptcies happen gradually, then suddenly, an Ernest Hemingway character famously deadpans in The Sun Also Rises. Yet the aftermath of insolvency can play out painfully slowly, as observers of Carillion’s collapse, four years ago this week, can testify. Carillion had its fingers in a lot of pies, to the point where it is difficult to explain what its main business was: was it construction, or something woollier like “support services”? Cleaning and maintenance are crucial to almost any business, but they are also shockingly easy to outsource to complex and faceless conglomerates. That complexity extended to accounts built on the directors’ “increasingly fantastical figures”. To borrow the Queen’s question about the credit crunch, why did nobody notice? Carillion’s crash was so severe that it has sparked years of navel-gazing by accountants and their regulators. The latest chapter will open on Monday, when a tribunal in London will look at allegations that KPMG, a former partner at the auditor and certain current and former employees issued “false and misleading information and/or documents” to the regulator, the Financial Reporting Council (FRC). KPMG declined to comment ahead of the tribunal. KPMG self-reported the latest problems, which relate to information handed over during standard FRC inspections of audits of Carillion and Regenersis, a London-listed IT company later renamed Blancco. The regulator will not allege misconduct in the audits, nor that the financial statements were imperfectly prepared, but the tribunal will probably shine more unwelcome light on a profession that has taken a beating ever since the global financial crisis. The existence of a dominant “Big Four” is not usually a good sign in any industry. Safe to say that Deloitte, EY, KPMG and PwC have all had their scandals (try Autonomy, NMC Health, Conviviality and BHS respectively) in recent years. Smaller hangers-on such as Grant Thornton have also had their moments (Patisserie Valerie and Sports Direct). The FRC and the broader audit profession have also been in the proverbial dock in recent years. At one point there were no fewer than five separate “Whither auditing?” inquiries, and the government is close to publishing a set of reforms to audit and corporate governance that it hopes will make it much harder for balance-sheet black holes to slip past auditors unnoticed. The FRC will be replaced by a new Audit, Reporting and Governance Authority, probably in 2023. However, recent reports suggested that business lobbyists had got their claws into the reforms, watering down some more controversial elements in favour of a “business-friendly” regime fit for a wheeler-dealer post-Brexit Britain. Gone, according to the Financial Times, will be proposals to make directors personally oversee financial reporting controls; this will be demoted instead to the corporate governance code. The code sets the standards, but companies can opt out as they see fit. There are other options for seeking accountability. This week’s tribunal is one of three investigations the FRC is still running on the Carillion collapse – there is another into KPMG’s audit itself, as well as one into the company’s former directors. The government’s Official Receiver has filed a claim form suggesting that it could seek damages of as much as £1bn from KPMG for audit negligence. (KPMG has promised to contest any claim, though none has yet arrived.) Yet industry sources suggest that readers don’t hold their breath for a payout on that scale. The Carillion fallout keeps coming – but we will have to wait even longer for answers on why it happened, and how we can avoid a repeat.Explorer and television presenter Simon Reeve is troubled by the carbon footprint of the travel documentaries he makes and sometimes feels a hypocrite, he has confessed. Talking candidly about his climate change guilt and also reflecting on his unhappy teenage years on Sunday’s Desert Island Discs, Reeve accepts that his journeys to Australia, Cuba and the Caribbean with the BBC have given him a damaging environmental record. “Personally, I would like to think there is some tiny value in the programmes I make, and I hope that mitigates in some ways the enormous footprint that I have, and we have, making these journeys. I am not sure we always get it right,” the 49-year-old tells host Lauren Laverne during his appearance on the BBC Radio 4 programme. “I obviously feel many a time like a hypocrite,” Reeve admits. “We’ve tried to incorporate from the beginning true, honest stories about what’s happening to our planet. And ultimately, the only way we’re going to know what’s happening out there is by going out there and faithfully capturing it and bringing it back for people to see and be shocked by.” Although in recent years his travels have showcased Cornwall, the Lake District and Cumbria, Reeve said his television career had been built partly on his natural urge to try things which others consider dangerous, such as searching for bears in a forest in the middle of the night. Documentaries including Holidays in the Danger Zone: Places That Don’t Exist, Tropic of Cancer and Tropic of Capricorn have involved filming in hostile surroundings. Reeve cites a perilous moment when he and his team realised the place they had gone to for interviews about the source of an illicit new drug was actually the den of a criminal gang. “I do feel a sense of responsibility in that sense, but I work with people who I trust and I hope trust me, we’re alert to risk and danger probably more than most people,” he says. Reeve also talks to Laverne about his upbringing, which did not follow the conventional lines of the gentlemen explorers of Britain’s past. In fact he reveals he did not fly on a plane until he was an adult: “I think that’s partly why I’m so grateful for the journeys I’ve been on since; I don’t take them for granted as a result.” He discusses being “trouble” as a teenager and clashing with his late father. He hung around with friends who stole cars and committed acts of vandalism. “I was carrying a knife by the time I was 12 or 13 … I’m not proud of what I did or saw or people I knew were up to … I knew what I was doing was wrong,” Reeve says. Despite counselling, Reeve says his confidence disappeared. “I lost my way and by the time it got to exams and schooling I was in a terrible state.” When he left school the TV presenter had only one GCSE and faced an uncertain future. He had no job prospects and had suffered from mental illness since the age of 15. He confides that he once found himself “on the edge of a bridge” considering ending his life, but “stepped back in every possible sense”. An encounter with a kind employee at a benefits office helped reassure him that things might change, he says. Reeve responded by setting off to climb in Glencoe in the Scottish Highlands, inspired by the location of the film Highlander. Reeve then went on to work at the Sunday Times, starting in the post room at 17. He was eventually trusted with his own news stories, carrying out investigations into organised crime and nuclear smuggling. In the late 90s Reeve wrote one of the first books about al-Qaida and Osama bin Laden. After 9/11 the book attracted media attention and he became a commentator on American media networks, leading to his broadcasting career.Linebacker Nick Bolton’s 86-yard fumble return after Melvin Ingram III darted into Denver’s backfield untouched and stripped Melvin Gordon powered the Kansas City Chiefs to a 28-24 victory over the Denver Broncos on Saturday. With their 13th consecutive win over the Broncos, the Chiefs (12-5) kept alive their hopes of getting the No 1 seed in the AFC playoffs. They need Houston to upset Tennessee on Sunday to get the pole position; otherwise, they’re the second seed and will host a wild-card game next weekend in their quest to reach a third consecutive Super Bowl. The Broncos (7-10) were ahead 21-20 and driving for another touchdown when Ingram sped past tight end Noah Fant and blew up the play just as Drew Lock handed the ball to Gordon. Bolton scooped up the loose ball and rumbled 86 yards to give the Chiefs their biggest lead, and Patrick Mahomes’ keeper on the two-point conversion made it 28-21. Lock and the Broncos quickly got into scoring position again, but coach Vic Fangio, who fell to 19-30 as Denver’s head coach, decided on a field goal on third-and-9 from the 13 as the crowd relentlessly booed the decision. McManus nailed the 31-yarder, but the Broncos still trailed by four and would need a touchdown if they were able to stop Mahomes. They weren’t. On third-and-8 from the Denver 17, Mahomes found Travis Kelce for an 11-yard gain at the two-minute warning, with the Broncos having burned all their timeouts. The Chiefs lined up in victory formation as the clock ticked down and the crowd of 61,441 – there were nearly 15,000 empty seats – streamed for the exits, a fifth straight losing season in the books and their playoff drought now stretched to six years. Jerick McKinnon broke three tackles on his way to a 14-yard touchdown catch that put Kansas City ahead 17-14 on the opening drive of the third quarter. Lock responded with a 31-yard dart to Tim Patrick on third-and-13 – that one pass topped Lock’s total yardage in the first half – and then Gordon burst through the line for a 47-yard touchdown that gave Denver a 21-17 lead the Broncos would take into the fourth quarter. Harrison Butker’s 51-yard field goal pulled Kansas City to 21-20 early in the fourth quarter and capped a 10-play drive that covered just 25 yards. Lock completed just 4 of 10 passes for 27 yards in the first half but the Broncos took a 14-10 lead into halftime thanks to Lock’s touchdown scrambles of 5 and 23 yards. Kelce’s three-yard catch put KC ahead 7-0, but Zayne Anderson’s roughing penalty on punter Sam Martin saved the Broncos from a second straight three-and-out, and Lock capitalized on his second chance to tie it with his five-yard scramble that tied it at 7. That drive started at the Denver 33 after Butker slipped on the kickoff. He also slipped twice in pregame warmups and changed his cleats before the game. Denver got its ground game going to take a 14-7 lead when Lock kept it himself and darted up the middle from 23 yards out. That made him the first Broncos quarterback to with two touchdown runs in a game since Tim Tebow in 2011. The Broncos, missing three of their top four cornerbacks, dropped two interceptions, one by Michael Ojemudia on Kansas City’s opening drive and another at the goal line by Kyle Fuller. Right after Fuller’s miss, Butker’s 34-yard field goal pulled Kansas City to 14-10. Dallas Cowboys 51-26 Philadelphia Eagles Dak Prescott ran into Dallas’ locker room with a message for any NFC team he’ll play next week in the playoffs. “The real (stuff) starts,” he said. It starts with finding out the Cowboys’ wild-card opponent, and Prescott will be like millions of football fans every Sunday and watch the scoreboard with their playoff fate at stake. Prescott threw a career-high five touchdown passes against Philadelphia Eagles backups, Cedrick Wilson and Dalton Schultz each had two scoring catches and the Cowboys kept their slim hopes for a No 2 seed in the NFC playoffs alive with a 51-26 victory Saturday night. The Cowboys still had seeding to play for against an Eagles team that rested Jalen Hurts and other key starters ahead of an NFC wild-card game next week. The NFC East champion Cowboys (12-5) need losses Sunday by reigning Super Bowl champion Tampa Bay against last-place Carolina and also for the Los Angeles Rams and Arizona Cardinals to lose to earn the No 2 seed. There also is a path to the No 3 seed for Dallas. The Cowboys can’t finish worse than the fourth seed. The Eagles (9-8) could still be the sixth seed. Prescott stayed in the game until the fourth quarter, the lead increasing seemingly with each throw and so, perhaps, the risk of injury for a QB nearly 15 months removed from the gruesome compound fracture of his right ankle that ended his 2020 season. Prescott did his best to get an offense that routinely produced at least 400 yards during a 6-1 start back on track headed into the playoffs following a two-year absence. He was 21 of 27 for 295 yards and no interceptions. “It’s a hell of a year for a guy that was in as slump,” coach Mike McCarthy deadpanned. He came out unscathed – and with the Cowboys’ record for touchdown passes in a season with 37. Tony Romo threw 36 in 2007. Prescott threw an eight-yard touchdown pass to Corey Clement early in the fourth quarter to make it 37-20 and set the mark and, mercifully for the Eagles, get him out of the game. His teammates knew Prescott set the TD mark. Prescott needed a reminder of his record. “Just coming off the field, they’re saying congrats and I thought they were saying congrats for five touchdowns,” Prescott said. Of course, Prescott got his record in the 17th game this season. Staying sharp, piling up points, and, yes, finishing 6-0 in the NFC East were all needed high points for the Cowboys. But, like the team records on both sides that kept falling, the win comes with a bit of a shrug. With nothing to play for, the Eagles treated the game like a preseason finale. Hurts, with 3,144 yards passing and a team-high 784 yards rushing, got the night off. So did tackle Lane Johnson, cornerback Darius Slay and 11 more players on the reserve/Covid-19 list. Gardner Minshew started for Hurts and – for a drive, at least – it was Minshew Mania again when he threw a three-yard touchdown pass to Tyree Jackson on the opening drive. It was the first catch of Jackson’s career. The score sparked an “E-A-G-L-E-S!” chant from fans across the street at the Flyers game after a replay was shown on the big screen. Philadelphia didn’t give anyone in green much reason to chant and cheer the rest of the game. Eagles coach Nick Sirianni defended his decision to rest Hurts, who missed a game this year with a sprained left ankle, ahead of the playoffs. “We thought it was an opportunity to get him back to 100%. We need to be able to have our full arsenal of offense going into the playoffs,” Sirianni said.Close contacts of people with Covid-19 will be allowed out of isolation to work if their job is critical for food supply or emergency services under new rules in New South Wales and Queensland. The two state governments announced the relaxed restrictions to ease food shortages on Sunday as federal health officials revealed isolation rules may soon change nationwide. With case numbers spiking due to Omicron, Australians are adjusting to growing hospitalisations, workforce disruptions and an increasing onus on managing the pandemic themselves by recording rapid antigen test results. NSW reported its deadliest day since the start of the pandemic on Sunday with 16 deaths in the preceding 24 hours – eclipsing the highest daily totals of the Delta wave. Eight men and eight women in their 60s, 70s, 80s, and 90s died. The state’s premier, Dominic Perrottet, told reporters NSW faced “a challenging three to four weeks” as the Omicron wave reached its peak. “There is no doubt for our state that this is a difficult time, just like across the country and just like across the world,” he said. Perrottet said from mid-week, citizens would be able to use the Service NSW app to record their rapid antigen test (RAT) results to connect positive cases to care, as already occurs in Victoria. The premier said a further 50m RATs had been purchased by the state in addition to the 50m already in reserve. “These tests will be crucial to ensure that we get kids back to school day one, term one,” he said. Dr Nhi Nguyen from the Nepean hospital said with almost 2,000 people in hospital in NSW and a further rise expected “the system will be under strain, it won’t be perfect”. The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, noted the peak of the Omicron wave is expected to come at the end of January or early February in her state. “This is going to be a tough time of year for a lot of people, I thank them for their patience and their understanding,” she said. The previous requirement for Covid positive people and their close household contacts to isolate have caused staff shortages resulting in empty supermarket shelves. The NSW government said workers in the agriculture, food logistics, transport and manufacturing sectors who had been furloughed as close contacts would be permitted to leave isolation if their employer determined their absence posed “a high risk of disruption to the delivery of critical services or activities”. Workers will be required to wear a mask and conduct daily rapid antigen tests, with any worker who tests positive or develops symptoms ordered to self-isolate. “The exemption from the isolation rules for close contacts also applies to emergency services workers who are necessary for the delivery of critical services and who cannot work from home,” NSW Health said in a statement. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Queensland said “essential workers” in critical industries would be allowed to work. The Palaszczuk government added conditions including the requirement to attend work in personal protective equipment, be vaccinated and to use private transport to and from work. The NSW industry minister, Stuart Ayres, defended the changes, noting the government was “not putting a single person who is testing positive to Covid out into the workforce”. “If you have tested positive you are at home in isolation, if you are not testing positive [and] you are asymptomatic, we want you out working in our most critical areas.” Australia’s deputy chief medical officer, Prof Michael Kidd, said chief medical officers from the states and territories were meeting to discuss furlough requirements – a sign the rules could soon change Australia-wide. The Australian Health Protection Principal Committee was “meeting as we speak right now ... looking at this issue and looking at what might be modified with the requirements and restrictions in order to ensure supply chain and supply lines continue,” Kidd told reporters in Canberra. The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said the national coordination mechanism was also considering the question and the prime minister, Scott Morrison, would on Sunday afternoon meet with the supply chain management team. Unions reacted furiously, accusing the Morrison government of liaising with employers to wind back isolation requirements in the transport sector without consulting workers. The Australian Council of Trade Unions acting secretary, Liam O’Brien, said “forcing potentially infected staff back to work will only exacerbate the already rampant spread of the highly infectious Omicron strain throughout workplaces and the broader community, putting the safety of all Australians at risk.” The Transport Workers Union national secretary, Michael Kaine, described scrapping isolation requirements as “reckless” and said it removed “the last buffer we had left to protect workplaces”. Hunt noted that Omicron had already prompted a change in the definition of contact, “significantly reducing” the number of people who had to isolate. In late December, the national cabinet redefined close contacts as those who had spent four or more hours in a household context or similar environment with a Covid-positive person. Morrison said eliminating the casual contact category and raising the bar for close contacts would have “a positive impact on the furloughing issue with particularly the health workforce”. Although rule changes may temporarily increase the available workforce, unions are concerned that employers are coercing staff to attend work while sick.A review of the film The Electrical Life of Louis Wain should have credited Simon Stephenson as co-writer (2 January, New Review, p27). An article (And the good news is ... Omicron is less likely to infect and damage lung cells, 2 January, p14) said: “If the virus produces more cells in the throat, that makes it more transmissible ...”. As quotes from the researchers made clear, the virus infects and multiplies in cells, so we should have referred to transmissibility increasing when it “replicates more” in the throat. The former Hungarian MP backing the opposition leader in upcoming elections is Zoltán Kész, not “Késv” (He’s religious, on the right – and the left backs him to beat Orbán, 2 January, p30). We referred to the tenor Freddie de Tommaso stepping into a leading role in “Verdi’s Tosca” at the Royal Opera House; the opera is by Puccini (Who’s who in ’22, 2 January, p34). Ray Illingworth did not captain Yorkshire for three championship-winning seasons from 1959-1968, as we said; he was the team’s captain only in 1982-83 (Successful captain who always spoke his mind, 26 December, Sport, p15). Other recently amended articles include: US judge delivers double setback to Prince Andrew’s abuse case battle Speaker defends Tony Blair knighthood after backlash Shops in Great Britain fear gaps on shelves as new Brexit import rules hit Write to the Readers’ Editor, The Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736Conservative MPs and rightwing commentators have misrepresented the jury’s verdict in the trial of the four protesters who toppled the statue of the slave trader Edward Colston in order to fan the flames of a divisive culture war, one of the defendants has told the Observer. Rhian Graham said the jury had accepted the argument put forward by the protesters’ lawyers – that they had a lawful excuse to remove the statue because continued veneration of a slave trader responsible for the brutal transportation of thousands of enslaved African people in the centre of Bristol amounted to a hate crime. “None of us denied toppling the statue. But we definitely did not admit to criminal damage. We all believed what we did was right and necessary – and the jury listened for 10 days and found we acted lawfully,” she said in a pub garden in the city. “The verdict does not give people the right to go around smashing things up willy-nilly.” Graham, 30, and Jake Skuse, 33, Milo Ponsford, 26, and Sage Willoughby, 22, were cleared of criminal damage last week for their role in pulling down the Colston statue during a Black Lives Matter protest in Bristol in June 2020. However, the attorney general, Suella Braverman, said on Friday she was considering referring the case to the court of appeal to clarify the law as the verdict was “causing confusion”. The acquittals cannot be overturned and there cannot be a retrial without fresh evidence, but judges could be asked to clarify points of law. This came after a backlash from Tory MPs, who claimed the verdict was “perverse” and “a vandal’s charter” that “allows anyone to rip down statues, vandalise public art and memorials or desecrate buildings”. John Hayes MP, who wrote to Braverman on behalf of the “anti-woke” Common Sense Group of Tory MPs, claimed the jury was devoid of an understanding of criminal damage because if “you damage, destroy or deface property without permission, you are guilty by definition”. The Daily Mail columnist Richard Littlejohn asserted the four cleared protesters had made no attempt to deny they had been caught on camera “committing criminal damage”. However, legal experts have pointed out the law does allow property to be damaged if there is “a lawful excuse”. The Colston verdict follows similar cases where juries have found environmental and anti-war campaigners were justified in damaging property to prevent greater crimes. Graham – who brought rope to the demonstration and helped the crowd drag the statue from its pedestal – said misleading comments by some MPs were preventing vital conversations about the country’s history. “These tactics are really damaging to unity because people hang on to these taglines and buzzwords rather than delving into the nuances of each situation,” said Graham, who works in the events industry. “I keep hearing that this case is a green light for pulling down statues. But it’s not – it’s about this statue, in this city, in this time.” The group’s impassioned, tearful remarks on the steps of Bristol crown court after they were exonerated were derided as “woke platitudes” by the Daily Mail. Other papers referred to the four cleared protesters as “vandals” and “woke statue-topplers” in the days that followed. “The war on woke is a feeble attempt to find another scapegoat – a sort of mythical enemy to blame everything on,” said Graham. “Woke is actually a colloquial term for being aware of social injustice – it’s been appropriated by the right as a way to demonise young people who care about equality and making the world a better place.” While Graham has become the unofficial spokesperson for the Colston Four, she has been careful to closely guard her privacy, partly out of fears about “being targeted” by “malicious people” enraged by the culture war stoked by Tory MPs. But last week a reporter working for the Sun turned up at the place where she is living, which is different to the postal address given in court. “I’ve intentionally kept where I live out of the news – so where did they get that information? It made me feel intimidated,” she said. Her father also had to fend off unwanted approaches. “Someone turned up at my dad’s house in Norfolk,” she said. “It’s not nice to know someone is snooping around.” The felling of Colston by a crowd of black and white protesters 18 months ago has forced Bristol to examine its pivotal role in the transatlantic slave trade. Colston’s name has been removed from two schools, a university building, a concert hall and a pub in the city. A stained-glass window dedicated to Colston has also been taken down. But the eventual fate of the statue is still unclear. It was put back into storage last week after being displayed for more than seven months in a Bristol museum, where thousands came to see the graffiti-sprayed monument laying on its side, without its notorious plaque celebrating “one of the most virtuous and wise sons of the city”. The commission set up by the city’s mayor, Marvin Rees, after the toppling, is due to make detailed recommendations next month about the future of the statue and the empty plinth from which Colston once surveyed the city centre. Prof Tim Cole, the commission’s chair, said there had been 14,000 responses to a consultation on the statue. “I’ve spent the last week reading through millions of words. We were really surprised by the level of engagement: this is a subject people in the city really care about,” he said. “We are almost there with some very specific recommendations about the future of the statue and plinth.” Cole said the verdict last week was now part of the statue’s history. “It is put up in the late 19th century, it’s taken down in the early 21st century. And four of those who took it down are put on trial and found not guilty by a jury in the city,” he said. “They are very much part of the story of the statue. It is a historic moment.”Phillip Inman strikes exactly the right note on the so-called levelling-up agenda (“It’s hard to ‘level up’ when No 10 is bearing down on us”, Business). If Michael Gove and co focus on structures rather than activity, outputs and outcomes, levelling up will struggle to get off the ground. Let’s also accept that meaningful activities, outputs and outcomes are in any case hard to achieve, given tough economic times, short-term political life cycles and economic and social inequities. If funding is to be properly channelled to relatively poor regions and localities, a government with less centralised control tendencies would be welcome. Beyond cities and regions with mayors and to avoid the inevitable mess and cost of too much restructuring, maybe it’s time to trust local authorities with regeneration activity and the like. Wouldn’t that be something after more than a decade of devastating cuts to local services? Central government could require local plans, a reporting process and some incentives or curbs, depending on progress. Even better, local people could have some involvement through existing consultation methods and citizen assemblies could be tried out. This approach might just stand a fighting chance of making a real difference. Steve West Fordingbridge, Hampshire Phillip Inman rightly draws attention to the problems with levelling up the north. Some of the problems lie here in Oxford, where donors seemingly queue up to fund new establishments, leading to all sorts of problems with affordable housing and undesirable green-belt development. Sometimes, the investment is very much to the good (there will be soon be millions more invested in vaccinology, for example), but the Oxford/Cambridge/London research and development triangle grows apace while universities elsewhere often struggle to find funds. A combined government and private enterprise initiative to divert research money to, say, Bristol, Birmingham and Sheffield would be welcome, though I cannot see our Oxford-based political establishment agreeing to this, alas. Don Manley Oxford Nazi art theft revealed With Vanessa Thorpe’s interesting article about Pauline Baer de Perignon’s sleuthing to recover her family’s Nazi-looted art, another piece of the jigsaw of wartime art theft falls into place (“The amateur sleuth, the galleries and a fight for family art looted by the Nazis”, News). I am reading the seminal work on the subject of Nazi art theft and the fate of Europe’s treasures in the Second World War, The Rape of Europa by Lynn H Nicholas. It must have been an influence on the making of the film The Monuments Men because so many events recorded in the book are portrayed in the film. The book is a masterwork of research, explaining the convoluted schemes to illegally acquire much of the patrimony of the conquered nations of Europe. It also explains the Allied programme for rescue, repatriation and restitution by “the monuments men” and their work with museum curators in the liberated nations. There are many unrecovered treasures from the period that perhaps will come to light, not least because of the diligent and persistent endeavours of people such as Pauline Baer de Perignon. Paul F Faupel Somersham, Cambridgeshire The wrong trousers? Your piece about school uniforms in Kerala was informative and insightful (“Unisex school uniforms come to Kerala. But some parents aren’t happy…”, World). It was also instructive, inadvertently, in illustrating gender-based assumptions in supposedly non-gendered thinking. Why is it that “unisex” and “gender-neutral” clothing is nearly always based on what is worn traditionally by boys/men? Obvious answers will refer to the disinhibiting practicality for girls and the need to disrupt the tendency to equate power and capability with items worn by boys. They are liberating interventions in the context of sexism. Just as there is nothing inherently male about trousers, there is nothing inherently female about a skirt or dress. Despite greater sensitivities about gender fluidity, gender-neutral clothing is still modelled on “male” norms. If we conceive of unisex clothing in terms of what girls must wear, and model gender-neutral clothing on what boys have worn, we should not be surprised if our children learn a lopsided message. Paul McGilchrist Colchester, Essex The politics of Covid In his interview with Robin McKie, infectious diseases expert Professor Mark Woolhouse makes a valid public health observation (“Britain got it wrong on Covid: long lockdown did more harm than good, says scientist”, News). However, what is missing is the political dimension of the decision-making process. While it was obvious in March 2020 that the global public health machinery was mobilised to combat the pandemic it had prepared for, rather than the one it was presented with, for the UK government to have admitted this would have shone a light on the consequences of its policies over the previous 10 years. Care homes should have been fortified, with enough skilled staff to safeguard residents. To have done so would have laid bare the working conditions, low pay and zero-hours contracts that facilitated the spread of Covid among those least able to cope. Infected patients were returned to care homes because the NHS had been so poorly funded that there was no slack in the system. While labour deregulation led to infected people having to continue working and concomitant poverty resulting in vulnerable people living in multi-generational households. All this overseen by a government (and party) whose inability to manage anything is only eclipsed by its willingness to lie. David Hoare Kingston, Lewes, Sussex Eleven years of council cuts Anne McElvoy’s interesting piece on Keir Starmer omits any reference to local government, which has suffered significantly over the last 11 years and faces more cuts (“Starmer is making headway, but has he got enough to worry the Tories?”, Comment). Councils are facing the prospect of having to continue to reduce staffing and services across the communities they struggle to support. It’s time the media began to cover the damage being inflicted by the government in this area of public policy. Jeremy Beecham Newcastle City Council Gosforth, Newcastle upon Tyne Yes sir, no sir I’m a great admirer of Sir Lindsay Hoyle. He has made the role of Speaker of the House of Commons his and continued to assert the independence of the office. He’s right to support Tony Blair’s knighthood – his support for George Bush over Iraq was a serious error of judgment, but there is still a worthy legacy, not least peace in Northern Ireland. However, Hoyle’s suggestion that all former prime ministers should be knighted (News) is surely a step too far: “Arise, Sir Boris” – no, thank you! Ian Ferguson Thornton Dale, Pickering, North YorkshireThe question I’m 47 years old. Five years ago, I got involved with a married man with two kids. The relationship was intense, hyper-sexual and obsessive. I felt uneasy and tried to end it many times, but was always easily persuaded otherwise by him. He started living separately from his wife two years back and there was terrible heartache with the children going back and forth. I was getting unhappier, more neurotic, and not in control of my see-saw emotions. Then the pandemic brought immense trauma. First, my mother died, swiftly followed by my father and then, in the second wave, my sister-in-law also died of coronavirus. I have become entwined with my brother’s life, helping him resurrect a routine, looking out for his two daughters. In the midst of all that, I felt I didn’t need to live with what had become a gnawing, unhappy situation with the married man. I tried to explain to him, but I think he’d become so used to me ending it that he thought it’ll be like other times when we would argue and then make up. But I really did finish it this time. I stopped calling him, didn’t respond to his messages. That was three months ago. I feel better for it and am in a more stable space, but feel bad because sometimes I think I have been unfair in ending it like that. Was I hasty? Do I need to meet him and have a rational conversation? Philippa’s answer You have borne a lot of loss and I’m sorry. But I’ll address what you asked me, should you meet your lover again? It seems you were in the habit of ending things with him and then getting back together again. You remind me of a person determined to stop smoking. She knows it’s bad for her, will damage her health, but without ever even putting it into words she finds herself lighting another cigarette; no decision-making process, she just does it. With an addict, there are usually two parts to them: the sensible, this-is-bad-for-me part and the impulsive, unthinking part, who reaches for the cigarette, the drink, the drug or, in your case, the man. You have two parts to you: the part that wants to be with him and the part that doesn’t. I’m going to call them Ms Adventure and Ms Sensible. Ms Adventure makes innocent-sounding suggestions, like, “Maybe we should have a rational conversation,” knowing that if you meet up for some rational conversation, going by past form, you will be seduced all over again. So that is Ms Adventure’s way of tricking Ms Sensible, who knows there’s something not quite right about this suggestion, so she sensibly writes to me. When we are addicted to drink, in our mind we think about what a first or a second drink used to feel like, which fuels the yearning. We don’t think of how we feel in the morning afterwards, we don’t dwell on not being able to stop once we start, we just remember the good bits. And I think there were probably good bits to your affair, loads of great sex, and Ms Adventure will tempt you with these, and she’ll gloss over the gnawing unhappiness and the see-saw emotions. You say you feel more stable without this relationship, but you have come up with an excuse to meet him again, which sounds very much like an addict reaching for those cigarettes. Do you need to contact him again as a question of doing the right, rational thing? No, you don’t. But I’m interested in Ms Adventure, that part of you who is untouched by the sensible, practical part of you and that wants to put you in the position of being in danger of seduction again. Is this for some distraction away from mourning those you have lost and how you feel for your brother and your nieces? Some intense, hyper-sexual passion would be a welcome distraction. What I think is, you know you feel better without him, but you have not admitted that you cannot resist him. If you meet him again you won’t have ended it, the meeting will be a continuation of it. What are you going to do with that part of you that longs for passion and intensity, but never quite puts that into words? You cannot ignore her, or she’ll do something that wouldn’t be in the best interest for both parts of you. You’d better find out a bit more about her; you don’t want her sabotaging the sensible part of you. The rational conversation that needs to be had is between Ms Sensible and Ms Adventure. What would they say to each other? I think you might always be in a see-saw of emotion unless you give Ms Adventure a voice and allow Ms Sensible to compromise. They may conclude that you need to take up painting, or try internet dating, and that you are giving support to your brother, but not getting any yourself. I’d recommend joining a grief group or otherwise finding support (cruse.org.uk). Do something for you, but without falling back down a hole you’ve just managed to climb out of. If you have a question, send a brief email to askphilippa@observer.co.ukThe Green Planet 7pm, BBC One David Attenborough is back to breathe some life into 2022 with this documentary series all about plants. First up: tropical worlds – from the fierce leafy battle for space on the forest floor of Costa Rica (it gets a bit Little Shop of Horrors at times) to the risky defence tactics of the poison arrow tree in Australia’s most ancient rainforest. Utterly fascinating – and don’t turn your back on those house plants. Hollie Richardson Around the World in 80 Days 6.10pm, BBC One Our intrepid trio reach Hong Kong, the commercial heart of the far east. While Abigail is looking forward to a “bath the size of Shropshire”, there’s a “tiny fly in the ointment”: the bank has blocked Phileas’s finances. Things go from bad to worse after Abigail prints an article that stitches him up like the proverbial kipper. Ali Catterall Vera 8pm, ITV As the 11th series continues, Vera (Brenda Blethyn) suspects an inside job when a heist at a shipping container results in the death of a security foreman. A mystery involving local drug rings and kidnapping ensues. As ever, much of the joy stems from no-nonsense Vera herself, zipping through the case with one-liners and characteristic grit. Henry Wong The Tourist 9pm, BBC One “Are you sure you wanna know who you really are? Because, mate, you’re not gonna like it … ” At the end of last week’s cliffhanger, Luci (Shalom Brune-Franklin) then told the Man (Jamie Dornan) his real name and the fact that he had killed someone. As episode three of the amnesia thriller kicks off, Dornan’s character will be less keen to go the police with Luci. Instead, he’ll be asking her a lot of questions, such as the all-important: “Who the hell are you?” HR The Killer Nanny: Did She Do It? 9pm, Channel 4 After ITV’s recent documentary about Louise Woodward, here’s another, three-part look at the trial of the nanny convicted of shaking a baby to death 25 years ago. It includes new interviews with the scientist who has changed his mind since testifying against Woodward and the detective who still believes she was to blame. Continues tomorrow. HR The Man Who Bought Cricket 9pm, Sky Documentaries This fascinating documentary series detailing English cricket’s farcical flirtation with Texas fraudster Allen Stanford reaches its conclusion. Stanford moves his operation to Antigua, where he discovers the power of cricket in the Caribbean. A tragicomic tale, nicely told. Phil Harrison Film choices After the Storm, 12.10am, BBC Two Hirokazu Kore-eda’s 2016 drama is another of the great Japanese film-maker’s understated, comic tales of fractured families and the ways they find to muddle through life. Hiroshi Abe plays Ryôta, a divorced, one-time novelist now gambling away his earnings as a private detective and neglecting his young son. His encounters with his no-nonsense widowed mother Yoshiko (Kore-eda regular Kirin Kiki) and long-suffering ex-wife Kyōko (Yōko Maki) nudge him slowly towards sorting his life out, though not exactly in the way he was hoping for. Simon Wardell The Sisters Brothers, 10pm, BBC Two Jacques Audiard, the French director of Rust and Bone, is not the first person you would expect to do a western. But this 2018 film is a fine piece of work, nodding respectfully to the genre staples of gunplay and glorious vistas while sneaking in moments of existential reflection. John C Reilly and Joaquin Phoenix play Eli and Charlie, the chalk-and-cheese assassin siblings of the title, sent to follow Jake Gyllenhaal’s scout John Morris to California and then kill a chemist, Hermann Warm (Riz Ahmed), who has developed a potentially lucrative method for extracting gold from rivers. SW Live sport Snooker:The Masters 1pm, BBC Two. Last year’s winner Yan Bingtao (pictured) plays Mark Williams in a first-round match from Alexander Palace, London. FA Cup Football West Ham United v Leeds United 1.15pm, ITV. A third-round tie from the London Stadium. Followed by Nottingham Forest v Arsenal at 4.20pm. Premiership Rugby Union: Wasps v Leicester Tigers 2pm, BT Sport 2. The league leaders visit the Coventry Building Society Arena. Women’s Super League Football: West Ham United v Man United 6pm, Sky Sports Premier League. From Chigwell Construction Stadium.Friday’s jobs report from the Department of Labor was a warning sign about the US economy. It should cause widespread concern about the Fed’s plans to raise interest rates to control inflation. And it should cause policymakers to rethink ending government supports such as extended unemployment insurance and the child tax credit. These will soon be needed to keep millions of families afloat. Employers added only 199,000 jobs in December. That’s the fewest new jobs added in any month last year. In November, employers added 249,000. The average for 2021 was 537,000 jobs per month. Note also that the December survey was done in mid-December, before the latest surge in the Omicron variant of Covid caused millions of people to stay home. But the Fed is focused on the fact that average hourly wages climbed 4.7% over the year. Central bankers believe those wage increases have been pushing up prices. They also believe the US is nearing “full employment” – the maximum rate of employment possible without igniting even more inflation. As a result, the Fed is about to prescribe the wrong medicine. It’s going to raise interest rates to slow the economy – even though millions of former workers have yet to return to the job market and even though job growth is slowing sharply. Higher interest rates will cause more job losses. Slowing the economy will make it harder for workers to get real wage increases. And it will put millions of Americans at risk. The Fed has it backwards. Wage increases have not caused prices to rise. Price increases have caused real wages (what wages can actually purchase) to fall. Prices are increasing at the rate of 6.8% annually but wages are growing only between 3-4%. The most important cause of inflation is corporate power to raise prices. Yes, supply bottlenecks have caused the costs of some components and materials to rise. But large corporations have been using these rising costs to justify increasing their own prices when there’s no reason for them to do so. Corporate profits are at a record high. If corporations faced tough competition, they would not pass those wage increases on to customers in the form of higher prices. They’d absorb them and cut their profits. But they don’t have to do this because most industries are now oligopolies composed of a handful of major producers that coordinate price increases. Yes, employers have felt compelled to raise nominal wages to keep and attract workers. But that’s only because employers cannot find and keep workers at the lower nominal wages they’d been offering. They would have no problem finding and retaining workers if they raised wages in real terms – that is, over the rate of inflation they themselves are creating. Astonishingly, some lawmakers and economists continue to worry that the government is contributing to inflation by providing too much help to working people. A few, including some Democrats like Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, are unwilling to support Biden’s Build Back Better package because they fear additional government spending will fuel inflation. Here again, the reality is exactly the opposite. The economy is in imminent danger of slowing, as the December job numbers (collected before the Omicron surge) reveal. Many Americans will soon need additional help since they can no longer count on extra unemployment benefits, stimulus payments or additional child tax credits. This is hardly the time to put on the fiscal brakes. Policymakers at the Fed and in Congress continue to disregard the elephant in the room: the power of large corporations to raise prices. As a result, they’re on the way to hurting the people who have been taking it on the chin for decades – average working people. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a Guardian US columnist. His newsletter is at robertreich.substack.comViña Indomita Gran Reserva Carignan, Maule Valley Chile, 2019 (£8, The Co-op) If some of us have been persuaded of the merits of treating January as an experiment in abstinence (up to 6.5m, or one in five UK adults, according to a poll taken before last year’s ‘Dry January’ campaign), there are many more who would make a convincing case for the opposite course of action. I’m not advocating that everyone maintains Christmas-level tippling every day and night past New Year’s Eve. But there is a reasonable line of thinking that says that this dark, cold, skint time of year may not be the best moment to deprive ourselves of one of life’s simpler pleasures. Moderation may be a more effective route to long-term healthy drinking, allowing us to lift our spirits with a glass or two of a moderately priced, delicious southern-sun filled red such as Indomita’s. Tesco Finest GSM, McLaren Vale Australia, 2017 (£9, Tesco) Chile remains one of the most reliable sources of inexpensive red wines of the softly textured kind that are the antidote to seasonal dankness – the sort that works as well on the sofa as it does at the table, such as Morrisons The Best Chilean Carmenère 2020 (£6.50), which makes it a good match for pizza. Also doing the job in the very specific category of ‘wines for TV and takeaway’ is the perfumed malbec from Argentina. Aldi Argentinian Malbec, Mendoza 2020 (£5.79) is one of the best-value versions of the style. Australia, too, has its way with the fruity, warming genre, although the best of the Down Under supermarket bunch tends to come seasoned with a lick of peppery spice, such as Tesco’s ever-excellent blend of grenache, shiraz and mataro. Domaine Gayda Chemin de Moscou, IGP Pays d’Oc France, 2019 (£25.99, Cambridge Wine Merchants) The GSM blend based on grenache and/or shiraz plus mataro and others is the base of many of Australia’s finest reds. But its origins are in southern France, producing wines that can feel like a transfusion of mood-boosting sunlight at this time of year. You can get some of that Mediterranean hillside feel in bottles from the Languedoc, such as Sainsbury’s Taste the Difference Saint-Chinian (£9), or from the Rhône Valley, such as Marks &amp; Spencer’s superb Les Closiers Lirac 2019 (£10). That’s true, too, of the latest vintage of one of my favourite wines from one of my favourite Languedoc producers. The darkly concentrated, blackberry, black olive, pepper and rosemary of Domaine Gayda’s Chemin de Mouscou, served with roast lamb, is my prescription for seeing off the winter blues. Follow David Williams on Twitter @DaveydaibachManteca, 49-51 Curtain Road, London EC2A 3PT (020 7033 6642). Snacks and small plates £3-£10; large plates £13-£36; desserts £5-£8; wines from £28 An email arrives from Australia. Greg declares himself a fan of this column. He also happens to be a newspaper subeditor and he’s noticed something. It’s the repeated use of a certain word. That word is “punchy”. By repeated I don’t mean just one or two uses. He has found 11 examples from the past six months. I have referenced punchy sauces and punchy Thai green curries, punchy loveliness and both a punchy affair and a punchy mess. Oh, the shame. I am clearly punch drunk. I could excuse myself. There are only so many words in the world. But that’s no excuse at all. So thank you, Greg. Today I’m officially announcing the retirement of punchy. It’s going straight from this page to a home for knackered adjectives, where it will share a room with “mouth-watering” and “sumptuous”. I wish it a happy retirement. I’m glad Greg emailed because, had he not, I’m certain I would have made it the dozen. The food at Manteca, a self-styled nose-to-tail Italian in London’s Shoreditch, serves food which demands all the big, rumbustious words. It’s less a menu and more of a horn section. Every dish, every snack and small plate, every bowl of pasta, side and sharing platter, arrives with a tap dance and a huge ta-da! Manteca doesn’t do subtle or restrained. It does dinner. And it’s bloody marvellous. The restaurant is a collaboration between David Carter, best known for the deep-glazed barbecue glories of Smokestak, and chef Chris Leach, who has time at Pitt Cue and Kitty Fisher’s on his CV. It started with a couple of residences in the centre of London (including one in the location now occupied by Sarap Bistro, reviewed last week). This is what it was all aiming at: a sandy-coloured, sexily lit space of clatter and crash, with an open kitchen and, downstairs in the basement, a glass-walled hanging cabinet for all the cured meats made on site. We are wooed by curls of their baby-pink mortadella with ivory gems of fat and a smoky speck sliced so thinly it’s almost lacy. With it comes their springy, oily crusted focaccia. All is very good. The parade of small plates starts with puntarelle, that crunchy and lightly bitter member of the chicory family, done in the Roman style, which is to say dazzled and boosted by an anchovy and fresh chilli vinaigrette, which leaves you wondering why you used up all the damn bread on the salumi. Our waiter notices and brings more, cut in swabs designed for sauce mopping. It comes in handy for the next dish, the mere name of which is an outrageous act of lusty flirtation: pig skin ragu with parmesan and crispy skin. The latter is a plate-sized piece of dehydrated skin that has been inflated in the deep-fat fryer. We break it up and use it to scoop away at the massive flavour bomb of a slow-cooked, reduced and intensified ragu, under its blizzard of aged parmesan. At ordering I was asked if I would like it with shavings of black truffle for an extra £6. Because I don’t know the meaning of “enough, already”, I said yes, of course I would like the extra black truffle. The measured hum of truffle gets deliriously swept away by the breaking wave of the ragu. We have a brick of pig’s head croquette, made with all the meaty bits and the sticky bits, which comes with a dish of pilacca, a fiery Italian hot sauce that might, involuntarily, make you say gosh. There is a puffy, billowing flatbread which isn’t very flat at all, studded with sweet salty clams. Almost all the pasta dishes come in small portions at around £9, or large at £14. We share three of the small, starting with the Manteca take on the popular old stager cacio e pepe. Here the pepper-boosted sauce, which clings adoringly to the fat noodles, has been mixed through with rust-coloured brown crab meat to give it a deep, savoury kick rather than a seafood tang. It strikes me that if they had attempted to serve this dish in Rome, they would have been run out of town, or invited on a tour of the Colosseum to meet some underfed lions specifically re-introduced to the arena for the purpose. Ah, but we are not in Rome. We are in Shoreditch where brazen innovation is fully embraced. The nearest thing to a mellow dish is the cappellacci di zucca, the pasta stuffed with a sweet squash purée and sprinkled with an amaretti crumb so it becomes a plateful hinged between savoury and dessert. Then there are the silky, butter-yellow folds of fazzoletti with a powerful duck ragu with duck fat and crisp duck skin. It’s the love child resulting from a raucous night of unbridled shagging between a prim Roman pasta dish and a blousy cassoulet from Toulouse. By this point we’ve rather lost a grip on what is reasonable. We really don’t need the flame-grilled chop of old ewe, with its glistening fat the colour of polished alabaster and its rosy meat and, on the side, the homemade lamb sausage that, like a great novel, is full of depth and meaning. Then again if this column concerned itself with issues of need, the whole damn premise would collapse. We are, however, restrained at dessert and merely share a piece of warm, crumbly honey cake with a scoop of salted caramel ice-cream. And a scoop of lemon sorbet, because that’s always a good idea. The wine list is divided, rather knowingly, between “classics” and “down the rabbit hole”. I appreciate this. It enables me to stay with the classics and avoid wines that will make me cross and shouty and boring. It’s hardly rich in bargains, but there is depth. Manteca is a well-seasoned restaurant masquerading as a new one. Those extended residences mean Leach and Carter got to stress-test their idea to breaking point. The result is genuinely bold and exciting. For days before my dinner, I read and re-read the menu online, wondering whether the promise of the words – pig skin ragu, brown crab cacio e pepe and so on – could be realised on the plate. Or would it turn out to be just so much empty menu writing? It’s nothing of the sort. I left feeling I’d been fed by people with genuine verve and originality. I’d go so far as to say I felt paunchy. I said PAUNCHY. For God’s sake, can’t you people read? News bites The Marine Stewardship Council has just published a free online cookbook, featuring recipes from big name chefs from around the world, utilising sustainable species and fisheries. The recipes, illustrated with photographs by David Loftus, include a Scottish Haddock dish from the UK’s Mitch Tonks, a salad featuring Pacific halibut from Canadian chef Charlotte Langley and an Indonesian tuna fish curry by Indonesian chef Ari Galih. All listed fisheries are MSC certified. You can download the cookbook at msc.org Amateur MasterChef winner Ping Coombes, who was crowned champion of champions in a one-off episode screened over the Christmas break, has just launched her own set of Malaysian recipe boxes. Her boxes, which include the ingredients for chicken rendang and a Nonya-style laksa, cost from £22 for a two-person box rising to £34 for the four-person option, and are available for delivery across much of mainland Britain. Visit thecookaway.com Further up the scale, the restaurant recipe box company Dishpatch (dishpatch.co.uk) has added two options from Michel Roux Jr of Le Gavroche to its increasingly impressive roster. The ‘Classique’ includes French onion soup, boeuf bourguignon and a rum baba at £70 for two; the ‘Gourmand’ at £100, adds a pissaladiere, a salmon tartar and passion fruit jellies. At time of writing, January slots had almost sold out, so get in now for February. Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1Paul Gardner bagged himself a rare interview with Robert De Niro for the Observer Magazine of 7 August 1977 (‘Making It – the man from Mean Streets’). Gardner had met De Niro in Rome for the filming of Bertolucci’s 1900 – ‘an extravagant tapestry of Italian history’ – but was rebuffed. Then three years later he caught up with him in Hollywood, De Niro having spent five months on Martin Scorsese’s film musical New York, New York. ‘After my first movies, I gave interviews,’ he said, slouched in a chair in Scorsese’s office. ‘Then I thought, what’s so important about where I went to school, and hobbies… what does any of that have to do with acting, with my own head? Nothing.’ Gardner argued that ‘personality stars’, such as Steve McQueen, would lose fans if they changed their image for each film, but that De Niro ‘changes roles without leaving footprints, without leaving a clue as to who they really are’. His New York, New York co-star Liza Minnelli agreed: ‘There’s an intensity and mystery. His eyes look out, but they also look in.’ Gardner caught up with De Niro again in New York, surprised to see he’d ‘radically changed his physiognomy and physique for his fourth Scorsese film, Raging Bull’. Over lunch Gardner asked him what got him interested in acting. De Niro told him: ‘Aw, now, don’t ask questions.’ So they ‘sit around… without questions’. ‘I gained about 20lb for Jake [LaMotta] and I’m still puttin’ it on,’ De Niro eventually revealed. ‘I see so many fight movies where the actors are out of shape, I don’t believe them. So I come to the gym here – they rigged up a special one – and work out every day.’ He laughed, quietly. ‘I’ve got Sylvester Stallone’s trainer.’ What Gardner didn’t know was that De Niro would pile on 60lb for the scenes as an older, has-been LaMotta. But perhaps De Niro wouldn’t have told him how, if he’d asked.New year, new plot, new soil. We have been exiled now from the allotment site for six weeks or so. Another six weeks – we hope – to go. Locked out from working land in winter, from digging and planting. Just being there. The garden rituals and camaraderie that get us through. I pine for the plot but we are currently persona non grata. A survey discovered asbestos on ours and another nearby allotment site. I suspect it is perhaps not uncommon in London. There were council plans at first to build raised beds but costs put paid to that. In mid-November, planning permission was given for the plots to be covered with geotextile and half a metre of new soil. The earth work we have done is now buried. I walk close to the gate sometimes. I almost press my face to the future. Everything we could save is sitting waiting on the banks at the edge of the plots. Tree and other treasured plants have been potted. Impatient on our return. Structures have been packed away. Fruit cages now without fruit. Poles waiting for beans and peas. In homes around north London, cuttings and saved seed sit quietly. There will be work to do to bring the new soil to life. To invite worms to return. Organic matter to add. At least, for now, it is winter. I wonder about the foxes, the feral cats, the owls, our robins and other birds. Where the other gardeners are. What plans they’re making for the new growing season. We have uprooted fennel and verbena waiting in Howard’s greenhouse. At least now we will have to thoroughly sort the seed. New life will return. The new year will see the return of old and new allotmenteers. Heads full of plans. Plot 29 will be carefully unpacked. Much-loved plants from before will be re-homed. New plots and new planting. New life will return. Until then at least, there is last year’s amaranth seed to sort. Allan Jenkins’s Plot 29 (4th Estate, £9.99) is out now. Order it for £8.49 from guardianbookshop.comMany years ago, I met a respected industry insider who knows all there is to know about beauty formulations. We were discussing skin products. Then I asked, “What about eye creams?” She looked straight at me and said, “Eye creams are a complete waste of money.” Up to that point I’d begun to suspect eye creams had a touch of the emperor’s new clothes about them. Hearing her validate my secret thoughts felt like a win. Fast forward to 2022 and here I am recommending eye creams. So what’s changed? Well, we (consumers) have become more discerning and brands realise they can no longer pull the wool over our eyes with overpriced creams that do nothing beyond the realms of a basic moisturiser. Today’s formulations are clever, boundary-pushing stuff. Many include hardworking active ingredients, such as retinol (Sunday Riley, Glow Recipe, Allies of Skin). Many have collagen-boosting properties to plump skin (Shani Darden, Dr Sturm, Clinique). And they go above and beyond to deliver intense hydration and brightening (Rose Inc, Dior, Augustinus Bader, Skinceuticals). So if you are looking to smooth, brighten and rehydrate, these have great stats to back their efficacy. Still, the only thing that gets rid of hereditary dark circles is an excellent concealer. 1. Augustinus Bader The Eye Cream £165, spacenk.com 2. Shani Darden Intensive Eye Renewal Cream £62, net-a-porter.com 3. Allies of Skin Peptides &amp; Omega Firming Eye cream £72, cultbeauty.co.uk 4. Rose Inc Eye Revival Brightening Eye Cream £42, roseinc.com 5. Dr Barbara Sturm Eye Cream from £40, drsturm.com 6. Skinceuticals HA Intensifier £90, lookfantastic.com 7. Clinique Smart Clinical Repair Cream £45, clinique.co.uk 8. Dior Prestige Le Micro Rose Eye Serum £154, dior.com 9. Glow Recipe Avocado Melt Retinol Eye Sleeping Mask £41, cultbeauty.co.uk 10. Sunday Riley 5 Stars Retinoid + Niacinamide Eye Serum £60, johnlewis.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFettoThe 6 January insurrection, when supporters of former US president Donald Trump stormed Capitol Hill, is widely viewed as a seminal moment in the history of US democracy. Never before had the modern nation witnessed such an organised, violent attempt to overthrow the elected government. Never before, not even at the height of the Civil War, had the Confederate flag flown over the halls of Congress. Yet last week, as the US marked the first anniversary of the thwarted insurrection, another significant turning point was reached. President Joe Biden, the lawful winner of the 2020 election and Trump’s principal intended victim, dropped what some call his Mr Nice Guy act. With gloves off, Biden came out swinging. It was about time. Since taking office almost exactly one year ago, Biden has deliberately ignored Trump. He has rarely mentioned his predecessor by name. He has refused to engage with Trump’s insults, lies and unceasing propagation of the “big lie” – that Democrats stole the 2020 vote. Instead, Biden sought to reunite a divided, fractious nation, appealing to what he called our “better selves” and looking to the future, not the past. It didn’t work. That is not to say it was not worth trying, nor that the effort should be discontinued: it should not. But in the intervening 12 months, Trump, egged on by cynical, unprincipled Republicans such as House minority leader Kevin McCarthy and far-right disruptors such as Steve Bannon, has not only not faded from view but, rather, he has emerged, strengthened, as Republican king-maker and his party’s leading 2024 presidential contender. Trump’s bottomless mendacity, lacking any factual, legal or moral basis and flying in the face of numerous court judgments, vote recounts and electoral inquiries, has nevertheless persuaded a majority of Republican voters that Biden was not legitimately elected while seeding doubt in the minds of others. His poison corrodes America’s governing institutions and incites civil strife. Trump embodies a clear and present danger to US national security, stability and democracy. He must be stopped. Biden’s 6 January speech appeared to unleash a new strategy to do just that. Trump, he said, was “holding a dagger” at the throat of American democracy. His “web of lies” could no longer be tolerated. Trump “rallied the mob to attack”, then did nothing to stop the ensuing lethal violence, Biden fumed. The president’s sudden switch to direct confrontation entails obvious dangers. It plays to Trump’s agenda and ego, making him the centre of attention. The shift may also be indicative of political weakness. Biden’s approval ratings are low, his legislative agenda has stalled, the Democrats in Congress are split and the party is widely expected to lose Congress in November’s elections. Yet Biden really had no choice but to go on the offensive. Trump and Trumpism’s world of “alternative facts” has had a free run for too long. To be defeated and debunked, it must be publicly and robustly challenged at every turn. Legal remedies, soft-pedalled until now by the justice department, must be pursued with renewed vigour and determination. “The legal path to investigate the leaders of the coup attempt is clear. The criminal code prohibits inciting an insurrection or ‘giving aid or comfort’ to those who do, as well as conspiracy to forcibly ‘prevent, hinder or delay the execution of any law’,” veteran Harvard constitutional law expert Laurence Tribe wrote recently. It’s a widely held opinion. The many documented actions of Trump and his circle in attempting to overturn the 2020 vote provide numerous grounds for criminal investigation and prosecution. Why is Merrick Garland, the attorney general, still dragging his feet? Biden can righteously rage. But the best antidote to toxic Trump’s dangerously lawless spree, and fears of civil war, is the law itself. Take him down – before it’s too late.Is democracy in America really on the brink of collapse? A lot of serious people appear to think so. Last week’s first anniversary of the Capitol Hill insurrection, viewed by Democrats as a coup attempt incited by Donald Trump, has sparked a torrent of nervous speculation that it could happen again before, during or after the 2024 presidential election – and that next time, the coup may succeed. One unhappy fact underpins this alarming scenario: many, perhaps most, voters have lost trust in the democratic system that governs them. A majority of Republicans believe Trump’s “big lie” – that Joe Biden stole the 2020 election. Democrats cite elections in 2000 and 2016 when Al Gore and Hillary Clinton respectively won the popular vote but were denied the presidency. Each side accuses the other of fraud and bad faith. A new USA Today/Suffolk University poll found eight in 10 Republicans, Democrats and independents are worried about the future of American democracy. But they disagree over the causes – and who’s to blame: 85% of Democrats call the Capitol Hill rioters “criminals”; two-thirds of Republicans believe “they went too far but had a point”. “Only free and fair elections in which the loser abides by the result stand between each of us and life at the mercy of a despotic regime,” warns Harvard law professor Laurence Tribe. But increasingly, for today’s politicians, honourable defeat is a wholly foreign concept. This chronic loss of institutional trust and credibility, also tainting a politicised, conservative-dominated supreme court, reflects a society more openly riven by longstanding cultural, racial and religious animosities – and one in which income, wealth and health inequalities are growing. These divisions are in turn wilfully exacerbated by rightwing broadcast and online media, bloggers and internet trolls. A Republican party mostly in thrall to Trump’s lies, delusions and conspiracy theories is creating a world of “alternative facts”, says columnist Thomas Friedman. If they succeed in replacing truth, “America isn’t just in trouble. It is headed for what scientists call ‘an extinction-level event’”. Jedediah Britton-Purdy, a Columbia law professor, is similarly apocalyptic. “One thing Democrats and Republicans share is the belief that, to save the country, the other side must not be allowed to win … Every election is an existential crisis,” he wrote. “We should stop underestimating the threat facing the country,” a grim New York Times editorial thundered last week. “January 6 is not in the past; it is every day. It is regular citizens who threaten election officials, who ask ‘when can we use the guns?’, who vow to murder politicians who dare to vote their conscience. It is Republican lawmakers scrambling to make it harder for people to vote and subvert their will if they do. It is Trump who stokes the flames of conflict.” Democracy, it said, was in “grave danger”. Systemic violence that overwhelms conventional politics may be near at hand. “We are closer to civil war than any of us would like to believe,” says Barbara Walter, a California politics professor. No one is talking about a remake of the 1861-65 US civil war. Instead, as in Ukraine or Libya, an “open insurgency”, as defined by Walter, would probably involve (at least initially), disparate militias and their supporters pursuing forms of asymmetrical warfare – typically terrorist acts, bombings, assassinations, kidnappings. That said, worrying echoes of Confederate-era secessionism are once again heard in Texas and elsewhere. When the warlike rhetoric of Charlottesville-style paramilitary white supremacists, the high nationwide incidence of gun ownership and, for example, worries about far-right cells within the US military are factored in, civil war scenarios do not appear so implausible. “Only a spark is needed, one major domestic terrorist event that shifts the perception of the country,” analyst Stephen Marche wrote last week. Marche quotes a military history professor and Iraq war veteran, Col Peter Mansoor, who tells him: “It would not be like the first civil war, with armies manoeuvring on the battlefield. I think it would very much be a free-for-all, neighbour on neighbour, based on beliefs and skin colours and religion. And it would be horrific.” So what is to be done? Columbia’s Britton-Purdy says America’s democracy is failing because it is not democratic enough. Old saws about the “tyranny of the majority”, propagated by founding father James Madison, among others, are redundant. The electoral college, which can override the popular vote, should be abolished, the franchise widened, and constitutional amendments curbing money in politics, banning gerrymandering and enshrining abortion rights should be voted on by all, he argued. Cynthia Miller-Idriss, author of Hate in the Homeland, says a key problem is the “mainstreaming of far-right extremism” during Trump’s presidency. She advocates large-scale investment to strengthen communities and improve media literacy and civic education. Friedman wants corporate America to cut off funding to Trump and anti-democratic Republicans. “Civil war is bad for business,” he wrote. Just look at Lebanon. Senator Bernie Sanders says radical change is the only answer. “At a time when the demagogues want to divide us … we must build an unstoppable grassroots movement that helps create the kind of nation we know we can become,” he says. Yet many Americans, including moderate Democrats, find the progressive left’s “transformational” agenda deeply disturbing, exemplified by calls to defund the police. Harvard’s Laurence Tribe and fellow lawyers say that for democracy and the rule of law to survive, there must be accountability. That requires, in addition to the congressional inquiry, “a robust criminal investigation” into all those responsible for 6 January – including Trump. In a tougher than usual speech marking the anniversary, Biden condemned “the former president’s web of lies” – but gave no hint of legal or other action to punish or restrain him. What would Alexis de Tocqueville, author of the famous study, Democracy in America, make of the present-day US? The French aristocrat and political scientist travelled the country in 1831-2, talking to ordinary people about governance and citizenship. He concluded, broadly, that democracy was an unstoppable, levelling historical trend that would eventually conquer the world. Until relatively recently, many in the west still held to that view. Now, with the rise of China and other powerful authoritarian, anti-democratic regimes, optimism is fading – and America, the global paradigm, is itself under the reactionary hammer. Has De Tocqueville’s dream been exploded? Not yet. The epic struggle for America’s democratic soul is just getting started. For a watching world, the stakes are sky-high, too. Where would Britain, Europe and all the globe’s democracies, actual and aspiring, be without the flawed but inspiring US example, without the “arsenal of democracy” to justify, validate and fortify their political universe? Best ask Xi Jinping, Vladimir Putin and other despots. They are betting the ranch on the failure of American democracy – and aim to profit greatly thereby.There is a plaque in the Old Bailey that commemorates the “courage and endurance” of Edward Bushell and 11 other jurors. In 1670, they were locked up by a judge without food and water for two days because they refused to change their not guilty verdict in the case of two Quakers who had been charged with unlawful assembly. Bushell petitioned the courts and the chief justice at the time, Sir John Vaughan, ruled that a jury could not be punished on account of the verdict it returned. In doing so, he established in English law the essential principle of jury independence. That principle means there is no such thing as an “incorrect” jury acquittal: juries have an absolute right to acquit a defendant in a criminal trial regardless of the legal arguments advanced in a case. Yet in the case of the not guilty verdict returned by the jury in the Colston four case, senior Conservative politicians, including the attorney general, the principal legal adviser to the Crown and the head of the Bar in England and Wales, have weighed in with explicit or implied criticism of the verdict, a fundamental undermining of the rule of law. The Colston four were charged with criminal damage for their role in toppling the statue of the slave trader Edward Colston in Bristol in 2020. Colston made his fortune by trafficking 80,000 men, women and children from Africa to America in the 17th century; one in five died in dreadful conditions en route. Bristol residents have, to little avail, long petitioned for their city to revisit the grossly offensive way he is honoured, including through this statue, which made no mention of his terrible legacy. The defendants’ acquittal by a jury should be the last word in this case. There were four potential defences put forward by lawyers for the four protesters; even if the jury found none convincing, they were still within their right to return a verdict of not guilty. But Tory politicians, including the prime minister and the home secretary, have picked a culture war with anti-racism protesters and well before the trial made their opinions on the toppling of the veneration of a slave trader well known. Since the verdict, they have not been able to resist implicitly expressing opinions on the lawfulness of its actions, thus undermining the rule of law. Robert Jenrick, the former communities secretary, suggested that the jury verdict itself undermined the rule of law, thus committing the very deed he wrongly accuses them of. Robert Buckland, the former justice secretary, himself a lawyer, called the verdict “perverse”. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said the government would fix the “loopholes in the law” that allowed for the jury verdict, without specifying what he meant, and indeed, whether he was questioning the very principle of jury independence established in 1670. By far the worst intervention, however, came from the attorney general, Suella Braverman, who announced via social media that, while trial by jury is an important right, the Colston verdict is causing confusion and so she is considering referring it to the court of appeal to clarify the law. A referral to the court of appeal is within her rights as attorney general and, as she stated, the court of appeal cannot overturn the jury verdict. However, there is absolutely no justification for her announcing that she is considering seeking a clarification on the law, without also setting out exactly what point of law in the judge’s directions to the jury, or in the court proceedings, is unclear. This is a gross politicisation and serves no purpose other than allowing her to inappropriately express a view on the jury’s verdict. Braverman’s announcement is only the latest sign of a Tory government only too willing to trash the rule of law for its own political ends. The examples abound, most memorably, Boris Johnson’s attempted prorogation of parliament in July 2019, ruled unlawful by the supreme court. Johnson said he disagreed with the supreme court, a nonsensical position given the highest court in the land does not opine on the law, it states how the law applies. Another cabinet minister, Jacob Rees-Mogg, accused the supreme court of a “constitutional coup”. But there are others. In 2016, Liz Truss while lord chancellor failed to defend the independent judiciary against dangerously hostile attacks from the press. In November 2020, the Home Office released a video that attacked “activist lawyers” for representing clients against the state, a role without which the justice system would not deserve its name. The government introduced the internal market bill in late 2020, which ministers readily conceded broke international law. And in recent years there have been repeated political attacks on judicial review – a vital route through which citizens can challenge the lawfulness of government actions – that give the impression of a government that wants to avoid all consequences of acting unlawfully. This rubbishes the core principle that the law applies equally to us all, including those involved in making it. The uncodified British constitution means that we as citizens rely on our politicians to abide by an unwritten honour code: that they will act to uphold the rule of law and respect the seven principles of public life. There may be advantages to a flexible constitution, but it is vulnerable to battering by a populist government such as Johnson’s. He is a prime minister with little regard for standards in public life or the rule of law. The damage Johnson is doing to fundamental constitutional principles that have evolved over centuries to protect citizens from the unlawful excesses of the state will last long after he leaves office.Sunday morning? If you’d asked me three years ago, I’d have been up at 1pm, then straight to the pub to drink all day with friends. Since Covid, I’ve had a new dawn. Now I’m at a fancy farmers’ market by 10am for a fresh coconut and health food wrap. Don’t get me wrong, I still love the pub. I’m just trying to be more balanced. Do you work? Music is a 24-hour business for me; it doesn’t stop for weekends. The other week we did a live session in Abbey Road Studios. It was all quite last minute, so I spent my whole Sunday rehearsing. I like making music any time the world feels quiet, Sunday included. I can just lock into the sound, uninterrupted. How do you relax? Watching movies, either at the cinema or on my projector at home. Outside music, film is where I turn for relaxation. And with food: I’m vegetarian these days– I try to eat healthier. Through childhood it was always a chicken roast, but now you’ll likely find me munching a beet wellington. Do you exercise? Again, lockdown changed me. I stopped playing football at 16 and didn’t exercise again until Covid. I can’t stand running, so I started taking daily techno walks: old-school heavy tunes in my ears, I march briskly to the music. There was a point last summer when I’d shaved, had a strong moustache, and sweated a lot – I looked like Robert Carlyle in Trainspotting. Sundays growing up? I went to Catholic school like most kids in Ireland, but we weren’t religious – church was for weddings, funerals and Christmas. Mostly, I remember Irish TV. We only had four channels – there were cowboy films dubbed with Gaelic, and lots of strange 1970s reruns. Sunday nights out? I used to go out raving on Sunday nights – that’s when some of the best underground spots were open. They tended to be pretty good, from what I can remember. Now you’ll probably find me at one of London’s late-night Irish pubs. If I can face starting the week feeling ropey, why should Monday morning stop me? Maverick Sabre’s new album, ‘Don’t Forget To Look Up’ is out on 28 January, and his UK+IRE tour commences on 17 FebruaryJosh Cavallo, who last year became the only openly gay professional top flight men’s footballer in the world, says he has “no words” to describe his disappointment at being targeted by homophobic abuse during an A-League Men game over the weekend. The Adelaide United player came on as a second-half substitute during the Reds’ away game at Melbourne Victory on Saturday night and said afterwards that he had received abuse from the crowd at AAMI Park. The 22-year-old received acclaim from across the globe in October when he came out via Adelaide’s social media channels. Players past and present from Gerard Piqué, Raphaël Varane and Marcus Rashford to Gary Lineker, Robin van Persie and Joey Barton, plus clubs including Liverpool and Juventus, all lined up to show their support. But just two months later, Cavallo has found himself having to call out abuse from the stands. “I’m not going to pretend that I didn’t see or hear the homophobic abuse at the game last night,” Cavallo wrote on Instagram on Sunday. “There are no words to tell you how disappointed I was. As a society this shows we still face these problems in 2022. “This shouldn’t be acceptable and we need to do more to hold this [sic] people accountable. Hate never will win. I will never apologise for living my truth and most recently who I am outside of football.” Cavallo also said he was targeted after the game on Instagram and used his own post to call out the social media platform for the way it deals with homophobic abuse. “To Instagram I don’t want any child or adult to have to receive the hateful and hurtful messages that I’ve received,” he said. “I knew truly being who I am that I was going to come across this. It’s a sad reality that your platforms are not doing enough to stop these messages.” The Australian Professional Leagues said it was “shocked and saddened” to hear of the reports of the “homophobic bullying”. “Our players, staff and fans have the right to feel safe on and off the pitch,” APL CEO Danny Townsend said. “There is no place for bullying, harassment or abuse in Australian football and we have zero tolerance for this harmful behaviour.” The APL is working with both clubs to investigate the incident and it promised to issue sanctions to any people found to be involved. “We fully support Josh Cavallo and want to ensure he can focus on his football performance, rather than on vile abuse. We will continue to concentrate our efforts on creating safe and welcoming A-Leagues for all.” Cavallo said he was grateful for the support from individuals who made a stand at the game and for the positive messages he had received afterwards. He also had a message for others, particularly young people, who had been on the receiving end of similar abuse, telling them to “hold your heads up high and keep chasing your dreams”. “Know that there is no place in the game for this,” he wrote. “Football is a game for everyone no matter of who you are, what colour your skin is or where you come from.” Adelaide United said the “disappointing and upsetting” abuse would not be tolerated while the players’ union, Professional Footballers Australia, said “there is no place in our game, or society, for those who direct abhorrent abuse at others”. The Victory released a statement condemning the abuse and confirming it was investigating. “Melbourne Victory sees football as a platform to unite fans no matter what background,” it said. “Spectators found to have breached these standards will be banned from future matches.”With a zillion images of themselves to choose from, many taken by a reverent state photographer, Boris and Carrie Johnson used a picture of their dog, Dilyn, for their recent Christmas card. If unlikely to appeal to the current pope, the pet is, they presumably concluded, more generally inoffensive, ostensibly uninvolved in the family’s tireless requisitioning of free luxury goods and, on a more positive note, a pointed reminder of the household’s remaining claim to virtue. Or if that’s putting it too strongly: to their formal recognition as sentient beings. For say what you like about his indifference to human welfare, not excluding that of close family members, the PM has, by his standards, worked tirelessly for lobsters. Better still, his wife, who’s employed by the Aspinall Foundation, a zookeeper so upmarket that it disdains zookeeping, is routinely described as an “animal rights campaigner”. There is talk of a Carrie wildlife show on Netflix. True, lizards, adders, insects and many other less immediately captivating creatures have yet to see the benefit of having, in Downing Street, these natural successors to Armand and Michaela Denis or the Born Free couple – but have we mentioned Dilyn, the famous rescue dog? Since the start of this administration, animals – occasionally held aloft for the purpose – have been the couple’s way of signalling that they are not, after all, shits. Johnson may have failed, for instance, to free Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, having idly blighted her hopes of liberation, but consider his work for badgers, following his girlfriend’s (as she then was) well-publicised intervention. In 2019 the future Mrs Johnson, after a briefing from Dominic Dyer, then CEO of the Badger Trust, got Johnson, not formerly known for any interest in animals beyond dressing up and killing them, to stop an imminent badger cull in Derbyshire. A judicial review, brought by the National Farmers’ Union, was later dismissed. Carrie Symonds went on to condemn trophy hunting, elephant rides and the fur trade and became Peta’s UK 2020 person of the year. “Symonds is a true ally to animals and her activism gets results,” Peta said, citing her condemnation of monkey labour. As for her husband, his government later produced an Action Plan for Animal Welfare, a characteristically boastful document in which George Eustice, the environment secretary, explained why, even as it discards EU regulation, the UK will lead the world in animal welfare. “The way we treat animals reflects our values and the kind of people we are,” he wrote. “We will continue to raise the bar and we intend to take the rest of the world with us.” A lesson in international bar-raising occurred sooner than anyone could have expected when, during the chaotic Kabul evacuation, the Johnsons intervened to save some of the dogs and cats collected by Pen Farthing’s charity, Nowzad. Farthing’s ally, Dominic Dyer, told the BBC he had again “reached out” to Symonds, and “forced the prime minister’s arm”. So it seems reasonable to ignore Downing Street’s denials, especially given the whistleblower Raphael Marshall’s evidence to the foreign affairs select committee. There was an “instruction from the Prime Minister” to evacuate Farthing’s dogs, zero policy justification for this and it came at a sickening cost. “There was a direct trade-off,” Marshall writes, “between transporting Nowzad’s animals and evacuating British nationals and Afghan evacuees, including Afghans who had served with British soldiers.” To balance this triumph for a UK brand of animal welfare so world-beating that it privileges pets over people, there are indications, however, that the government is not so much anti-speciesist as species selective. Had Farthing chosen to deliver neglected Afghan goats they would probably not, for all their sociability and cleverness, have inspired a Carrie Johnson mercy intervention. The RSPCA has already noted, following Liz Truss’s Australia trade deal (likely to be a template for others), that a government proudly sensitive on pet-smuggling and badger survival will happily surrender livestock standards for trade deals. Unless some new intervention is imminent, Dilyn’s owners, recently willing to trade interpreters’ lives for Farthing’s cats, have no problem with imported beef from cattle raised on “enormous bare feed-lots” and subjected to transport times of 48 hours and lamb from animals mutilated without anaesthetic. As applied to killing animals for fun, Johnson’s eclectic welfare principles could lead to yet more confusion in countries unfamiliar with the UK tradition of class-based animal protections. What, for instance, makes a UK badger’s welfare more worthy of consideration than a UK crow’s? The bird is famously brainy, capable of social learning, of reasoning and of using tools – quite likely more effective in that respect than Johnson, for all his opposable thumbs. Nest sanitation is, in contrast to the prime ministerial “tip”, a given. Their rank in Tory animal taxonomy dictates, however, that crows are among several wild creatures that can now, following an updating of the law, be more easily killed in order to protect game birds, which vastly outnumber all native British birds and are the cause of extensive ecological damage. Jackdaws, pigeons and rooks can be likewise sacrificed for a higher purpose: the subsequent slaughter of the protected game birds, by landowners, in still greater numbers. The RSPB said the revised regulations could be a “massive backward step for nature conservation”. Again, it’s not too late for another intervention by Mrs Johnson. Even if crows and pigs lack the superficial appeal of dolphins, monkeys and Dilyn the rescue dog, she might yet decide that some registered aversion to killing game birds for amusement, and to mistreating livestock for profit, is a minimum requirement for her career in animal welfare. Though admittedly no law says professional animal lovers must love all animals. The late Steve Irwin was killed harassing a stingray. And they’re still seeking a successor to Joe Exotic. • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnistUnthinkable is the perfect title for this extraordinary book, because it describes a superhuman feat. Jamie Raskin is a fine writer, a Democratic congressman, a constitutional scholar and a deeply loving father. When 2020 began, he had no inkling that just 12 months later his country and his family would face “two impossible traumas”. On 31 December, his beautiful, brilliant, charismatic 25-year-old son, Tommy, took his own life. Six days later, a vicious mob invaded Raskin’s workplace, the cradle of democracy, leaving several dead and injuring 140 police officers. Raskin suffered “a violent and comprehensive shock to the foundations”. Never had he felt “so equidistant … between the increasingly unrecognizable place called life and the suddenly intimate and expanding jurisdiction called death”. This is where the superhuman part came in. Instead of succumbing to unfathomable grief over the death of his son, Raskin seized a lifeline thrown by the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, and agreed to lead the effort to impeach Donald Trump for inciting the riot which might have derailed the peaceful transition of power. He found “salvation and sustenance … a pathway back to the land of the living”. “I’m not going to lose my son at the end of 2020 and lose my country and my republic in 2021,” he told CNN, less than three weeks after Tommy’s death. Raskin’s astonishing story of tragedy and redemption, of “despair and survival”, depended entirely on all the “good and compassionate people” like Tommy, “the non-narcissists, the feisty, life-size human beings who hate bullying and fascism naturally – people just the right size for a democracy … where we are all created equal”. Tommy Raskin was the fourth generation in a great liberal family. His maternal great-grandfather was the first Jew elected to the Minnesota legislature. His grandfather, Marcus Raskin, was one of the earliest opponents of the Vietnam war when he worked in the Kennedy White House. In 1968, Marcus Raskin was indicted with William Sloane Coffin, Dr Benjamin Spock and others for conspiracy to aid resistance to the draft. When Raskin was the only one acquitted, he famously demanded a retrial. Jamie Raskin taught constitutional law then ran for the Maryland senate, with Tommy, then 10, his first campaign aide. In the state legislature, Raskin helped outlaw the death penalty and legalize same-sex marriage. Tommy was a second-year student at Harvard Law School when Covid began. Like so many others with clinical depression, the catastrophe deepened his symptoms. His father described his illness as “a kind of relentless torture in the brain … Despite very fine doctors and a loving family … the pain became overwhelming and unyielding and unbearable at last.” This is also a political memoir, of the Capitol attack and the second impeachment. Driving to the Capitol, Raskin spotted Maga supporters heckling a young Black driver and a car with a bumper sticker reading: “If Guns Are Outlawed, How Am I Going To Shoot Liberals?” He realizes these “fascist bread crumbs throughout the city” should have activated “some kind of cultural alarm”. More chillingly, he reports the decision of some Democrats to cross their chamber after Congress was invaded, “because they thought a mass shooter who entered would be less likely to aim at the Republican side of the House”. But Raskin was never afraid: “The very worst thing that could ever have happened to us has already happened … and Tommy is with me somehow every step of the way. He is occupying my heart … He is showing me the way to some kind of safety … My wound has now become my shield of defense and my path to escape, and all I can think of is my son propelling me forward to fight.” The most powerful part of Raskin’s book, the heart-shattering part, is his love letter to Tommy, a “dazzling, precious, brilliant … moral visionary, a slam poet, an intellectual giant slayer, the king of Boggle, a natural-born comedian, a friend to all human beings but tyrants and bullies, a freedom fighter, a political essayist, a playwright, a jazz pianist, and a handsome, radical visitor from a distant future where war, mass hunger and the eating of animals are considered barbaric intolerable and absurd”. Raskin realized that for the last week of his life, his son had made an effort to impersonate someone in perfect mental health, so no one would intervene. These were his parting words: “Please forgive me. My illness won today. Please look after each other, the animals and the global poor for me. All my love, Tommy.” Raskin takes some solace remembering the story of Abraham Lincoln’s son Willie, who died of typhoid fever at the age of 12 in 1862, plunging his parents into depression. It had been a point of pride that Raskin responded to every constituent, but a deluge of condolences made that impossible. There was also a call from Joe Biden, three days after Tommy died. The president-elect promised “the day would come when Tommy’s name would bring a smile to my lip before tears to my eyes”. Eventually Raskin was convinced to write one letter for everyone sending condolences, one for everyone who wrote about impeachment and a third for everyone who offered condolences and political solidarity. One actually wrote: “I was looking for a condolence card for the loss of your son which also said ‘and thanks for saving our country too’, but Hallmark apparently doesn’t make those.” Naturally, one of Raskin’s son’s heroes was Wittgenstein, who believed the truth of ethical propositions is determined by the courage with which you act to make them real. “On this standard,” Raskin writes, “there have never been truer ethical claims than the ones made by Tommy Raskin, because he was all courage and engagement with his moral convictions.” May this book and Tommy’s example inspire us all to rescue our gravely beleaguered democracy. Unthinkable: Trauma, Truth, and the Trials of American Democracy is published in the US by HarperThe family of a man who died suddenly after being released from police custody are calling on the attorney general and home secretary to intervene and demand that the police watchdog release bodycam and CCTV footage showing the final hours of his life. Mohamud Mohammed Hassan, 24, died hours after he was released from Cardiff Bay police station a year ago. He was arrested at his Cardiff home on suspicion of breach of the peace, but released without charge. His family said he had claimed he was assaulted in custody before his death. A postmortem later failed to establish a cause. The Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) served notices to five police officers and one custody detention officer, advising them their conduct is subject to investigation. In a statement released on the one-year anniversary of the death, the family said: “We have repeatedly requested that the IOPC provide the family and our legal team access to the video showing the final hours of Mohamud’s life. Despite our repeated requests for access to film recording of the last hours of Mohamud’s life, the family have been consistently denied access by the IOPC. “We believe that all families of those that die in suspicious circumstances in police custody should have an automatic right enshrined in law to get immediate access to police bodycam footage showing exactly what happened during their final moments on this earth.” The family called on the attorney general, Suella Braverman, and home secretary Priti Patel to intervene and instruct the IOPC release all police bodycam and CCTV footage. The police watchdog said its investigation into police contact prior to the death of Hassan was nearing completion and a “substantial investigation report” was being finalised. The IOPC said its thoughts remain with Hassan’s family and friends. A spokesperson said the IOPC had kept the family, coroner and South Wales police updated on the progress of the investigation. Hilary Brown, the family’s legal representative, said: “The length of time it has taken for the IOPC to conclude their investigation is totally unacceptable. The family made requests early in the investigation to disclose the police bodycam and CCTV of Mohamud Hassan that both the IOPC and South Wales police have access to – which has still not been disclosed to the family. This failure has significantly contributed to the ongoing trauma suffered by the family. “This denial constitutes a cruel and unusual punishment for a family seeking nothing more than the truth as to what happened to their beloved Mohamud.” Catrin Evans, IOPC director for Wales, said: “While we appreciate how very difficult this past year has been for Mr Hassan’s family and their understandable need to know the circumstances surrounding his death, it has been vital that we pursue every possible line of inquiry. “We continue to liaise with the coroner, and work towards sharing video footage and other evidential material with Mr Hassan’s family and legal representative as soon as we are able. We also need to take account of the need to safeguard the inquest into his death, which may be heard before a jury, and other potential future proceedings.”Apart from his bad luck in being struck twice by the need to go into isolation from Covid, the leader of the opposition, Sir Keir Starmer has a huge, indeed historic, weight on his shoulders. To put it bluntly: this government is so appalling that if, as it hopes, it is re-elected either this year or next, many of us will be seriously tempted to emigrate. The sleaze that finally overturned one of the safest Tory seats in the land, namely North Shropshire, brought to mind a line in Imperium, a novel by my old friend Robert Harris: Cicero (for it is the fictional he) describes a dodgy politician as “giving corruption a bad name”. The reaction to the Johnson government in the polls, and in voluminous acres of the hitherto supine Tory press, may be heartening to Starmer, but only up to a point. What we are witnessing – and, goodness, it has taken time – is the eternal wisdom of that great observation attributed to Abraham Lincoln: “You can fool all of the people some of the time and some of the people all the time, but you cannot fool all the people all the time.” It is reassuring to those of us who are unrepentant Remainers that the wider public appears to be waking up to the economically and socially damaging impact of Brexit. This development, along with the chaotic sleaze of Johnson’s government, is giving rise to open rebellion within the Tory ranks, and speculation about who will succeed him. The problem is that the candidates are all of the same mould: in horseracing terms, they are sired by Brexit, and their dam is Austerity. The point about Brexit, as emphasised in Lord Frost’s resignation letter from his post as chief negotiator, is that it was a neoliberal coup to make this country “a lightly regulated, low-tax, entrepreneurial economy, at the cutting edge of modern science and economic change”. No matter that Frost, before the referendum, was on record as acknowledging that we were better off within the EU; no matter that all that stuff about being at the “cutting edge” is so much cant; the main point is that in attempting, in Lord Lawson’s notorious words, “to finish the Thatcher revolution” with Brexit, the Brexiters were opposing the social-democratic, interventionist nature of the EU in favour of giving free rein to “market forces” and English nationalism. But they were abandoning a market that really mattered: the single market, an enlightened intergovernmental creation championed by Thatcher. What Starmer needs to do is stop trying to pacify “red wall” former Labour voters and get across to them that Brexit was essentially a war against them, and against the socially compassionate nature of the founding principles of the EU, principles that have been made a mockery of by the long squeeze on the NHS and social services generally. In his magnum opus The Betrayal of Liberal Economics, Prof Amos Witztum laments the way that, because “collectivism” or state provision is associated with the political tyranny of communist regimes, there has been, since the collapse of the USSR, “another form of unnoticed oppression: the tyranny of markets”. He suggests: “Instead of subjugating all public provision to the scrutiny of markets, we should subjugate markets to the scrutiny of socially constructed criteria.” Now, I have noticed that there have been many references recently to the debt we owe to Clement Attlee, Labour prime minister from 1945 to 51, by whose beneficent administration the NHS was founded. Starmer for one, has been singing his praises. Attlee, like Franklin Roosevelt before him in the US, sought the right balance between private and public provision. The ideological Brexiters do not. One of the reasons Frost adduces for his resignation is that Johnson is “going in the wrong direction” by planning to raise taxes and increase public provision, even though this is the forced consequence of the costs of dealing with Covid. Chancellor Sunak has made it plain he wants to cut taxes before the next election. Johnson is actually unpopular among many of his colleagues for being a “big spender”. The thrust of the policies of such potential successors to Johnson as Sunak, or the one and only Liz Truss, would be the Brexit doctrine of low taxes and concomitant austerity. What they do not appear to take into account is that by knocking 4% off GDP with Brexit (the OBR’s estimate), they have damaged prospective tax revenues so badly that their tax-cutting plans have horrifying implications for public services. Or perhaps that does not worry them. Attlee must be turning in his grave. I am sure Starmer and his advisers are aware of the implications of all this. They should be championing the EU, and not be embarrassed by their association with the Remain campaign. Let us hope they can bring home the electoral bacon. I really do not wish to have to emigrate.Joe Biden had spent a year in the hope that America could go back to normal. But last Thursday, the first anniversary of the deadly insurrection at the US Capitol, the president finally recognised the full scale of the current threat to American democracy. “At this moment, we must decide,” Biden said in Statuary Hall, where rioters had swarmed a year earlier. “What kind of nation are we going to be? Are we going to be a nation that accepts political violence as a norm?” It is a question that many inside America and beyond are now asking. In a deeply divided society, where even a national tragedy such as 6 January only pushed people further apart, there is fear that that day was the just the beginning of a wave of unrest, conflict and domestic terrorism. A slew of recent opinion polls shows a significant minority of Americans at ease with the idea of violence against the government. Even talk of a second American civil war has gone from fringe fantasy to media mainstream. “Is a Civil War ahead?” was the blunt headline of a New Yorker magazine article this week. “Are We Really Facing a Second Civil War?” posed the headline of a column in Friday’s New York Times. Three retired US generals wrote a recent Washington Post column warning that another coup attempt “could lead to civil war”. The mere fact that such notions are entering the public domain shows the once unthinkable has become thinkable, even though some would argue it remains firmly improbable. The anxiety is fed by rancour in Washington, where Biden’s desire for bipartisanship has crashed into radicalized Republican opposition. The president’s remarks on Thursday – “I will allow no one to place a dagger at the throat of our democracy” – appeared to acknowledge that there can be no business as usual when one of America’s major parties has embraced authoritarianism. Illustrating the point, almost no Republicans attended the commemorations as the party seeks to rewrite history, recasting the mob who tried to overturn Trump’s election defeat as martyrs fighting for democracy. Tucker Carlson, the most watched host on the conservative Fox News network, refused to play any clips of Biden’s speech, arguing that 6 January 2021 “barely rates as a footnote” historically because “really not a lot happened that day”. With the cult of Trump more dominant in the Republican party than ever, and radical rightwing groups such as the Oath Keepers and Proud Boys on the march, some regard the threat to democracy as greater now than it was a year ago. Among those raising the alarm is Barbara Walter, a political scientist at the University of California, San Diego, and author of a new book, How Civil Wars Start: And How to Stop Them. Walter previously served on the political instability taskforce, an advisory panel to the CIA, which had a model to predict political violence in countries all over the world – except the US itself. Yet with the rise of Trump’s racist demagoguery, Walter, who has studied civil wars for 30 years, recognized telltale signs on her own doorstep. One was the emergence of a government that is neither fully democratic nor fully autocratic – an “anocracy”. The other is a landscape devolving into identity politics where parties no longer organise around ideology or specific policies but along racial, ethnic or religious lines. Walter told the Observer: “By the 2020 elections, 90% of the Republican party was now white. On the taskforce, if we were to see that in another multiethnic, multi-religious country which is based on a two-party system, this is what we would call a super faction, and a super faction is particularly dangerous.” Not even the gloomiest pessimist is predicting a rerun of the 1861-65 civil war with a blue army and red army fighting pitched battles. “It would look more like Northern Ireland and what Britain experienced, where it’s more of an insurgency,” Walter continued. “It would probably be more decentralized than Northern Ireland because we have such a large country and there are so many militias all around the country.” “They would turn to unconventional tactics, in particular terrorism, maybe even a little bit of guerrilla warfare, where they would target federal buildings, synagogues, places with large crowds. The strategy would be one of intimidation and to scare the American public into believing that the federal government isn’t capable of taking care of them.” A 2020 plot to kidnap Gretchen Whitmer, the Democratic governor of Michigan, could be a sign of things to come. Walter suggests that opposition figures, moderate Republicans and judges deemed unsympathetic might all become potential assassination targets. “I could also imagine situations where militias, in conjunction with law enforcement in those areas, carve out little white ethnostates in areas where that’s possible because of the way power is divided here in the United States. It would certainly not look anything like the civil war that happened in the 1860s.” Walter notes that most people tend to assume civil wars are started by the poor or oppressed. Not so. In America’s case, it is a backlash from a white majority destined to become a minority by around 2045, an eclipse symbolized by Barack Obama’s election in 2008. The academic explained: “The groups that tend to start civil wars are the groups that were once dominant politically but are in decline. They’ve either lost political power or they’re losing political power and they truly believe that the country is theirs by right and they are justified in using force to regain control because the system no longer works for them.” A year after the 6 January insurrection, the atmosphere on Capitol Hill remains toxic amid a breakdown of civility, trust and shared norms. Several Republican members of Congress received menacing messages, including a death threat, after voting for an otherwise bipartisan infrastructure bill that Trump opposed. The two Republicans on the House of Representatives select committee investigating the 6 January attack, Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger, face calls to be banished from their party. Democrat Ilhan Omar of Minnesota, a Somali-born Muslim, has suffered Islamophobic abuse. Yet Trump’s supporters argue that they are the ones fighting to save democracy. Last year Congressman Madison Cawthorn of North Carolina said: “If our election systems continue to be rigged and continue to be stolen, then it’s going to lead to one place and that’s bloodshed.” Last month Congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene of Georgia, who has bemoaned the treatment of 6 January defendants jailed for their role in the attack, called for a “national divorce” between blue and red states. Democrat Ruben Gallego responded forcefully: “There is no ‘National Divorce’. Either you are for civil war or not. Just say it if you want a civil war and officially declare yourself a traitor.” There is also the prospect of Trump running for president again in 2024. Republican-led states are imposing voter restriction laws calculated to favour the party while Trump loyalists are seeking to take charge of running elections. A disputed White House race could make for an incendiary cocktail. James Hawdon, director of the Center for Peace Studies and Violence Prevention at Virginia Tech university, said: “I don’t like to be an alarmist, but the country has been moving more and more toward violence, not away from it. Another contested election may have grim consequences.” Although most Americans have grown up taking its stable democracy for granted, this is also a society where violence is the norm, not the exception, from the genocide of Native Americans to slavery, from the civil war to four presidential assassinations, from gun violence that takes 40,000 lives a year to a military-industrial complex that has killed millions overseas. Larry Jacobs, director of the Center for the Study of Politics and Governance at the University of Minnesota, said: “America is not unaccustomed to violence. It is a very violent society and what we’re talking about is violence being given an explicit political agenda. That’s a kind of terrifying new direction in America.” While he does not currently foresee political violence becoming endemic, Jacobs agrees that any such unravelling would also be most likely to resemble Northern Ireland’s Troubles. “We would see these episodic, scattered terrorist attacks,” he added. “The Northern Ireland model is the one that frankly most fear because it doesn’t take a huge number of people to do this and right now there are highly motivated, well-armed groups. The question is, has the FBI infiltrated them sufficiently to be able to knock them out before they launch a campaign of terror?” “Of course, it doesn’t help in America that guns are prevalent. Anyone can get a gun and you have ready access to explosives. All of this is kindling for the precarious position we now find ourselves in.” Nothing, though, is inevitable. Biden also used his speech to praise the 2020 election as the greatest demonstration of democracy in US history with a record 150 million-plus people voting despite a pandemic. Trump’s bogus challenges to the result were thrown out by what remains a robust court system and scrutinised by what remains a vibrant civil society and media. In a reality check, Josh Kertzer, a political scientist at Harvard University, tweeted: “I know a lot of civil war scholars, and … very few of them think the United States is on the precipice of a civil war.” And yet the assumption that “it can’t happen here,” is as old as politics itself. Walter has interviewed many survivors about the lead-up to civil wars. “What everybody said, whether they were in Baghdad or Sarajevo or Kiev, was we didn’t see it coming,” she recalled. “In fact, we weren’t willing to accept that anything was wrong until we heard machine gun fire in the hillside. And by that time, it was too late.”The ballerina’s tutu remains a traditional object of desire for many young girls: an enduring emblem of diaphanous femininity, as well as the twirling centrepiece of many a childhood music box. But is its longstanding link with the world of professional dance now out of date? Several leading performers and choreographers think so, and while the twinkly costume of The Nutcracker’s Sugar Plum Fairy may not quite have been consigned to the wardrobe archives, its days may be numbered. Late last year, the Royal Ballet’s former principal ballerina, Australian-born Leanne Benjamin, spoke candidly in public about falling out of love with the tutu. She would be happy never to wear one again, she confided to an audience at the Australian embassy gathered to mark the British launch of her autobiography, Built for Ballet. Traditional ballerina outfits had always felt constrictive to her, Benjamin said. Speaking to the Observer this weekend, the 57-year-old dancer and teacher admitted that the conventional shape does still have many fans among fellow performers. “The evolution of the tutu was designed to show off the leg,” she said, “In my book I discuss that personally I didn’t like wearing a tutu, but most of my contemporaries love wearing them.” Benjamin, who was at Covent Garden with Darcey Bussell, is clear that her views may not hold sway. “I am not a director of a company, so I speak as an onlooker now,” she said. “And I am not sure if gender distinctions come into the discussion. But tutus are a style of costume and the conversations now taking place may well affect decisions about what occurs. I think we all expect and enjoy evolution and so will welcome what comes next.” Back in Benjamin’s native land the national ballet company has announced a new season of work that will steer away from pretty costumes and orthodox stagings. Artistic director David Hallberg, who has been leading the Australian Ballet since last year, has not programmed any of the classic “tutu ballets”, such as Swan Lake, Giselle or The Sleeping Beauty, and is keen to take a break from bouncing layers of tulle. “I believe ballet audiences in Australia are very open to the new,” he recently told the Guardian. “There is an openness.” Tutus are not banned for good, Hallberg says, but he recognises his dancers welcome something different. “They’re not bogged down in tradition or by the patina of companies like the Bolshoi or Royal Ballet. They can absorb varying styles more easily than a dancer trained in the French, Russian or English style.” And this revolution in the wardrobe department is not confined to those of Australian birth. Tamara Rojo, the acclaimed Spanish ballerina who is artistic director of the English National Ballet at the Coliseum in London, is also turning away from the standard tutu in her first work as both choreographer and director. Although Rojo has chosen to present an established work – Raymonda by Alexander Glazunov and Marius Petipa – her approach is revisionist, if not radical. Not only will the costume conventions of the piece be laid aside, but the emphasis of the narrative is being reworked to reflect modern concerns. The ballet’s third act, in which Hungarian influences are usually clear in a grand wedding scene staged in the court of King Andrew II of Hungary, who had led the 1217 Crusades, Rojo has done away with the shimmering tutus and ornate trappings. Instead she is to show a chorus of European immigrants helping to pick the harvests for Raymonda on her land. And Jo Meredith, creative director of the UK’s National Youth Ballet, has also chosen to abandon many of the traditional stage orthodoxies for her latest production of Kurt Weill’s The Seven Deadly Sins. “Young ballet dancers generally have a very clear agenda and are very “on it” when it comes to questions of gender and stereotyping on stage,” she said. “The idea of gender neutral costumes also works very well with this show, which is set in the 1930s. We are going to put everyone in tuxedos.” It is a decision particularly well suited to a production from another era when visual androgyny was celebrated, but Meredith believes it could fit a ballet from any time. “We have used short classic tutus in the past, as well as the longer romantic tutus you often see in Giselle, or in many of Degas’s paintings,” she said. “But the idea of the ballerina is developing and, although there will always be a place for the Sugar Plum Fairy, it’s very interesting to see what Tamara is now doing with Raymonda at the Coliseum. It is a way of keeping ballet looking fresh and exciting.” Benjamin agrees that presenting historical works without the tutu from now on “would seem a shame”, but argues they are not always relevant in a reimagined production. She is not, she adds, urging that tutus should suddenly disappear. “I have seen how beautiful they can be and how they evolved. However, the reality is that you assess how the whole thing works together. “Look at how Stephen Galloway was inspired by the tutu to contemporise his costumes for William Forsythe’s new Vertiginous Thrill of Exactitude with Pacific Northwest Ballet last year – and how Serena Williams had her own take on it, wearing a tutu-style dress on the tennis court.”According to the writers of And Just Like That, HBO’s fascinatingly appalling Sex and the City reboot, it’s really perfectly easy to find contentment as a middle-aged single woman. In episode four, the recently widowed Carrie Bradshaw (Sarah Jessica Parker) returns to her old bachelor-girl flat, a place she kept on (because she is rich) untenanted after her marriage. There, having slept soundly for the first time in weeks, she pulls on a long tulle skirt that makes her look a bit like a fairy, and heads out to her local bodega to pick up a free coffee from its kindly owner. There is, we can’t help but notice, a spring in her step now, and thus the hapless viewer receives the message loud and clear. Happiness, it would seem, is only a simple matter of determination. Stride briskly on in your favourite outlandish clothes, a paper cup in your right hand and a mobile phone in your left, and daily rapture will be yours. In her new book, I Came All This Way to Meet You: Writing Myself Home, the American novelist Jami Attenberg has a lot to say about writing; ostensibly, her first work of nonfiction is determined to stare hardest at the creative life, and all that such an existence involves (in summary: a lot of hard work, a certain amount of luck, and very little cash). As the daughter of a travelling salesman, she’s interested, too, in a certain kind of transience. For many years, she found it hard to settle. Attenberg was 45 before she owned a bed; she once slept in 26 different places in seven months. In the end, however, she just can’t help herself. The truth must be told. Ultimately, her memoir is about what it is like not to have, nor even much to want, all the things that are supposed to make a woman complete. If it is wonderful to be free – to be the kind of unicorn that judges yourself, not according to the putrid benchmarks of a sexist society, but by your own standards – this doesn’t mean that it isn’t also, sometimes, painful. For Attenberg, as for Carrie Bradshaw, happiness and being alone are not mutually exclusive. But as she also notes, expressing such a truth in public for the first time may still “feel like a specific kind of death”. Her memoir is, in other words, a powerful antidote to pernicious fantasies of the tulle-skirt-and-soya-latte kind. I don’t mean it as a criticism when I say that Attenberg’s book has an untidy, artless structure. Yes, its narrative, which moves repeatedly back and forth in time, is often in danger of seeming repetitive, and perhaps it comes with one too many Zoom meetings (it is something of a pandemic book, I think). But such restlessness reflects its subject matter: the sublets that come and go; the thousands of miles travelled in pursuit of minuscule sales at bookshop readings (it wasn’t until 2013, when her fourth novel, The Middlesteins, appeared on the New York Times bestseller list, that Attenberg had anything even approaching a literary hit). When success arrives at last, our one-time couch surfer finds that she cannot say no, and thanks to this she attends literary festivals all over the world, and teaches creative writing in Vilnius, Lithuania. Flying causes her intense anxiety, but still she does it, relying on Xanax “borrowed” from friends – she has so many! – to see her through. What she needs, she comes to realise, as the “vibrations” of her youth begin at last to subside, is a home. She doesn’t want carpets strewn with toys; marital cosiness (smugness?) isn’t for her. But there is a moment, staying with a friend in Evanston, Illinois, when she considers the contents of a family-size refrigerator – six packs of yoghurt, freshly squeezed juice, an entire drawer devoted to cheese – and experiences a pang of envy. Where is her place? For a long time, it will be a loft in (pre-gentrification) Williamsburg, Brooklyn, a ramshackle cavern, all thin walls and exposed pipes, described in a love letter that is one of the best pieces of writing in her book. Finally, though, this won’t do. It’s in New Orleans that she will buy a room of her own, one that comes with a view of hummingbirds and loquat trees. The resistance you detect in her as she writes of this beloved house – she always had a room of her own in her head, she insists – only makes this the sweeter as you read of it. Similarly, her cheeriness – her absolute disdain for self-pity – only serves to make the sad parts of her book seem the more plangent. Those who love Attenberg’s novels – for me, All Grown Up (2017) is one of the best, most spirited and most enjoyable books ever written about a mostly single woman – will recognise her tone here, even if parts of this work do border on self-obsession (not that I particularly blame her for being self-obsessed; this, too, is something society forces on women, for we can never live up to expectations, falling back always on self-recrimination, self-improvement and, worst of all, hour-by-hour analyses of our moods). Attenberg recounts it all – the bad men, and the bad friends, the sexual assaults and the restaurants that won’t provide a table for one – in a way that is at once a kind of reckoning, as dramatic as this sounds, and effortlessly casual. Haven’t these things happened to all women? If they’re grave, they are also quotidian. She’s very funny, and it’s this that makes her marvellous. When a man with whom she’s about to have sex for the first time – “we made our way towards nudity” – suddenly produces a brown paper bag in bed, all she can wonder is whether there’s a sandwich in it. In fact, it contains an unrequested sex toy. I laughed out loud at this. Here is the kind of determination I favour. Life is funny and grim (or, if you prefer, grimly funny). Forget this and, like the writers now desperately trying to make Sarah Jessica Parker relevant again, you’ve got what Attenberg would doubtless call Bad Art. • I Came All This Way to Meet You: Writing Myself Home by Jami Attenberg is published by Serpent’s Tail (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyA couple of years ago, Alec Soth, the great road-tripping witness of American life, decided to retrace the path of the most famous funeral procession in his nation’s history: the train journey that carried assassinated President Lincoln’s 6ft 4in corpse from Washington DC to his home town of Springfield, Illinois. The steam-powered cortege was witnessed by millions of Americans, among them the poet Walt Whitman, who was moved to write his elegy, When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom’d. Soth set out on his journey with a line from Whitman’s poem in his head – “And what shall the pictures be that I hang on the walls, To adorn the burial house of him I love?” – and a notion “to mourn the divisiveness in [contemporary] America”. Soth made his name as a photographer with Sleeping By the Mississippi, his landmark 2002 journey along the human margins of the storied river. He quickly found the polemical impetus of his Lincoln project too confining. He continued his journey but adopted another more freewheeling line from Whitman instead: “From this hour I ordain myself loos’d of limits and imaginary lines, Going where I list…” He followed his eye, rather than his head. The result is a book, A Pound of Pictures, which free-associates around some of the themes of that original project. Most of Soth’s images are taken of roadside oddities – a woman measuring “the girthiest sycamore in Michigan”, for example, or a wedding party stranded waiting for a bus. Connections and themes emerge. One is a sense of people searching among wasteland wildflowers for something unknown. You are reminded that Whitman was a great butterfly hunter – there is a famous photograph of the poet with a moth on his finger (it later turned out to be made of paper). Soth’s moth on an orange segment is real enough, another surprise interloper among his images, staring back at you with a predatory warning eye. A Pound of Pictures by Alec Soth is published by Mack. An accompanying exhibition runs at Sean Kelly Gallery, New York, from 14 January to 26 FebruaryWelcome to the supermarkets of the future. They may look and feel like the supermarkets we are all used to – and stock the same bread, butter and bananas – but these shops are now fitted out with more than £1m of the latest technology that their bosses promise will put an end to our biggest frustration (queueing) and our most persistent crime (shoplifting). Jill French, a legal secretary in her 30s, wearing a sharp navy suit and matching beret, has just left a Tesco Express on London’s Holborn Viaduct empty-handed. It’s coming up to 6.30pm on a Thursday and, like dozens of others, French has popped in for a few essentials on her way home. “I just went in to grab pasta, milk and some broccoli,” she says. “But there was such a queue I got frustrated and walked out.” An eight-minute walk away is another near-identical Tesco Express where there are no queues. This shop is the cleverest of all the 2,700 Tescos in the UK. There are no checkouts (self-scanning or traditional), no checkout assistants, and – in theory – no chance of shoplifting. This Tesco, called GetGo, is filled with thousands of cameras, weighted shelves and artificial-intelligence technology that watches your every move, figures out what you’ve bought and bills you directly as you walk out. It’s not just Tesco that is trialling these new “smart” supermarkets. Retailers across the UK, and the rest of the world, are racing to deploy rival technology. The model for all of them is similar. First, you must download an app, register a credit card and scan a QR code on your phone to enter through train station-style gates. Barriers prevent those without the app from entering the shop. Once inside, the technology follows you around the store recording every item you pick up (and put back). When you’re done you just walk out and after a few minutes your phone alerts you as to how much you’ve spent. The supermarkets say time-pressed, easily frustrated people are crying out for a better, hassle-free shopping experience, and if these trial stores are successful they will roll out the technology across the country. It’s almost 74 years since the first British supermarket opened in Manor Park, east London. At this branch of the London Cooperative Society, customers could walk round the store and take items off the shelves by themselves. It was revolutionary. In the years before, shoppers had to present the shopkeeper at a counter with a list of items that their assistants would fetch. Choosing your own tomatoes was banned, and touching the products could lead to prosecution. As with many innovations, the “self-service” supermarket concept was exported from the US, where retail pioneer Clarence Saunders opened Piggly Wiggly in Memphis, Tennessee, in 1916. If you’re wondering about the name, Saunders said it was named “so people will ask that very question”. Today all shops, big or small, follow a similar concept. But our retail needs are evolving. The days of “the big weekly shop” are over, with Britons going to a supermarket at least twice a week, according to YouGov, while a growing minority admit to popping in more than twice a day. The new generation of AI stores is meant to respond to these changes, but are there dangers in tinkering with one of the last remaining social levellers? Supermarkets are more than just places to buy food; they provide a space for a daily mixing of people of different classes and backgrounds in our increasingly siloed world. If AI takes over, will those without access to the latest smartphone be barred from the great supermarket melting pot? Will lonely older people lose their friendly chat with the cashier, which could be their only conversation of the day? Research backs up the retailers’ hunch about our frustrations with shopping. A recent survey by packaging company DS Smith found that more than a third of 2,000 people polled would walk out of the store rather than wait five minutes in a checkout queue, and 46% said they were so irritated by queuing that they would consider not coming back to the shop again. Laura Saunter, a senior retail analyst at the consumer trends analytic firm WGSN, says supermarkets have spent years trying to bust queues because they are the customers’ “number one pain point”. Many of us are now so impatient that waiting a few minutes for a checkout assistant to become free can feel like an unacceptable hassle in a world where technology dominates and instant gratification is expected. “These stores are positioned at millennial parents who are busy; they want to be in and out, they don’t want to waste their time,” Saunter says. And younger people, generation Z, just don’t want to interact with store staff.” Tesco has already tested the technology at its employee-only supermarket in Welwyn Garden City for more than a year. Amazon has 15 stores that use similar technology, including one almost directly across the street from the Tesco on Holborn. The supermarkets’ analytics teams seem to have a thing for the central London neighbourhood with Sainsbury’s also opening a trial smart supermarket on the same street in late November. The race is on. Aldi is preparing to open a similar smart store in Greenwich, south London. Morrisons is testing its own vision of the technology, codenamed Project Sarah, at its Bradford headquarters, and plans to quickly roll out dozens of small stores at busy locations. Another two of the Amazon stores opened in Chingford and East Sheen shortly before Christmas. A recent leak of internal documents reveals that these are just baby steps on to the UK high street for Amazon, which was founded by the world’s second-richest person, Jeff Bezos, in 1995 and is now the second-largest retailer on the planet, collecting sales of more than $1.2bn (£900m) every day. The internet giant is planning to open about 60 more UK stores next year, followed by 100 in 2023 and another 100 in 2024, according to a report by the blog Business Insider. Amazon has long been accused of attempting to kill off the high street by encouraging us all to buy almost everything online. But could its desire to now open bricks-and-mortar stores revitalise our urban centres? All of the supermarkets say the technology is designed to make shoppers’ lives easier, but experts say the real desire is to improve their bottom line as they can cut back on the wage bill and save some of the £5.5bn lost every year to shoplifting and employee theft. The most frequently stolen items from UK stores include spirits, sirloin steaks, razor blades, cosmetics, infant formula and batteries, according to the Centre for Retail Research (CRR). Cheese also makes the top 10, with posh bries and aged camembert often stolen to order by restaurants. Retailers in Scandinavia are ahead of the UK, opening shops without checkout assistants, security guards or any other members of staff present. Instead, customers use their phones to open the doors of shipping container-like stores, shop completely alone and walk out to the beep of the bill notification on their phone. In less than three years, Stockholm-based start-up Lifvs has opened 29 of the tiny stores in remote villages across Sweden, which in some instances had lost their last corner shops decades ago. Giulia Ray, a beekeeper in the village of Veckholm, 60 miles east of Stockholm, said the opening of the Lifvs “shopping box” added to rather than took away from community spirit. “You go inside and get something, and maybe someone else is here and you can have a chat,” she says as she picks up essentials and restocks the shelves with her own honey at the same time. While fitting out supermarkets with the new technology costs about £1m-per-store, the firms installing it claim it will pay for itself within 18 months because it will hopefully eliminate theft. “With this technology, you can’t really steal, we know who is in the store and we know where all the products are,” says Yair Holtzer, who helped develop the technology for Trigo, an Israeli firm that fitted out the Tesco store, and is working with other major retailers across the world. “With these systems it cuts out not just shoplifting but also mistakes, errors and employee fraud,” he says. “These are problems that all retailers have, and could be solved.” Supermarkets lose about 1.4% of their combined £200bn annual revenue to “shrinkage” – industry code for customer or employee theft and admin errors. Professor Joshua Bamfield, director of the CRR, says supermarkets thought they had found a solution to queue frustration and high wage bills with the introduction of self-scanning machines that were rolled out in the early 2000s and are now ubiquitous. “But it is very easy for customers to skip a few items through without scanning the barcode,” he says. “It’s quite easy to get away with things that you wouldn’t be able to at a staffed till.” Probe a little, and even the most upstanding friends and acquaintances have a shoplifting tale – from the south London primary school teacher who makes a point of stealing one item in every shop to the writer who was tapped on the shoulder by a security guard who’d seen her tap the screen for one banana when she bagged two. A study by the University of Leicester’s criminology department found that theft from stores with self-checkout machines was between 33 and 147% higher than those with only traditional checkouts. The researchers also found that the number of self-checkout machines available to use was correlated to the level of theft. In response, shops have cut down on the number of self-checkout machines available per staff member which, Bamfield says, explains why supermarkets often annoyingly place out-of-order stickers on working terminals. Supermarkets, including Tesco, have also begun installing screens on self-checkouts showing a livestream of customers scanning their items. “They’re reminding you that every action you take is being filmed,” says Bamfield. “It’s like the shop saying, ‘Are you sure you want to steal?’” It’s not just customers who steal. Bamfield’s research shows that about £1.4bn a year is lost to shoplifting, followed closely by £1.3bn in employee theft. The new technology is designed to tackle that, too. “It might not seem so obvious, but a big proportion of theft is due to staff on the take, and by removing staff from tills this technology will eliminate that loss,” he says. Bamfield believes the most common technique staff use to steal is referred to in the industry as “the switcheroo”. “An uncle will say to his cashier nephew, ‘I’m coming into the store tomorrow afternoon and I’d like a discount,’” he explains. “When the uncle comes to the checkout, the nephew will have a barcode sticker for a watermelon or orange or something on his palm and while pretending to scan the uncle’s bottles of scotch whisky the nephew will scan the watermelon sticker.” Bamfield, who has spent a career working with retailers, and has written a book on shoplifting (Waterstones describes his 2012 title Shopping and Crime as “an interdisciplinary study of retail crime as a cultural phenomenon”), isn’t sure the new checkout-free supermarkets will succeed in eliminating shoplifting altogether. “I was at a retail conference in Norwich, and one of the speakers flashed up a picture of one of these new stores and said, ‘Well, that is the end of shoplifting.’ But, we just don’t know yet how good this technology will be at reducing theft.” Shoplifting, which was first documented in the 16th century, began soaring in 2014 after the law was changed to define “low-value shoplifting” as a summary offence. This means that police forces can decide not to investigate thefts from shops of goods worth less than £200. Anyone caught stealing less than £200-worth of goods can still be arrested and face prosecution, but the 2014 antisocial behaviour, crime and policing act allows them to plead guilty by post. Police in England and Wales recorded 374,000 incidents of shoplifting in 2019 (the latest figures available), up from 317,000 in 2013, before the law changed. Retailers have responded with more technology. Sainsbury’s is experimenting with machine-learning “concealment detector” technology to monitor and record when shoppers place an item in their pocket and alert in-store security guards in real time. Sainsbury’s says its 30-store trial partnership with UK artificial intelligence startup ThirdEye has helped cut theft from its spirits aisles by 47%. Razwan Ghafoor, co-founder and chief executive of ThirdEye, says the technology helps make CCTV smarter. “You can have hundreds of cameras in a store, but which feed should you be watching?” Ghafoor says on the phone from Heathrow as he boards a plane to New York the day after selling ThirdEye to larger rival Standard AI for millions of pounds. “We’ve taught the system to learn when someone picks up an item and pockets it. The system will flag it and send a four-second clip to a human to investigate. It means the security team can watch a lot less footage and concentrate on the footage they need to watch.” No queues, less shoplifting, lower wage bills: the benefits of this new generation of hi-tech supermarkets are clear. But campaigners are concerned they represent another step in the UK’s march towards an “everyday surveillance society”. “Going to the supermarket is one of the most mundane, everyday things we do. The fact that surveillance and data gathering in such a space is being normalised is deeply troubling,” says Emmanuelle Andrews, policy and campaigns officer at human rights group Liberty. “Shopping should be one of the great levellers, where the businessman in the sharp suit is shoulder-to-shoulder with the pensioner on benefits. Everyone has to buy food, but with this technology only those with a smartphone and credit cards will be able to shop there.” In the near term, the biggest losers from this technological revolution are likely to be Britain’s army of 270,000 checkout workers, most of whom are women. The pandemic has already hit retail workers hard, with some 190,000 jobs lost since the start of the first lockdown in March 2020. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) has identified supermarket cashier jobs as among the most at risk of being replaced by automation, with 65% of checkout-operator jobs said to be in peril. “The checkout-free technology is specifically designed to eliminate jobs, and save money,” says Dr Carl Benedikt Frey, an Oxford University economist and expert on automation whose research the ONS statistics are based on. Up to 47% of all jobs could be done by machines “over the next decade or two”, he believes. Frey predicts that checkout workers are likely to be among the first to lose their jobs to the robots, alongside bar staff, farm workers and sewing machinists. Supermarkets have offered stable employment to generations of Britons excluded from higher-skilled roles, providing modest but reliable incomes – and the prospect of advancement – in communities blighted by manufacturing decline. Frey fears that a national rollout of AI stores would send the checkout worker the same way as the elevator operator, which as of today is the only one of 270 job descriptions listed in the 1950 US census to be completely eliminated by automation. “We think this coming change is unprecedented, but actually what is happening mirrors what we saw in the Industrial Revolution and hollowing out of middle-income jobs,” he says. “The technology is very different, but the effects on the economy are quite similar.” Back in that Holborn Tesco, among the familiar daily groceries, a change is coming that could herald the biggest revolution in how we shop for groceries since the opening of the first supermarket on 12 January 1948. Like their predecessors, the smart supermarkets are said to be designed to make our lives easier. But is it time to allow the shop assistant to follow the elevator operator into obsolescence, or could we all learn to wait a little longer and enjoy a friendly chat at the checkout?Since its launch in 1994 with the enticing slogan “It could be you” and glitzy televised live draws, the national lottery has created 6,300 millionaires and given £43bn to good causes. But MPs and campaigners are calling for its operations to be overhauled after a slump in the proportion of its revenues going to those causes and growing concerns that its scratchcards and online games fuel problem gambling. Instant games now offered by the lottery operator, such as Red Hot 7s and Mega Cash Showdown, offer prizes of up to £1m and can be played on smartphones, but pay out less to good causes because more cash is given in prizes to help drive sales. Sir Iain Duncan Smith, vice-chair of the all-party parliamentary group on gambling-related harm, said: “There should be a fixed percentage on the amount that goes to good causes. The operator is beginning to look like any other gambling company.” Calls for a review of the lottery and a national debate on its future come as rivals bid for a new licence to run it from 2024. A decision on the successful applicant is expected within the next two months. Lottery operator Camelot gave 28% of its revenues to good causes in the year to 31 March 2010, but its most recent accounts show the proportion given has fallen to less than 23%. The operator says it has still significantly increased the amount paid to good causes because of the rise in revenues over the same period, from £5.5bn a year to £8.4bn a year. The lottery was launched under prime minister Sir John Major in November 1994. One of his aims was to give more funding to Olympic sport, which, as the single gold medal won by GB’s athletes at the Atlanta Games in 1996 demonstrated, badly needed the money. The first scratchcards were launched in March 1995. Scratchcards sold in stores and instant online games now account for 44% of the lottery’s total revenues. About 31% of the income from draw-based games goes to good causes, compared with about 9% from scratchcards and 12% from instant-win games. There are concerns that scratchcards and online instant-win games are more likely to be associated with problem gambling than the traditional weekly draw. Heather Wardle, an expert on gambling research at Glasgow University, said there was a significant association between scratchcards and problem gambling. She said: “Engagement in traditional lotteries does decline over time and companies rely on products like scratchcards and they are more risky.” Charles Ritchie, who lost his son Jack to gambling-related suicide and is co-founder of the charity Gambling With Lives, said: “Online games are very different from the weekly lottery draw. These are instant-win games and can be played fast. Often they’re no different to online casino games and slots that are incredibly addictive and harmful to mental health.” The companies hoping to oust Camelot include the Czech lottery operator Sazka, which operates lotteries across Europe, through a special-purpose vehicle called Allwyn. It is headed in the UK by Sir Keith Mills, who helped win the 2012 Olympic bid for London. The other bidders are the Italian operator Sisal, which is being taken over by Flutter, the gambling giant that operates Paddy Power and Betfair, and media tycoon Richard Desmond, who owns the Health Lottery. The bid is being conducted in strict secrecy and bidders have been told publicity material must first be vetted by officials at the Gambling Commission, the betting regulator that is overseeing the process. Matt Zarb-Cousin, director of the campaign group Clean Up Gambling, said: “We should be having a national conversation about the future of the lottery, but instead the Gambling Commission is running the process for the licence as if it’s a military contract.” The government announced in December 2020 its decision to raise the age for playing the national lottery from 16 to 18, including scratchcards. The Gambling Commission says there are controls in lottery games to prevent excessive play and approved rules and procedures for each game. The Gambling Commission said this weekend the lower rate of return from instant games was because the higher prize payouts were “necessary to drive the optimal level of sales of these products”. The commission said the confidentiality arrangements around the bidding process protected the “integrity of the competition”. Camelot said: “Focusing solely on the amount generated for good causes in percentage terms paints a deliberately misleading and damaging picture of the health of the national lottery. By making the national lottery more attractive and generous to players, we’re delivering record sales, prize money and payments in lottery duty to the Treasury. Annual returns to good causes are now over £500m higher than they were at the start of this licence, even though the percentage rate of return is lower.” The lottery operator says its products are very different from those offered in the mainstream gambling sector and data showed the risk of problem play associated with lottery products was very low. It said: “We abide by rigorous controls, with numerous checks and balances in place to ensure that lottery games are safe and enjoyable for players.”With that, we will wrap up the blog for the day. Enjoy your evenings; I’m off to watch the final hour of the Ashes and crack a cold one. Here were today’s major developments: First, Covid numbers. NSW recorded a record 16 deaths and 45,098 cases yesterday from PCR tests. Victoria reported 51,356 cases and four deaths, which included results from rapid antigen tests logged online over the past six days. The vast majority of new cases are the Omicron variant. Tasmania recorded 1,406 new cases, the ACT recorded 1,039 new cases, South Australia recorded 4,506 new cases and the NT recorded 481 cases. WA recorded one case linked to backpackers. Queensland reported 18,000 new cases and announced that students’ return to schools would be delayed by two weeks until 7 February to manage an expected Omicron peak to occur at the end of January. Year 11 and 12s will return a week prior to the rest of students, for remote learning only. Further south, NSW premier Dominic Perrottet said that kids will be returning to school on day one of term one in a safe environment for staff and students. In a similar move, though, NSW will allow close contacts in food logistics and manufacturing to leave self-isolation for work, subject to conditions. Queensland will also allow essential workers in a broader range of industries to head to work if they are asymptomatic and fully vaccinated. Major flooding is continuing in Queensland despite eased conditions today. In Maryborough, residents and businesses have been evacuated in some areas ahead of peaking floodwaters expected to reach 10.5 metres later this evening. It comes as, further north, a category one cyclone is developing and expected to hit the Cape York Peninsula from early Monday morning. Novak Djokovic’s visa cancellation battle continues. The tennis star is detained in an immigration hotel in Melbourne while he waits on an appeal against his visa cancellation at a high-stakes federal circuit court hearing on Monday. Two individuals connected to the Australian Open have voluntarily left the country, health minister Greg Hunt confirmed today. And Ash Barty has won the Adelaide International women’s singles ahead of the Australian Open. Dipping our toes into the world of sport for a moment, and Ash Barty has just defeated Elena Rybakina in straight sets to become the 2022 Adelaide International women’s singles champion. The things you can achieve when you’re vaccinated! Flood waters are continuing to rise in Maryborough, where business owners and residents have been told to evacuate ahead of an expected peak this evening. NSW can expect more damp, muggy days into 2022. Unions believe the decision to wind back close contact isolation requirements in NSW is reckless and will threaten the health and safety of staff, while exacerbating supply chain disruptions, AAP reports. The Transport Workers Union urged prime minister Scott Morrison to include unions in an urgent supply chain meeting scheduled for Sunday afternoon to properly hear their concerns. TWU says NSW Health’s decision to wind back self-isolation requirements for close contacts who work in critical industries like food logistics means employers could prioritise operational matters over the safety of workers. TWU national secretary Michael Kaine: Scrapping isolation requirements for transport workers is beyond reckless – workers are being thrown to the wolves by a government that continues to ignore all the warnings. We know even if you’re asymptomatic you can still spread the virus. NSW Health’s decision requires asymptomatic close contacts to wear masks and take daily rapid antigen tests, but the union says RATs alone don’t offer enough protection as they won’t pick up every Covid-19 case. Kaine said the TWU wrote to the prime minister and national cabinet in September and October urging governments to provide rapid tests to road transport workers to avoid unnecessary delays and keep drivers on the road. SDA national secretary Gerard Dwyer said this situation is again the result of the prime minister’s negligence and failure to plan or demonstrate genuine leadership: The prime minister must ensure as a matter of absolute immediacy priority access to free rapid antigen tests and appropriate PPE for essential frontline retail workers in stores and distribution centres. The authorities must act to give shoppers sufficient confidence to ensure retail workers do not become the targets of abuse and worse in the face of supply shortages of food and other essentials. Health minister Greg Hunt insists there is a progressive increase in rapid antigen tests being made available, with the commonwealth having purchased 70m, and now over 200m when states and territories are included. There have also been very significant private acquisitions. He said the commonwealth is looking to supply the states with 10m tests over the coming weeks, while over 5m have been supplied to aged care facilities. But opposition leader Anthony Albanese said these issues are contrary to the statements that have been made by the NSW and federal governments. Everything isn’t all okay in the health system in New South Wales. There are major issues with the pressure on the hospital systems. The ‘Let it rip’ approach is creating major issues in our health system, with people under such enormous pressure. A man has died following a motorcycle crash in Longreach this morning. Early investigations suggest the man was riding along Tonkoro Road when he lost control after striking a ditch around 7am, Queensland Police say. The 61-year-old Longreach man died at the scene. The Forensic Crash Unit will investigate his passing. Australia is fast approaching some grim milestones. The nation is likely to surpass 1 million total cases since the pandemic began tomorrow. Almost 100,000 cases – one tenth of that figure – form part of today’s numbers. There have been 2,367 deaths throughout the pandemic, while 3,323 people are in hospital across the nation. APL ceo Danny Townsend has released a statement on the Adelaide United v Melbourne Victory match at AAMI Park last night, saying he was “shocked and saddened” to hear reports of homophobic bullying directed towards Josh Cavallo at the game: Our players, staff and fans have the right to feel safe on and off the pitch. There is no place for bullying, harassment or abuse in Australian football and we have zero tolerance for this harmful behaviour. We are working with both clubs to investigate the incident and will issue sanctions to any people found to be involved. We fully support Josh Cavallo and want to ensure he can focus on his football performance, rather than on vile abuse. We will continue to concentrate our efforts on creating safe and welcoming A-Leagues for all. Some good news for Canberrans. The ACT is opening a dedicated seven-days-a-week clinic for Covid-19 patients from tomorrow. The clinic, located at the Surge Centre at Garran Oval, will provide health care for people who have tested positive and need treatment for other non-life threatening illnesses or injuries like cuts, strains, stings and wounds. It will also offer in-person support and advice as patients manage their Covid symptoms. The clinic, open 7.30am to 10pm, won’t require appointments and will be free of charge. Still in Victoria, and A-League Mens club Melbourne Victory have just released a statement in response to homophobic comments directed towards Adelaide United player, Josh Cavallo during last night’s match at AAMI Park. Cavallo spoke out condemning the “homophobic abuse” in an Instagram post, saying there were “no words” to express how disappointed he was and asserting “I will never apologise for living my truth”. The sportsman has previously made history as the world’s only openly gay top-tier mens footballer. Melbourne Victory confirmed the club was working to investigate the matter: Melbourne Victory has been made aware of homophobic comments directed towards Adelaide United player, Josh Cavallo during Saturday night’s clash with the Reds at AAMI Park. The club is committed to celebrating diversity in football, and strongly condemns this behaviour which has no place at our Club or in our game. Melbourne Victory sees football as a platform to unite fans no matter what background. Spectators found to have breached these standards will be banned from future matches. The club is working with the League, Stadium and Adelaide United to investigate the matter further. Back in Victoria and in perhaps not hugely surprising news, the state government has extended its pandemic declaration to apply from 11.59pm Wednesday, 12 January for a further three months. In making the declaration, premier Daniel Andrews was satisfied there was a “serious risk to public health throughout Victoria” due to Covid-19, including “the rapid spread of the Omicron variant leading to significant case numbers not previously experienced in Victoria”. Omicron is now estimated to account for more than 75% of newly diagnosed cases in the state, while booster doses remain relatively low. The acting chief health officer noted as part of his recommendation “the continuing rise in hospital and intensive care unit admissions, with no indication that Victoria has reached its peak, as well as the potential significant negative impact on essential services and supply chains”. A pandemic declaration gives the health minister the authority to make orders considered “reasonably necessary” to protect public health. The health advice will be tabled in parliament. Thanks as ever to Justine Landis-Hanley for guiding us through this afternoon’s news. In the next half hour, Wide Bay Burnett District superintendent Michael Sawrey is due to provide an update on the flooding in Maryborough. We’ll aim to bring you the latest here. Meanwhile, as weather conditions ease in Queensland (bar an incoming cyclone), parts of NSW including North West Slopes and Plains, Central West Slopes and Plains and Northern Tablelands Forecast Districts have been issued with a severe thunderstorm warning. I’m finishing up for today, so I will once again pass the blog over to the wonderful Caitlin Cassidy, who will take you through to the evening. Have a great rest of your weekend! Of these, 336 cases were confirmed via rapid antigen tests and self reported. Premier Steven Marshall, who is currently isolating after his daughter tested positive for Covid-19, announced the numbers via a Facebook video. He said that so far he has tested negative for the virus. A man in his 90s with Covid-19 has also tragically died. There are now 176 in a SA hospital with coronavirus, of which 18 are in the ICU. Victoria Health have also confirmed that they will analyse data to identify any cases where someone has reported a positive result on a rapid antigen test, and then subsequently returned a positive PCR test, to ensure there are no duplicates. In other news, 16.4% of Victorians aged 18 and over have had three doses of a Covid-19 vaccine. We have more information about Victoria’s case numbers from yesterday. The state reported a record 51,356 Covid-19 infections yesterday. The reason why the numbers were so high is because around half of the cases were rapid test results from the previous six days that people had logged online. The reason why they were released on Saturday was because the new online reporting system went live yesterday. Today, Victoria Health have released more data about when those rapid tests were taken. Of those who reported a positive rapid antigen result yesterday: Approximately 40% undertook that test yesterday, 8 January. Approximately 18% undertook that test on 7 January. Approximately 10% undertook that test on each day of 3-6 January. Approximately 2% undertook that test on 2 January. So the vast majority of cases reported yesterday were in fact confirmed yesterday or on Friday. Further to that last post, Queensland police have issued an exclusion zone in parts of Maryborough following continued flooding in the area. The emergency declaration was issued under the Public Safety Preservation Act (PSPA) this afternoon, with police providing assistance with emergency evacuation of the area. The exclusion zone covers parts of Adelaide Street, Kent Street, Lennox Street, Alice Street and Richmond Street. Businesses and residents have been door-knocked and are being urged to leave for higher ground as soon as possible. While weather conditions have largely eased, flooding is expected to peak at 10.5 metres later this evening. In Queensland, Maryborough CBD has been evacuated due to flood concerns. According to Queensland Fire and Emergency Services, the gates underneath a recently installed levee have been damaged, and the area is set to be inundated with floodwaters. There are now 24 people in hospital, one of whom is in the ICU. Staff at the hospital serving tourist mecca Byron Bay in northern New South Wales say the facility is under “extreme strain”, with Covid-positive patients left in bays behind curtains and one patient waiting 45 hours to be transported to the region’s designated Covid hospital. As many as 100 people a day are arriving at the Byron Central hospital, stretching staff already depleted by Covid-forced absences. The Byron area had a double-vaccination rate of about 85% as of 20 December, one of the lowest in NSW. Read the full story from the Guardian’s economics correspondent, Peter Hannam: WA Health says the case is a known close contact of two cases from the Delta backpacker cluster. This brings the total number of cases related to the cluster to 22. The person has been in quarantine and is not considered to have been infectious in the community. The federal circuit court has today published an order judge Anthony Kelly made in the Novak Djokovic case yesterday. The order refuses an application the government made on Saturday to delay the hearing of the case to Wednesday, but does so while acknowledging the commonwealth has another opportunity to ask for a delay after Djokovic’s opening submissions on Monday. The court heard on Thursday that Tennis Australia had said it would need to know whether Djokovic could compete by Tuesday for scheduling purposes. Kelly said he would try to accommodate the parties to come to a resolution but said the court would not be rushed. “The tail won’t be wagging the dog here,” he said. If the court sticks to its current timetable, Djokovic’s submissions will be made at 10am Monday, followed by home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, at 3pm. As always thanks to everyone who is commenting on the blog today. For those asking where the active cases chart had gone … we are sorry! It was an oversight and we’ve added it back to the top of the page now. We blogged today’s cases numbers as soon as they were released for most states but, like everyone, we are increasingly focusing on hospitalisations, ICU presentations and deaths, given the case numbers are so large and fairly inaccurate due to rapid test results not yet being included in the official statistics (other than Victoria). Sam Birrell has been preselected as The Nationals candidate for the seat of Nicholls, currently held by retiring Nationals MP Damian Drum. Drum held onto the seat at the 2019 federal election, despite a 13.4% swing against him. Secretary of the Australian Council of Trade Unions Sally McManus also tweeted: The Australian Council of Trade Unions has accused the prime minister of “hosting talks with industry bosses at a closed-door meeting at 2pm today to develop plans to force supply chain workers back to the front lines despite being possibly infected with the Covid virus.” The Union claims that Morrison is excluding unions and workers from this meeting. In a statement released this afternoon, ACTU acting secretary Liam O’Brien said: The Australian Council of Trade Unions joins with the Transport Workers Union in urging prime minister Scott Morrison against proceeding with his reckless plan to force supply chain workers back to the frontline despite being possibly infected with the Covid virus. Forcing potentially infected staff back to work will only exacerbate the already rampant spread of the highly infectious Omicron strain throughout workplaces and the broader community, putting the safety of all Australians at risk. Transport workers believe the decision to wind back close contact isolation requirements in NSW is reckless and will threaten the health and safety of staff, while exacerbating supply chain disruptions, AAP reports. The Transport Workers Union is urging prime minister Scott Morrison to include unions in an urgent supply chain meeting scheduled for Sunday afternoon to properly hear their concerns. It says NSW Health’s decision to wind back self-isolation requirements for close contacts who work in critical industries like food logistics means employers will be able to prioritise operational matters over the safety of workers. TWU national secretary Michael Kaine said in a statement on Sunday: Scrapping isolation requirements for transport workers is beyond reckless – workers are being thrown to the wolves by a government that continues to ignore all the warnings. We know even if you’re asymptomatic you can still spread the virus. He said requiring potentially sick people to go to work won’t make supply chains healthy. Sick drivers won’t get stock onto supermarket shelves any faster but it will certainly help the virus hitch a ride across Australia. NSW Health’s decision requires asymptomatic close contacts to wear masks and take daily rapid antigen tests, but the union says RATs alone don’t offer enough protection as they won’t pick up every Covid-19 case. Someone who is a close contact is by definition the greatest risk of passing it on – the NSW government is effectively scrapping the last buffer we had left to protect workplaces. To rebuild a healthy workforce we need to have isolation requirements and rapid testing working together - we can’t have one without the other. If you are feeling confused about why we are seeing changes in Queensland and NSW to isolation requirements for close contacts in food supply industries, take a read at this reporting by the Guardian’s Ben Butler. The Australian Fresh Produce Alliance, the industry’s peak body, warned this week that Australians might be unable to buy fresh produce at supermarkets, with fruit and vegetables are left to rot on farms due to staff shortages caused by the pandemic. Palaszczuk is back. She says further changes will take effect from midday today to ensure critical workers who may be quarantining at home but haven’t tested positive can continue to go to work in “certain circumstances”: We need to keep the lights on, we need to keep the water supply going, we need to make sure our freight is moving and our food supplies go where they need to go to. Health minister Yvette D’Ath says the state has to be “agile” to make sure critical services continue to operate amid rising Covid cases. She says if you are identified as a critical essential worker in a critical industry, you will be able to return to work if you are a close contact but are asymptomatic, fully vaccinated, wear a mask at all times and travel to and from work in personal transport. Workers will still have to do a day six test and are only released from quarantine for the purposes of work. A comprehensive list will be released by the state government later today, but essential industries will include health, emergency services, the resource sector, agriculture, freight and logistics, teachers, public transport, essential retail and stores in remote locations and major manufacturing. Grace is providing a further update on the delay to the school year in Queensland. She says the two weeks will be pupil free days for teachers, who will be paid accordingly to prepare for remote learning or their yearly curriculum. Students who need to come into school will be provided with supervision from a skeleton staff. Asked whether the school year could be pushed back further, or remote learning could be expanded, she says: I don’t think there’s guarantees at the moment for anything ... but we want as much certainty now as we can possibly provide. Queensland’s education minister Grace Grace is up now. She says the delay to the school year is a “common sense” approach in response to a peak of the Omicron virus, and will allow more time for children between five and 11 to be vaccinated – due to begin from tomorrow: We know the year is going to be disrupted when we start schooling due to staff numbers ... breakouts in schools, we don’t want to have a situation where parents are told at the last moment they won’t be able to attend a certain school because it is shut down. Schools will remain open to children of essential workers and vulnerable children. Definitions in relation to who fits that category will be released, Grace says. Palaszczuk turns to the school year. She says because of the wave Queensland will be experiencing when students are due to return to school, children won’t return to classrooms on 24 January. Instead, the school year will start on 7 February, and finish a week later on 16 December. Year 11 and 12 students will start a little earlier on 31 January, but they will move to remote learning for the first two weeks. We are expecting the peak of this wave during ... the end of January, early February ... this is going to be a tough time of year for a lot of people, I thank them for their patience and their understanding. This brings the total number of active cases to 5,766. There are 27 patients in ACT hospitals, including four in intensive care and four ventilated. Queensland has recorded 18,000 new Covid cases. Some 4,320 of the new cases are from rapid antigen tests. It brings active cases to 80,573. The new cases come from 37,591 test results. Turning to hospitalisations, there are 402 people in hospital, including 22 in ICU and five requiring ventilation. Premier Dominic Perrottet says that kids will be returning to school on day one of term one in a safe environment for staff and students. He says that it might be the case that there may be differences state to state (Queensland has warned it may delay school returns), but that he hopes that states can commit to a uniform approach. Perrottet says that a key issue is around staffing as the state opens up schools. He acknowledges that there will be challenges and that there will be “inconveniences” that arise, but that the government is committed to this plan. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk is also up now, providing a combined cyclone and Covid-19 update. She says weather conditions are expected to “ease” today but a low will transform into a tropical cyclone, expected to cross the coast at 4am Monday. The cyclone is expected to be a category one, and will be named tropical cyclone Tiffany. Meanwhile, some 80 homes have been impacted in Maryborough, where floods are expected to peak at 10.5 metres this evening. Palaszczuk says there are “still concerns” for a 14-year-old girl who has been missing since yesterday. There are eight specialist police out trying to assist in the search. We do expect weather conditions to ease, which is great news, but that unexpected rain that fell in that catchment over 24 hours was absolutely unprecedented. We’re expecting the low will transform into a tropical cyclone expected to cross the coast at 4am on Monday ... all of our agencies are well prepared up there at the moment. NSW minister for industry and trade Stuart Ayres, has been asked about the changes announced today that would allow asymptomatic close contacts in key food supply and manufacturing areas to leave isolation early and return to work if they return a negative rapid test. Ayres is asked whether this is putting other employees at risk. Ayres defends the decision: We are not putting a single person who is testing positive to Covid out into the workforce. If you have tested positive you are at home in isolation, if you are not testing positive you are asymptomatic, we want you out working in our most critical areas. Dr Nhi Nguyen from Nepean hospital has spoken about rising Covid-19 hospitalisations. There are almost 2,000 people in hospital with Covid-19 in NSW, 151 of which are in the ICU. Dr Nguyen: Just as you are, all the healthcare staff wake every day to look at what the numbers are that are reported and we wait in anticipation. What we have seen over the last few weeks is that the vast majority of patients who test positive for Omicron, or for Covid, can manage well at home and we see that with those people who are positive, there is good guidance in place for them to seek advice, either from NSW Health, their GP or through the hospital. There are really high numbers presenting to hospital and we can understand the anxiety in the community faced with positive Covid tests. But we are consistently seeing a very small percentage of those needing to be admitted. The patients who do come, though, still present a significant strain to the hospital and the hospital staff. However, we’ve learnt a lot from the Delta outbreak and I have confidence that the systems in place will help the health system deal with all of the patients who are presenting. NSW recorded 16 Covid-related deaths today, the state’s highest daily total, according to Dr Jeremy McAnulty. In September and early October last year, the state recorded 15 deaths on two separate days. Perrottet says that he has received advice from Service NSW and NSW Health that, from mid this week, you will be able to register a positive rapid antigen test through the Service NSW app. He says that this isn’t just for the purpose of case numbers, but to ensure that NSW Health “can connect people who need care”. We’ll have further to say about that over the course of the week. Perrottet reiterates that the NSW government has procured 50m rapid antigen tests, and that it will be procuring an additional 50m. He says the state government will be rolling those out across the state, “particularly to areas where there are vulnerable people.” We’re already at the moment, as of today, have been reaching out to remote Aboriginal communities with those rapid antigen tests. These tests will be crucial to ensure that we get kids back to school day one, term one. We are finalising our back-to-school plans at the moment. He adds that state government had the first batch of tests arrive yesterday. Perrottet is encouraging anyone who is unvaccinated to go and get their Covid-19 jab, adding that “if we look at ICU numbers, if we look at hospitalisation numbers, there is no doubt, no doubt, it is very clear, that vaccination is key to keeping you safe.” He says that over 15,000 booster shots were administered in the last 24 hours, bringing the total given out to 320,000. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet is providing a Covid-19 update. In case you missed it, NSW public health orders will be updated next week to require people to report their positive rapid antigen test results. NSW Health says that this will help them link those positive cases to support and advice. We have more information about today’s case and hospitalisation numbers to come out of NSW. To recap: NSW has reported 30,062 new Covid-19 cases today. These are just the cases that have been confirmed by a PCR test; we don’t know how many people have tested positive using a rapid antigen test. NSW Health sadly also reported the deaths of 16 more people; eight women and eight men aged in their 60s, 70s, 80s, and 90s. Seven were from south-western Sydney, two from south-eastern Sydney, two people were from western Sydney, two from Sydney’s inner west, one from the Central Coast, one from the South Coast, and one from northern Sydney. There are 1,927 Covid-19 cases currently admitted to hospital in the state. Of these 151 people are in intensive care, 38 of whom require ventilation. With that, I will pass you back to the lovely Justine Landis-Hanley. Weimar says the recent sequencing done by health authorities shows more than 80% of screening is Omicron. He says Omicron is “significantly” displacing Delta in Victoria. But health authorities are still “catching up” with testing demand: We haven’t caught up yet. We’re not at the standard that we expect to be at. We have high expectations here in Victoria about speed and return of PCR test results and a fair bit of work still to do. But I think that the labs have made significant ground in the last four to five days and I know that there’s been challenging measures to undertake to do so. But still, like many businesses and many organisations, struggling with making sure that they’ve got sufficient staff available to work on the very important job that they do. But also with the introduction of rapid antigen tests into our mainstream testing sites, that’s also providing a bit of a pressure relief. So with the numbers I expect to get more and more representative as we go through the coming week. I expect the turnaround times to continue to drop progressively over the coming week. Weimar is asked whether there may be double-ups on people who test positive on a RAT and subsequently test positive to a PCR test in terms of daily case numbers. He says each person who fills out an online form for a RAT will create a “unique record” in the system: That is also matched around whether we have the same details on file already for someone who previously returned a PCR test. Either recently or any time in the last 18 months or so. We will cross match that data. There is always a bit of a risk if people are using different names or different dates of birth or the dates don’t match. But by and large, we will match your details against any other records in our system and I’m pretty confident that we won see a huge amount of duplication as a result. Weimar says 9,000 of today’s probable Covid cases are from rapid antigen tests done yesterday. That means the some 13,000 remaining RATs reported as part of today’s case numbers were done in the days prior. A reminder there were 44,155 cases reported in Victoria today – half of which were from rapid antigen tests. Covid-19 commander Jeroen Weimar is up in Victoria. He says about half of PCR test results are being returned within 48 hours, which means, of course, that half are taking longer than two days to come back: If you’re waiting for a PCR test result, please be assured that you will get a result, you will get a message from the lab at some point. It may not be as quick as we would like, but the times are starting to come down and you will get a swift result. I’m also aware that yesterday, Melbourne Path ... made the decision not to process tests older than seven days in the labs. We’ve discussed that with them over the last couple of days and I think that broadly we agree, that there’s a very low utility in processing test results that old. I apologise to people, the 7,000 people who received those Melbourne Path messages that says that they will not be continuing to process their test sample. I would encourage anybody who is still symptomatic in that cohort or still concerned to please come forward and get another PCR or a rapid antigen test and work with us. It is all part of that significant challenge that we had over the Christmas and New Year period with the 300,000 or so travel tests that we had to process and all of the other challenges over that period. Tasmania’s daily Covid numbers are in, and there have been 1,406 new cases detected overnight. It brings active cases in the state to beyond 7,000. Mayor of Gympie Glen Hartwig is up on ABC News discussing the floods that have hit the Queensland city. Hartwig doesn’t have an update on the teenage girl who was reported missing yesterday, and police area dealing with the matter. He says there’s been “very significant damage” that has already been detected: I’ve been in this area for 40 years, and we haven’t seen anything like it. It’s stopped raining here and it’s rather hot and humid. But we’re just waiting for the water to start to subside. The areas of Kilkivan and Theebine copped a torrential drenching that we probably haven’t seen before. So you know, it’s unusual times in that it was such a concentrated downpour. But like always, the great people out in this region have banded together to support one another and support the travellers who have been coming through as well. We had the main water pipeline get fractured due to road corrosion. So that was being repaired by the crews yesterday. But there will be massive amounts of damage to road infrastructure and bridges. We’ll deal with that. We have some great staff and local contractors who know what we need to do to repair these things and we’ll be stuck into that as the water subsides. We have further details coming out of New South Wales. Of the 16 deaths reported today, there were eight women and eight men aged in their 60s, 70s, 80s and 90s, spread across Sydney, Central Coast and the South Coast. Condolences to their family members and loved ones. A series of “precautionary measures” will be put in place in anticipation of a peak to occur later this month, including the relaxation of close contact rules for critical workers in food and manufacturing. From next week, people who test positive on a rapid antigen test will be required to report their result to authorities. We should be hearing from Victorian authorities any minute. Big thanks to Justine Landis-Hanley. It’s just been confirmed Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk will hold a press conference at 11am AEST. We’ll bring it to you here. I’m handing the blog over to my brilliant colleague, Caitlin Cassidy. Back soon! Australian tennis star Nick Kyrgios has come to Novak Djokovic’s defense, saying he should be allowed to play at the Australian Open. Our friends at AAP have the story: Nick Kyrgios once said he could not stand Novak Djokovic, describing him as “a tool”. Yet he has now become one of his old foe’s most unlikely and sympathetic backers, declaring that Djokovic hasn’t been treated humanely and that tennis really needs its world No 1 back at the Australian Open. Honestly, I hope it all gets sorted as soon as possible. For the sport, we need him here, it’s that simple. He’s one of the most influential sports people, probably of all-time. If he’s ready to play and he’s allowed to play, I think it’s in a way good for our sport with all this attention. I’m feeling for him now. Like it’s not really humane, is it, what’s going on? Djokovic has also found support from his old friend, another former Australian ‘enfant terrible’ Bernard Tomic who, like Kyrgios, said he wished the situation surrounding Djokovic’s visa exemption had been handled very differently. Yet Kyrgios reckoned that his apparent enmity with Djokovic had always been blown out of proportion and he praised the Serb for how selfless he’d been when donating thousands of dollars to bushfire victims in Australia two years ago. He’s actually helped us, like he’s reached out. He didn’t have to do that. Most athletes wouldn’t, they’re selfish. So I don’t forget that. In case you need to get a PCR test in South Australia: For a bit context, Australia is struggling with food supply chain issues due to rising Covid-19 cases and there have been calls from industry leaders to change the seven-day isolation requirements for close contacts working in these fields. The Guardian’s Ben Butler has been reporting on this issue. While there is no hard data on how many people are off work because they have Covid or are a close contact, some companies are reporting that half of their employees are unable to attend. Trucking and logistics are particularly hard-hit, as is the meat industry. There are empty spaces on supermarket shelves in every department of the two big supermarkets, Coles and Woolworths, as staff shortages hit every part of the supply chain from suppliers through to transport companies and the chains’ own distribution centres, which send products to individual stores. Michael Rogers, the chief executive of the Australian Fresh Produce Alliance, even said that there was a “significant risk” that Australians will be unable to buy fresh produce at supermarkets, with fruit and vegetables left to rot on farms. You can read more about the issue here: On that note, NSW premier Dominic Perrottet will address the media at midday today to give a Covid-19 update. He will be joined by minister for western Sydney Stuart Ayres, NSW Health deputy chief health officer Dr Jeremy McAnulty and Nepean hospital’s ICU specialist Dr Nhi Nguyen. NSW Health has announced that critical workers in the food logistics and manufacturing sectors who are deemed close contacts will be allowed to leave self-isolation to attend work if they have no symptoms of Covid-19, as the state struggles with supply chain issues. In a media statement released this morning, NSW Health said that workers will only be eligible to leave self-isolation if their employer determines that their absence from the workplace poses a high risk of disruption to the delivery of critical services or activities, and they are unable to work from home. Workers must wear a mask and comply with risk-management strategies put in place by their employer, including daily rapid antigen tests. If they test positive or develop symptoms, they will need to self-isolate. This rule change extends to workers in: Agriculture (biosecurity and food safety personnel undertaking critical duties). Manufacturing (production and manufacturing of food, beverages, groceries, cleaning and sanitary products). Transport, postal and warehousing (food logistics, delivery and grocery fulfilment). Guardian Australia has confirmed that the two people connected to the Australian Open who voluntarily left Australia after their visas were cancelled were Czech doubles specialist Renata Voracova and one official. Hunt noted in passing that any individual who has had their visa cancelled can elect to leave Australia – even if there is a court case on foot challenging the decision – which is a bit of shade directed at Novak Djokovic. Finally, Greg Hunt was asked whether he thinks Queensland voters will punish the Liberal National coalition at the federal election this year, with north Queensland businesses and tourism operators seeing their trade decimated by rising Covid-19 cases. Hunt responded by focusing on the fact that cases have increased worldwide. He also said that, by comparison, Australia has “one of the highest vaccination rates, one of the lower rates of loss of life, and we have one of the strongest economic recoveries and we have provided as a government enormous support to businesses, to health and to the community.” He also shifted blame to the Queensland state Labor government’s decision to keep international borders closed during stage one and stage two of the country’s reopening. There are differing approaches across some of the state and we will let them speak to that. Anyone who has been to a supermarket lately knows Omicron is interrupting the flow of goods around the country. The country’s deputy chief medical officer, Prof Michael Kidd, has been asked about disruption to supply chains caused by people in isolation due to Covid-19. Kidd revealed that chief medical officers from the states and territories are “meeting as we speak right now ... looking at this issue and looking at what might be modified with the requirements and restrictions in order to ensure supply chain and supply lines continue”. Hunt said the national coordination mechanism, the part of the federal public service responsible for supply chains, is also considering the question. Hunt noted that Omicron has already prompted a change in the definition of contact, “significantly reducing” the number of people who would have to isolate. Just to recap, we already knew that Czech doubles specialist Renata Voracova had left the country voluntarily after having her visa cancelled by the Australian Border Force last week. She was also detained in the Park Hotel in Melbourne – where Djokovic is awaiting his court hearing – despite initially having been waved through the border and already having played a pre-tournament match. In an interview with Czech media, she has accused Tennis Australia of misleading players. Apparently the Australian Tennis Association has misled us, which is annoying. I wanted to focus on tennis, not visas, quarantine. It’s really weird that I spent a week here, played a match ... And then they came for me. The health minister, Greg Hunt, has been asked about Novak Djokovic’s court case. Hunt declined to comment, citing the fact the matter is before the court but did reveal that two other people connected with the Australian Open tournament have left Australia after their visas were cancelled. Hunt said: In relation to Novak Djokovic, as this is now a matter before the courts, I will respectfully leave any commentary until after it has been heard by the court and my understanding is that there is a hearing tomorrow. My other advice from border force is that their assessment of any visas relating to the Australian Open has now been completed and two other individuals have now voluntarily left the country – as is the case with an individual who has their visa cancelled is entitled to leave the country at any time, even while they are going through a court proceeding but that is a matter for them. Beyond that, the advice is that there is an ongoing court case so we respectfully are not making any additional comment. Hunt is asked whether all eligible aged care residents received that booster yet, and whether residents have been left vulnerable with waning immunity? Hunt says that over 1,500 aged care facilities have received their boosters, adding that those numbers will be updated over the coming days. Hunt is speaking about the fact that children aged five to 11 will become eligible for a Covid-19 vaccine tomorrow. He said that there are approximately 2.3 million children in this age group who will become eligible, and that there are 3m doses of the vaccine available to them over January. Hunt then turned to boosters. He says that 141,000 boosters were administered yesterday, which forms part of 164,000 vaccine doses given out in total. Hunt says this is Australia’s “highest Saturday since October”. He added that around 1.25m vaccines were delivered this last week, and thanked the “incredible work by our GPs, our pharmacists, and the state clinics are no coming back online ... as well as our Indigenous medical clinics”. At a national level, we have surpassed 94.7% first doses. We are within sight of 95% which has always been seen as the full vaccination level, but we want to keep pushing. Our over 50 population are almost 99%, and we have passed the 92% figure for second doses. He said that, despite the significant number of cases, it is “very heartening that there are only 76 patents on ventilation for Covid around the country”. Federal health minister Greg Hunt is speaking live from Canberra. Parts of Queensland are experiencing major flooding, with the aftermath of ex-tropical cyclone Seth causing “unexpected” prolonged heavy rain and storms that have claimed the life of a man trapped in a submerged vehicle north of Brisbane. Up to 15 others, including a teenage girl, are missing. AAP have the full story: Police and emergency rescue teams were called after reports of a utility being swept into floodwaters on Cherry Tree Road near the Bruce Highway, at Kanigan, about 7.30pm on Friday. An extensive response involving swift water crews ended when the body of the driver, a 22-year-old Sunshine Coast resident, was found inside the ute on Saturday morning. A 40-year-old man was rescued after a car was swept away in the early hours of Saturday at Booubyjan near Gympie in the state’s southeast. It’s believed he and a 14-year-old girl managed to get out of the car before it was swept away in floodwaters near the Burnett Highway and Murgon Gayndah Road. Police said the man was found clinging to a tree but the girl remains missing. More than 650mm of rain fell across the area overnight. State Emergency Service officials received more than 700 calls for help, while 31 swift water rescues were launched. Meanwhile a tropical cyclone may be brewing further north in the wake of Seth. The Bureau of Meteorology is keeping an eye on a monsoon trough in the Coral Sea that is threatening to develop into a tropical cyclone by Monday. Australian Medical Association president Omar Khorshid has called for efforts to help flatten the curve to “give hospitals a chance”, warning that the number of Omicron cases won’t peak for weeks. NSW, Queensland, Victoria have suspended non-urgent elective surgery due to rising Covid-19 hospitalisations. Khorshid went on to tweet that “the system is leaning on individuals (esp HCW) without providing the necessary support. Surely it’s worth a try to flatten the curve (many people doing right thing anyway) to give hospitals a chance and get boosters into arms.” He also called for greater support to GPs and private doctors. One of Victoria’s largest public hospitals, the Alfred, predicts as many as 15% of its staff may be unavailable because of Covid with the Omicron wave expected to last for up to another eight weeks. Staff at the hospital, which includes Australia’s largest intensive care unit, were told in an email on Friday from the chief executive, Andrew Way, to prepare for rising demand just as the available workforce was decreasing. The Alfred now has more than 50 patients in ICU, or about twice the next largest hospital in Victoria. Read the full story from Guardian Australia’s economics correspondent Peter Hannam here: Of these, 22,051 were reported from rapid antigen tests. This figure is just cases confirmed by PCR tests, not including rapid antigen tests. There are now 1,927 people in hospital with the virus, 151 of whom are in the ICU. It’s Justine Landis-Hanley here, back on the blog for 2022. Let’s dive straight in. Novak Djokovic’s visa cancellation battle continues. The tennis star is detained in an immigration hotel in Melbourne while he waits to appeal his visa cancellation at a high-stakes federal circuit court hearing on Monday. In a court submission, Djokovic’s lawyers claimed that he had been advised by home affairs his travel declaration met the requirements for “quarantine-free arrival”. They claimed that Tennis Australia granted him a medical exemption to play at the Australian Open despite not being vaccinated against Covid-19, on the grounds that he tested positive for the virus in mid-December. The federal government is expected to file its response to Djokovic’s submission today. But the tennis star is now facing fresh criticism after pictures on social media showed he appeared at public events after his positive Covid test. Meanwhile, parts of Queensland’s south-east are experiencing major flooding following heavy rain. A 14-year-old girl is missing near Gympie and a 22-year-old Sunshine Coast man was found dead yesterday. Covid-19 cases are also continuing to rise across the country. NSW recorded 45,098 cases yesterday from PCR tests, acknowledging that the real number was likely much larger. Victoria reported 51,356 cases, which included results from rapid antigen tests logged online over the past six days. Queensland reported 11,174 cases and announced the suspension of non-urgent elective surgery for eight weeks.France is both beautiful and brutally bleak. It is a country studded with towns and rural vistas that take your breath away, but pockmarked with districts of soulless, desolate concrete, especially in the suburbs of its cities, the banlieues. It’s as though French planners and architects, in their embrace of modernity, lost touch with what it means to be human. It has been an important trigger for a toxic brew of Islamophobia and wider cultural despair. The political consequences, now playing themselves out, will ricochet around Europe and the west. The presidential elections this spring will be dominated by the right, overtly mouthing implacable opposition to immigration that even Nigel Farage, who shares similar sentiments, dares not use so openly in Britain. French socialism has collapsed before the onslaught, while the mainstream right candidate – Valérie Pécresse – is compelled to shore up her position by echoing the same tropes. The pace is being set by presidential candidate and TV celebrity Éric Zemmour, who burst on to the scene last autumn. He is a hardline Islamophobe who argues that France is about to be overrun by Islam, dignified as “the great replacement”. He is joined by the longstanding representative of the nativist right, Marine Le Pen, who has been saying similar things, echoing her father, for years. Extraordinarily, together they command just over 30% of opinion poll support. President Emmanuel Macron, seen only five years ago as representing a new, self-confident majoritarian blend of liberal social democracy and liberal conservatism, is only just ahead of them both, polling around 24%. It is hardly a ringing endorsement of his years in office or his aim to transcend left and right. Macron may have governed competently, but the abolition of the wealth tax and an attempt to create more consensual trade unions have trashed whatever reputation he had on the left, while on the right he is seen to temporise too much on immigration, asylum and Islam. France is home to Europe’s biggest Muslim population, but many French people think Islamic values are incompatible with core French values – notably laïcité, born of the 1789 revolution, that religion should be kept out of public and cultural life, to which a fading Catholicism presents no threat. Islam should fade too. French Muslims, for their part, are disproportionately crowded into the soulless concrete jungles of the banlieues – marginalised, segregated and isolated into what the former prime minister Manuel Valls called “territorial, social and ethical apartheid”. Add to the mix the fallout from the rise of militant Islam in the Middle East and there is the perfect recipe for a dark, vicious circle of marginalisation that is feeding Muslim extremism. Macron has found himself impossibly squeezed. No extra powers to deport, to investigate, to arrest, to attempt to assimilate before this evident threat are enough for the Islamophobes. Speeches proclaiming faith in republican western values seem beside the point. And all against a wider sense that France is in decline. It is potent material for ideologues. Terrorism has risen exponentially – the fastest rise of any country in Europe. France arrests four times more Islamic suspects than any other country in Europe, according to the Institute of Economics and Peace. At the last count, 47,000 out of a prison population of 67,000 were Muslim. The unemployment rate of 14% among Muslims is almost twice the national rate. France’s political and media culture exacerbates the problems. Zemmour made his name on cheap chat shows on the multiplicity of tiny TV stations that screen current affairs discussion as inflammatory infotainment; think a plethora of GB News channels, only worse. An electoral system organised around presidentialism, with a first and second round of voting, encourages a figure such as Zemmour to build a personality cult, just as Macron himself did in 2017. Macron created En Marche. Zemmour has created Reconquête. It is sheer racist poison. Reconquête is so named to “reconquer” a France at risk of being “overwhelmed” by Muslims. Zemmour celebrates the “great leader” doctrine of history, a France led by Napoleon, Joan of Arc and de Gaulle. The country now needs another great leader – not the weird centrist Macron but passionate Zemmour – to recover its lost greatness, but based on racial and cultural purity. Assimilation should be complete, down to changing forenames. Immigration should cease. All welfare support and budgetary aid for anything foreign should stop. Free trade is anathema. He would freeze relations with the EU and pursue an independent foreign policy. Only the disaster of Brexit has checked the ambition for a “Frexit”, once pushed by Marine Le Pen. Somehow, the politics of tolerance and of mutual respect have to surface, and triumph, otherwise western democracies, with their multiracial populations, are in real trouble. Macron’s compromised decency and competence are of course preferable to the politics of hate and exclusion that can only lock France – and Britain, if it were in any way repeated here – into a self-fulfilling vortex. Aid to Europe, France and even Britain is coming unexpectedly from the unfolding, self-defeating debacle of Brexit, driven by parallel anti-immigrant instincts morphing into near racism. Without its grim warning, Zemmour and Le Pen’s grip on French politics, even if they lose to Macron or his probable rightwing challenger Pécresse, might undermine France as a pillar of the EU. As it is, the threat remains all too real. Equally, in post-Brexit Britain, opinion polls show some softening in anti-immigration views. We may live in rightwing times, but one of the right’s greatest triumphs – Brexit – may prove to be the trigger for a rebirth of a better, less hateful politics. Pray Macron, battered perhaps, survives. • Will Hutton is an Observer columnistThose shining orbs, the Golden Globe awards, have well and truly lost their lustre. Unloved and almost unattended, the prize-giving ceremony that once promised more Hollywood entertainment value than any other, with closeups of tipsy stars in unguarded moments, will not even be screened on network TV. Its demotion follows a series of rows over its dubious practices and lack of diversity. Yet the event at the Beverly Hilton hotel comes as Hollywood tries to cling on by its glistening fingernails to all the traditional allure and hoopla of the awards season. After two years of film-making against a background of Covid infections and international restrictions, the industry sorely needs to keep up the illusion of glamour and fun that helps to bankroll its biggest productions. Despite efforts to quickly reconfigure the nomination and voting processes behind the awards and to emphasise its philanthropic arm, the 2022 globes are likely to make a fairly lame first outing, with no red-carpet buildup or even a livestream. As campaigner Melissa Silverstein, founder and publisher of Women in Hollywood, told the Observer this weekend: “If an award is handed out alone in a forest, with nobody looking, did it really happen at all?” Silverstein, who also directs the Athena film festival, added: “The Globes were always the awards where the nominees would be a little drunk by the time they got up for their awards and people would turn up to enjoy themselves, but they have really fallen away this year. They can’t get anybody to go to it. “It’s sad, but they deserved it as they treated people horribly. When women actors were put up in front of the press in the past they had to answer questions about their babies and their personal lives. The awards organisers felt they had all the power. Shame on everybody, though, for letting it go on for so long. I’m sure many nominees will be relieved they don’t have to go through that any more.” The awards are run by the Hollywood Foreign Press Association (HFPA), which was last year called to account for its ethical failings and failure to reflect the wider film world, as well as answer questions about its finances. In 2019 none of the 87 members was black and the recruitment of 21 more to improve diversity has been dismissed as tokenism. These claims, echoed by stars such as Scarlett Johansson, who refused to take part in their events claiming that “sexist questions” from members “bordered on sexual harassment” and Tom Cruise who returned his three awards, led to boycotts from most of the leading public relations firms with which the HFPA was once hand-in-satin-glove. None of the industry magazines is promoting the event this year, NBC has pulled out of a broadcast arrangement, and A-list stars have refused to attend. “The Globes have been the big loser of the season,” said Jeremy Kay, US editor of Screen Daily. “For months, the HFPA has been furiously issuing press releases to show it’s undergoing fundamental structural change to course-correct, bring in new membership and ingratiate itself with Hollywood, but it got the cold shoulder. The Globes nominations passed by with little fanfare and it is hard to see tonight’s ceremony registering anything like the level of interest it has enjoyed over the years. Its influence on the Oscar season seems negligible.” It is possible, though, that this reversal of fortunes has had the accidental effect of modernising the Globes and making them more suited to our sombre, mid-pandemic era. Critic Robbie Collin suggested last week in the Telegraph that their low-key look would be more apt: short on pizazz, short on self-congratulation, and, most importantly he seems to feel, just plain short. Yet the annual awards season is a key component of the marketing machine in Los Angeles, and organisers of the Critics Choice awards were hoping to benefit from the Globes’ loss of status this time around. The Critics Choice ceremony was also due to take place this month but a fresh surge in Omicron cases has seen it postponed. So maybe it is now the Baftas, held in London on 13 March, that has the best chance of attracting attention before the Oscars on 27 March. The British academy has already undergone its own hefty shake-up and self-examination, following recent accusations that female directors and black artists were under-represented. It will also inevitably gain kudos this spring from the number of British actors winning plaudits. Among them are Olivia Colman, for The Lost Daughter, Benedict Cumberbatch, for Jane Campion’s The Power of the Dog, and Kenneth Branagh, for Belfast, starring Jamie Dornan and Ciarán Hinds. Each is in the running for a string of prizes, potentially culminating in golden statuettes at the ceremony that still outshines them all. “Despite an ongoing decline in the TV audience for the Oscars telecast, the show remains the pinnacle of the US awards season,” said Kay. “But there’s also now a lot of love for other events, like the indie-skewing Spirit awards in Santa Monica, scheduled to take place in early March, and for last November’s Gotham awards in New York.” For Silverstein all the jockeying for prominence between the awards is an unwelcome distraction: “I hope the really big story will also be noticed; the fact we could have a woman, Jane Campion, being nominated for the Oscar for directing twice. If that happens it would also be the second year running it goes to a woman. And her cinematographer is a woman too. That would be monumental.” But the thirst for red carpet footage of women in frocks, she knows, will not go away. “It’s because of the pressure for eyeballs. The television networks are very worried about the disconnect between the films that make money at the box office and those that win awards.” Silverstein argues that audiences can find quality content without any emphasis on glamour and high heels. The achievements of women behind the camera, as well as in front, should be marked, before the film industry then concentrates on opening its doors to a wider group of people and on moving away from the financial imperatives that drive a conveyor belt of action and superhero films. “I’m really hoping to see a change in the way we define a successful film now. You really can make a profitable film without having a big budget. If you make any money, then you’ve had a successful film. So how do we de-couple the movie industry from this expectation of really big profits?” Whether the tarnished Golden Globes can be buffed-up again next yearto help with this shift in perspective remains in doubt. “It’s too soon to say whether the HFPA will be embraced and welcomed back into the awards community next season,” said Kay. “At a time when content creators and actors from under-represented communities have been making their voices heard, Hollywood finally is very publicly moving to a place where any whiff of inequity will no longer be tolerated. “Over the past five years or so diversity has become the watchword and the industry has been vocal in wanting to embrace change. You see it in awards season and in the reporting of awards season, where outlets are quick to tot up how many women or people of colour, for example, are among nominees and winners. The Gotham awards recently announced their first gender-neutral winners in acting categories and I wouldn’t be surprised if other groups follow suit in future and we see new, ‘woke’ awards shows spring up.” • This article was amended on 9 January 2022. Jane Campion has been nominated for a best director Oscar once before but she did not win it as suggested in an earlier version due to a misquote.Climate justice is the theme of this year’s Guardian and Observer charity appeal and with a week to go we have so far raised more than £725,000 for four environment charities: Practical Action, Global Greengrants Fund UK, Royal Botanic Gardens Kew, and Environmental Justice Foundation. Nearly 7,000 readers have already donated. Here, they tell us why. Pam MacLeod, 79, Truro Pam MacLeod was motivated to donate to this year’s appeal because she and her family have been directly affected by the climate crisis. She grew up in southern Africa and while at school in Zimbabwe in the 1950s she witnessed the consequences of drought. The memory of that time has remained with her. She says: “My older brother still lives in southern Africa and he sees effects of a lack of rain which is increasingly a problem. My other brother lives in California. Last year, he and his wife were told to leave home because the wildfires had got so close.” Her son lives in British Columbia, in Canada where he works as a nurse practitioner. The clinic where he’s based is in an area that has been badly affected by flooding. “He’s been very aware of the effects of flooding on the lives of his patients,” adds MacLeod. “The necessity for doing something about climate change is absolutely pre-eminent in our thinking. It was an obvious choice [to donate to this year’s appeal] for me.” Jennifer Labwo, 29, east London “Climate change underpins everything,” says Labwo. “It is the single most important issue that we face. She says that without tackling the climate crisis, it is impossible to get justice for other social problems. “It’s all interconnected,” she adds. Without seeking redress to climate justice, we can’t spur self-determination for women in the global south because they’re concerned about accessing resources like clean water. “We can’t begin to talk about a post-racialised society when we [in the west] are actively propping up our lifestyles on the backs of people in the global south.”We can’t talk about creating an equitable society for disabled people because we’re not taking their needs into consideration.” Margaret Turner, 82, Exeter In November, Margaret Turner, who belongs to Exeter’s Extinction Rebellion, went to Glasgow to attend the second week of Cop26. There, she heard speakers from Nigeria and Brazil, among others. She says: “I was impressed by their awareness, commitment and knowledge regarding their own part of the Earth. “I believe that we in the rich nations should support those who know better than we do how to take care of their own land and environment – this charitable appeal works by giving more agency to these people to care for the Earth.” Clive Quick, Huntingdon For Clive Quick, the appeal was a chance to donate to Practical Action – a charity whose work he has been supporting and following for decades. Quick, a retired surgeon, has taught in Africa and Sri Lanka, and has witnessed how some people are desperately trying to make a living. “[Practical Action] starts at the bottom rather than at the top,” he says. “It helps people to help themselves.” “Having seen the effects of climate change I can see that what they’re trying to achieve is beneficial in that respect. They help people cope with what they’ve got, rather than what they might have,” he says. Quick has seen some of the work Practical Action has done in Nepal and Peru, among other countries, and credits it with enabling people to achieve amazing results. Dede Liss, 67, Forest of Dean, Gloucestershire “I feel strongly that the west and northern countries owe a debt to people in the global south because we’re responsible for the climate change that is happening,” says Liss. She feels that although the UK government should take more responsibility and action, individuals can also play a role. “I do feel people have an individual responsibility. We are not able to change things dramatically but we are a key part of it. That’s why I felt I could give money.” “I feel really really privileged and have everything I could possibly need … I’m trying to make my contribution. Social justice and ending poverty aren’t possible unless we do something about the climate emergency and biodiversity loss together.” Alayne Perrott, 71, Carmarthenshire, Wales Alayne Perrott is a climate scientist who has retired from Swansea University. Her career has taken her to places such as Ethiopia, Mexico and Nigeria, where she discovered “there was a pernicious cycle of human and climate interaction” over hundreds of years and that it was continuing in the modern world. She chose to give to the appeal because she liked how the chosen organisations were supporting positive work. “Charities like Practical Action, in particular, have discovered a deep well of local innovation,” she says. “Once people become aware and sensitive to what their problems are, they innovate on a domestic scale and it’s amazing how those innovations can spread. People can do a lot for themselves.” Donations can be made online by credit card, debit card or PayPal, or by phone on 0151 284 1126. We are unable to accept cheques.Tianjin, a major Chinese port city near the capital Beijing, has begun mass-testing its 14 million residents after a cluster of 20 children and adults tested positive for Covid-19, including at least two with the Omicron variant. Those infected include 15 students aged between eight and 13, a staff member at an after-school centre and four parents. The citywide testing, begun on Sunday, is to be completed over two days. The first two cases confirmed in Tianjin were a 10-year-old girl and a 29-year-old woman working at the after-school centre. Both were infected by the Omicron variant. In subsequent testing of close contacts, 18 others tested positive and 767 tested negative as of Saturday night. Residents have been advised to stay at or near home to be available for the community-level nucleic-acid screening. They have been told that until they obtain a negative test result, they will not receive a “green” code on smartphone Covid-tracing apps that nearly all people in China are now required to present when using public transport and in other situations. China has stepped up its zero-tolerance Covid-19 strategy in the run-up to the Winter Olympics, which open on 4 February in Beijing. The Chinese capital is 150km (90 miles) north-west of Tianjin and connected by a high-speed rail link that takes less than one hour. Millions of people are being confined to their homes in Xi’an and Yuzhou, two other cities that are farther away but have larger outbreaks. The city of Zhengzhou, a provincial capital 70km (40 miles) north of Yuzhou, is also conducting mass testing and closing schools starting Monday. China reported 165 confirmed coronavirus cases for 8 January, up from 159 a day earlier, its health authority said on Sunday. Of the new infections, 92 were locally transmitted, according to a statement by the National Health Commission, from 95 a day earlier. Most of the new local cases were in the provinces of Henan, home to Yuzhou, and Shaanxi, home to Xi’an. China reported 46 new asymptomatic cases, which it classifies separately from confirmed cases, compared with 52 a day earlier. There were no new fatalities, leaving the death toll at 4,636. Mainland China had 103,619 confirmed cases as of 8 January. With Associated Press, Reuters and Agence-France PresseAs a leading art historian, Christopher Wright has uncovered several old master paintings in public and private collections over five decades. Now he has discovered that a copy of a painting by Sir Anthony van Dyck, which he bought for himself for £65 in 1970, may actually be an original by the 17th-century Flemish court painter to King Charles I. “I bought it from a jobbing dealer in west London,” he said. “I was buying it as a copy, as an art historian. I took no notice of it, in a strange way. The syndrome is the cobbler’s children are the worst shod. So the art historian’s collection is the least looked at.” Wright estimated the painting might be worth around £40,000, although some Van Dycks have fetched seven-figure sums. The painting, a portrait of Isabella Clara Eugenia, Infanta of Spain and Regentess of the Spanish Netherlands, has been hanging in his sitting room for years. Now, having realised its significance, he wants it to go to a public institution. He is putting it on permanent loan to the Cannon Hall Museum, Barnsley, which boasts a collection of fine 17th-century Dutch and Flemish paintings. Wright’s previous discoveries include a Stubbs portrait in the Ferens Art Gallery, Hull, and his publications include studies of 17th-century artists such as Rembrandt. He looked at the infanta’s portrait more closely only after it caught the eye of a visitor to his home, Colin Harrison, senior curator of European Art at the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. “He comes to see me. We chat. He says, ‘I really think your picture is by Van Dyck,’’’ said Wright. “When you own something, you don’t take any notice of it. It was the sitter’s hands that set it off. That’s what Colin noticed.” Harrison recalled: “In the normal way of a museum curator, Iimmediately was looking around the walls. It seemed to me that this was an interesting and possibly good picture [and] that, if you got the hands right, Van Dyck may very well have painted them.” When buying it, Wright had assumed that it was one of numerous copies of Van Dyck’s infanta portraits in various formats, including full, three-quarter and half-length versions. His is half-length, an oil on canvas measuring 81.5cm by 70.5cm. In each, she appears in a nun’s habit, signalling her mourning and piety after the death of her husband, Archduke Albert VII of Austria, in 1621. She became Regentess of the Netherlands and ruled in her own right until her death in 1633, abandoning the lavish jewellery and clothing in which she had been painted in her younger days. Wright acknowledged that she had been a pious woman, a good administrator and an arts patron, but he never particularly liked the portrait. “My nickname for it was ‘Er Indoors’ after Rumpole of the Bailey. She’s a kind of doom-ridden personality.”[See Footnote]. But, inspired by Harrison, he took it to the Courtauld Institute of Art in central London, where it has been examined and restored. “It was dirty and had yellow varnish, but it was in decent condition,” he said. “The whole thing looks absolutely magnificent now.” It is thought to date from between 1628 and 1632. Van Dyck had by then worked in England for King James I and as court painter to the infanta and, in 1632, he returned to England, where Charles I appointed him “principalle Paynter” and knighted him. The Courtauld’s report, by Kendall Francis and Timothy McCall, notes that Van Dyck and his workshop produced many such infanta portraits and that it can be “very challenging” to determine the extent to which assistants were involved. They conclude: “The adroit skill leads us to tentatively propose that [it] can be attributed to Van Dyck’s workshop and that it was completed during his lifetime and under his supervision.” Wright noted that, while some believe that the half-length version in the Walker art gallery, Liverpool, is by Van Dyck, “that is not an opinion held by the Walker”, whose online description refers to it as from Van Dyck’s studio and “possibly” the artist. Discussing the qualities of his version, he said: “The hands are beautiful. When it’s a studio execution, the hands, they can’t do them. The structure of the face is right, her clothes are beautifully done. There’s no copyist busy here.” • This footnote was added on 14 January 2022. The nickname ‘Er Indoors’ is not “after Rumpole of the Bailey” but was used by the character Arthur Daley to refer to his wife in the TV series Minder.In the spring of 2020, Hart Island, a mile from City Island in the Bronx, was a focal point of grief in New York. It was here, at the city’s public cemetery or potter’s field, the final resting place of more than a million people, that officials ordered trenches dug to accommodate those the coronavirus was expected to kill. The trenches were never filled. Many bodies were returned to funeral parlors or stored in mobile freezers on Randall’s Island, better known for music festivals and the Frieze art fair than cold storage of corpses. Last week, as New York was once again in the grip of a pandemic spike, the ferry jetty was devoid of morbid feelings, even with infections running at a 35% positivity rate, close to five times the peak of last winter. “We haven’t seen anyone here – or any of the trucks coming like they used to,” said one Hart Island worker. The winter Covid wave has hit the Bronx hard. The borough has the city’s highest positivity rate, in some neighborhoods near 50%. But for many this wave feels different, not least in the way leaders and health officials are treating it. Last week, Governor Kathy Hochul ordered hospitals to start reporting numbers of patients being treated for symptoms of Covid-19 separately from those who test positive after being admitted for other reasons. The general sense of weariness – and wariness – around official guidance may have reached a breaking point when the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) advised that quarantine times for anyone testing positive would be cut from 10 days to five – guidance interpreted by many to mean that Omicron was milder than its predecessors. In New York the number of hospital admissions is similar to the peak in April 2020 – 11,000 – but fives times more people are being found to have the virus. Stays in hospital, at least for the vaccinated, are shorter. The virus is still causing havoc. The state reported 130 deaths on Thursday, the highest single-day toll since the vaccination rollout. New York City has reported service suspended on three of 22 subway lines and reduced on others, because 21% of operators and conductors are sick. In the most recent figures, 21% of the NYPD was out, as were 30% of emergency medical service personnel and 17% of fire officials. But under new mayor Eric Adams and Hochul, the message is different from former governor Andrew Cuomo’s “New York tough” message or that of Bill de Blasio, the former mayor who ordered a million public school students into remote learning for more than a year. Adams said plan A was for classes to remain in person. The city, he said, had put 1m Covid tests in schools. “The safest place for a child is in school,” Adams said – scaring many parents, especially those with children too young to be vaccinated. Fifteen miles south of the Bronx, in lower Manhattan, some said Covid was losing some of its power. “People are doing what they need to do to stay safe,” said Courtney McCleskey. “This seems like the new normal.” Visiting from Georgia, she said she planned to attend Broadway musicals on three consecutive nights, even as many stages have been forced to close by cast and crew infections. Charley Bailey, also visiting from the south, said New Yorkers seemed more adapted to masking and vaccine requirements. “It’s seems like people are taking it way more seriously than they do in east Tennessee, where getting people to wear masks is impossible. People here seem much more agreeable to protecting to each other.” Others said that after the CDC cut quarantine in half, they stopped taking government directives so seriously. “The reality is that everyone is fatigued by the pandemic, and at this point everyone knows they should be doing what they can to stay safe. But at this point we’re in a ‘fuck it’ phase,” said Ben Martin, visiting from Boston. On Friday, CDC director Rochelle Walensky said she would assume greater control over messaging.To Yascha Mounk, a professor at Johns Hopkins University, one measure of when a pandemic ends is when people become accustomed to it. “By that definition, the massive surge of Omicron infections coursing through scores of developed countries without eliciting more than a half-hearted response marks the end of the pandemic,” Mounk wrote in the Atlantic. Politicians are singing a similar tune, with a back-to-normal message subject to masking and vaccination. “We are refining everything, our whole quarantine idea,” Hochul said. “Everyone was staying home for 10 days; they might be asymptomatic for five days and still have five days, which was paralyzing to our economy. Staying at home is widely disruptive. We can’t do that. That is as disruptive as saying stay remote.” Adams has said it is his priority to get New Yorkers back to work, proposing a three-day office week, expanding to five. “Covid is here. We have to learn to live with it in a smart way,” Adams said. The issue, the mayor said, is that 30% office occupancy cannot sustain businesses. Restaurants which boomed in the fall are now emptying again. Having survived the first, crippling phases of the pandemic, they are seeing business dry up. At Pardon My French, a restaurant in the East Village, business was good from March to December. Just before the holidays, it dried up. “Discussions always become about Covid but there are so many other things touching people’s lives way more profoundly,” said owner Valentin Leleu. New York is a long way from March 2020, when the city was in the grip of a paralyzing fear, residents haunted by a near constant wail of sirens. But the city is not normal either, despite many residents’ efforts. At Lovely Day in Nolita, owner Kazusa Jibiki said that combined with rising overheads, Omicron was a cruel blow. “We are concerned how we’ll survive if this lasts,” he said.It was Roger Federer who first coined the term “Happy Slam” to describe the Australian Open – a phrase that perfectly encapsulated the first grand slam of the year, a time when the players are feeling fresh and simply happy to be there. For those coming from the European winter the warm sunshine offers rejuvenation, mentally and physically, while the players have also been well treated by Tennis Australia, particularly over the past 15 years or so since Craig Tiley became the tournament director. It was Tiley who introduced a blanket payment of $1,000 to every player in the main draw, singles and doubles, which was strongly appreciated by those further down the rankings who made the long trip to Australia knowing that their first-round loser’s cheque would probably barely cover the expense. In 2018, Tiley pledged to eventually raise the prize money from its figure of Aus $55m to Aus $100m, which would put the Australian Open above the other three grand slams. (This year, it is Aus $75m.) The players love Melbourne’s restaurants, they love the climate and everything about it. The facilities, vastly improved over the past decade, are second to none, including three covered courts as well as outstanding gym and recovery rooms. But as Novak Djokovic sits in his quarantine hotel in Melbourne, awaiting Monday’s appeal against the rejection of his visa – for not providing sufficient evidence that he merited an exemption from the country’s Covid-19 vaccine mandate – things don’t quite seem quite so happy any more. While the Happy Slam has been enjoyable for players to play and for journalists, broadcasters and fans to attend, things have changed. Rose-tinted glasses may be in play here, but many who covered the event in the 1980s and 1990s will tell you how officials have been more officious, how flexibility has been replaced by rigidity. Rules are rules. It has hardly been without its share of controversy. In the past 16 years, the Australian Open has endured at least two strike threats (with Djokovic as a key figure) as well as failed drug tests, natural disasters, homophobia and match-fixing. In 2005, the buildup was dominated by a drugs scandal, sparked by the Belgian sports minister, Claude Eerdekens, who announced that women’s US Open champion at the time, Svetlana Kuznetsova, had tested positive for ephedrine at an exhibition event in Belgium. Journalists landing in Melbourne joined local reporters in chasing the story for three days and though the Russian, who said she had been prescribed a cold remedy that might have caused the failed test, escaped a sanction because ephedrine was only banned in competition, it set things off on a dark note. The Australian Open’s slot in the calendar, held in the second half of January, may be one reason why it attracts controversy. By the time players arrive it is more than four months since the end of the US Open, the last time they have all been in the same place. The ATP and WTA hold player meetings on the eve of the event and that timing can often lead to explosive moments. In 2012, tensions were high at the US Open over prize money, in particular the percentage of revenue that was given to players. A strike threat – aimed at the 2013 Australian Open – was averted after Federer and Djokovic led the negotiations with the grand slam tournaments. In 2018, the threat of a strike reared its head again, this time in Australia, when Djokovic led calls for a vast increase in prize money. The Serb said he wanted to spread the wealth further down the rankings, while he also threatened to form a breakaway union to have an independent body that represents players alone. The threat was averted when Tiley promised to increase the prize money. Djokovic later followed through with the formation of the Professional Tennis Players Association (PTPA) in September 2020, though it remains in its formative stages. Even Australia’s heroes have not always helped. Margaret Court, a legend of Australian tennis on the court and the holder of a record 24 singles grand slam titles, has long been a polarising figure thanks to her vocal stance against gay rights. Her name still adorns the Margaret Court Arena but in 2018 there was an embarrassing moment for Tennis Australia when Billie Jean King, invited to Melbourne to receive the inaugural Australian Open woman of the year award, said Court’s name should be removed. “It’s really important if you’re going to have a name on anything that you’re hospitable, you’re inclusive, that you open your arms to everyone who comes to a public facility,” she said, as it slowly dawned on Tennis Australia officials what might be about to go down. “I was fine until lately when she said so many derogatory things about my community, about the LBGT. That really went deep in my heart and soul. I don’t think she should have [her name on it] any more.” In 2016, a match-fixing scandal broke on the eve of the event. In 2020, devastating bushfires threatened the Australian Open before clearing just in time and last year, the event was held in a pandemic thanks to incredible efforts from all concerned. As Djokovic awaits his fate, he may just wonder what happened to the Happy Slam.Six matches into a stewardship may seem premature for an inquest unless the club is Manchester United and the manager was brought in to administer a quick fix before a permanent No 1 is hired in the close season. Yet when Aston Villa arrive for Monday’s FA Cup third‑round tie a long week will have passed since the 1-0 capitulation to Wolves at Old Trafford that greatly increased scrutiny of Ralf Rangnick’s interim tenure. Such is the reality for the 63-year-old, who arrived on a much-trumpeted ticket of being a coach whose use of a vaunted high press would whip a listing squad into shape. Except the intense closing‑down game seen during his opening match – a win over Crystal Palace – has since vanished, causing some to venture that Rangnick’s “godfather of gegenpress” tag may be one of football’s great misnomers. If this is confusing so, too, is the picture offered by those at United about the German’s nascent regime and the squad’s reaction to it. Rangnick, according to one international, knows precisely what he is doing and is admired for a structured tactical approach. Other senior players, having experienced Chris Armas’s coaching, are unimpressed by the former New York Red Bulls and Toronto FC manager appointed as his assistant by Rangnick, whose thinking and decision making are consequently being questioned. But while there are strong claims that the German’s training methods are causing some discontent, a few are hardly enamoured of Cristiano Ronaldo. Since his arrival in the summer, Ronaldo’s presence can be seen as a boon for United’s emerging talent due to positive interactions with junior squad members. Others, despite his 14 goals, see him as an aloof signing who illuminates the executive’s muddled thinking. If there are grumbles about Ronaldo’s static play, there is also confidence that Rangnick possesses the backbone to drop United’s superstar forward if he decides that is required. This swirl of contrasting opinions would not matter if United were sailing serenely along, giving Manchester City the run for their petrodollar Liverpool and Chelsea are currently unable to do and challenging for a 21st championship. But they have not really been in position to do so in the nine years since Sir Alex Ferguson retired and it is certain to reach a decade, at least, before another title is secured. Instead, before Thursday’s announcement that Ed Woodward’s troubled time as United’s most powerful executive will end on 1 February, the man he signed to be a mid-season Mr Fixit has already reached a juncture where he is conceding his players “didn’t at all” employ the press against Wolves because they were unable to occupy the positions to do so. Rangnick’s admission is particularly mystifying given it casts a coach five decades into the high press as being unable to drill it into a talented group. Ronaldo’s ageing legs suggest he might be a fall guy in the efforts to make United an energised, harrying side, but Mason Greenwood, whose five goals make him United’s joint-second highest scorer with Bruno Fernandes, is among those now considered expendable instead. Against Wolves, Greenwood was the sole outfield player who performed to the Rangnick blueprint. Yet the 20-year-old was substituted on the hour, a jarring moment that provoked further questions regarding the manager’s reputation for being a clear-eyed watcher of players. Greenwood’s whirring feet, menacing passes and ability to close down fast appeared an ideal fit for Rangnick. When asked why Greenwood had lasted barely an hour he replied: “His effort and performance was not outstanding but he was one of the better players today.” Rangnick chose not to replace the faltering Jadon Sancho, the other “No 10” in his 4-2-2-2. That formation had, before the Wolves game, enabled his side to go five matches unbeaten – which is good – but has not allowed his proposed style to prosper – which is not so good. Rangnick has demanded more consistency from Greenwood and said the youngster still needs to develop physically. If the latter part is a job for the club’s sports science department, the former is tricky if you are being substituted when performing close to your best. Defeat Villa and the noise around United may well quieten but elimination from the one competition United can still realistically claim and the volume will be turned up.Movies that have the appearance of being filmed in a single continuous take usually raise two questions. First, is this actually a “one-shot” production (and if not, can you see the joins)? Second, does the format actively benefit the drama or is it merely a gimmick? Alfred Hitchcock famously referred to his experimental 1948 stage-to-screen adaptation of Rope as a “stunt”, and admitted to François Truffaut: “I really don’t know how I came to indulge in it.” More than six decades later, Alejandro González Iñárritu’s wildly overrated 2015 best picture Oscar-winner Birdman felt similarly indulgent – technically dazzling but ultimately hollow. Perhaps the greatest compliment I can pay actor turned director Philip Barantini’s low-budget Brit pic Boiling Point (co-written with James Cummings) is to say that I frequently forgot I was watching a brilliantly orchestrated one-shot film. Not that the format isn’t effective – far from it. It’s utterly immersive, conjuring the raw experience of an inexorably accelerating panic attack. Yet, like the 2015 German thriller Victoria, which was similarly captured in an authentic single take, this is first and foremost a gripping and gritty drama in which the spiralling descent of the narrative is enhanced and enriched by uninterrupted digital photography. Stephen Graham, who was so brilliant in last year’s BBC mini-series Time, and who gets an executive producer credit here, is on fire as Andy Jones, the already rattled head chef whose world is teetering on the brink of chaos. We first meet him scurrying through the crepuscular streets of London – late for work and ensconced in some on-the-hoof phone pleading that succinctly establishes the collapse of his family life. In the restaurant kitchen where his arrival is overdue, stalwart team leader Carly (Bifa winner Vinette Robinson) and her exasperated colleague Freeman (Ray Panthaki) are holding the fort, something that’s clearly become an increasingly common situation of late – another deftly delivered detail. Andy is overwrought (the Friday-before-Christmas rush is upon them), and swearily takes his stress out on others, his anxiety levels stoked by a visit from a patronisingly pernickety environmental health officer. Meanwhile, out in the restaurant, a rogues gallery of customers must be served. They range from a gaggle of social media influencers who are indulged rather than ejected, to an irate, racist patriarch performatively throwing his weight around on table seven. As for the soon-to-be engaged couple on table 13, they’ve flagged up a nut allergy that needs to be prioritised by the already overworked staff. And then there is Alistair Skye, a celebrity chef to whom Andy is uncomfortably indebted, played with brilliantly passive-aggressive smarm by Jason Flemyng. On the surface, Alistair is all smiles, assuring Andy that “we’re here to support you”, and insisting that he needn’t worry about the feared food critic with whom he has arrived (“You don’t need my endorsement, there’s such a buzz in this place!”). Yet soon enough, Alistair is taking credit for Andy’s menu (“I recognise all these dishes”) and offering smug serving suggestions (“Could I just get a little ramekin dish with some za’atar?”) while making increasingly threatening noises that reveal a deeper, more desperate purpose. Bifa-winning director of photography Matthew Lewis (who also shot the 2019 short from which this feature was born) leads us with superbly unobtrusive skill through this wholly believable hectic world. It’s a world in which everyone has a story, from the nervous young saucier hiding his forearms beneath untucked sleeves, to the game-faced maître d’ weepily phoning her father from the toilets, and the cocky chancer indulging in covert backstreet liaisons by the bins. Subplots about overdue pay increases and overstretched ambitions swirl amid the cacophony of standoffs and service bells (plaudits to the sound team), each thread skilfully interwoven into a complex mosaic of individual voices, all rising to a single scream. The result is a spicy nerve-jangler served with a chargrilled side order of jet-black gallows humour – a divine comedy barrelling towards inevitable tragedy, played out in hell’s kitchen where someone is bound to get burned. In cinemas and on digital platformsHanya Yanagihara’s debut novel taught her not to give up her day job as a travel writer and editor. The People in the Trees was the story of a scientist jailed for sexually abusing children he adopted during his Nobel-winning research on a Pacific island. It impressed reviewers with its exhaustive inventiveness and its refusal to offer redemption or solace, but sold only a few thousand copies when it was published in 2013. Two years later, the Manhattan-based writer released a novel that was twice as long and even less forgiving. It was about the fallout, among four college friends, from the appalling childhood sexual abuse of one of their group, and it hit the jackpot, becoming one of those vanishingly rare literary break-outs. Victoria Beckham and Dua Lipa declared themselves fans, while an equally passionate group of readers condemned it as gratuitous, even “evil”. A Little Life sold a quarter of a million print copies in the UK alone, where it was shortlisted for the Booker and the Women’s prize for fiction. But far from giving up her day job, Yanagihara took on a bigger one, as editor-in-chief of T, the New York Times style magazine. When we meet up, at an upmarket London hotel in October, she is combining a whistlestop publicity trip for her third novel, To Paradise, with two weeks of European fashion shows that have left her with “a mysterious illness” which, she hastens to add, is definitely not Covid. The jaunt is a twice-yearly ritual: menswear and furniture shows the spring and summer, then women’s ready-to-wear in the autumn. “I do New York, Milan and Paris, and I always end up getting sick. Usually it’s a cold or flu, so this is a new one for me,” she says, brandishing hands flushed with tiny red spots. She is determined not to let her mystery ailment get in the way of a promotional campaign that began six months earlier when news of To Paradise was teased to the book trade. “Do you remember where you were when you finished A Little Life? And where were you when you heard that Hanya Yanagihara’s new novel arrives next year? Right here,” tweeted Waterstones at the time – an enthusiasm rewarded by Yanagihara in proof copies of To Paradise, with a personal note of thanks to all the booksellers who had pressed her work into readers’ hands. Like its predecessor, To Paradise is a brick of a book that checks in at well over 700 pages and is set largely in New York. But there the similarity ends. This is a very different city, which is seen in three different iterations in a trio of time zones. There’s perhaps another motive behind Yanagihara’s note to the booksellers: until you get the hang of it, which takes the length of an ordinary-sized novel, it’s all a bit disorientating, not least because – for reasons to do with its preoccupation with inherited privilege – the protagonists in all three timezones are all named David, Edward and Charles/Charlie Bingham. It is, however, most definitely worth hanging on in. “It’s a mature masterpiece, which makes A Little Life look overcaffeinated,” says veteran novelist Edmund White, who emerged as an early champion with a Facebook post that To Paradise was “as good as War and Peace”. In the first section we’re in 1893, at the heart of fin-de-siècle society with clear Jamesian resonances (it centres on a big family house in Washington Square), except that this New York is a breakaway republic where same-sex marriage is the norm. “I’d always wanted to write a marriage story, but marriage stories are about money, and I wondered, if you wrote one that wasn’t about gender norms, and gender rules, what would that marriage story be? And beyond that, what would that history be?” says Yanagihara. In the second section we move to 1993, where an unnamed plague is laying waste to the complacency of the next generation of Davids, Charleses and Edwards. In the third section we’re in a dystopian 2093 where the personal and social freedoms of David, Charles and his granddaughter Charlie have been sacrificed to the demands of controlling wave upon wave of pandemics. It’s all scarily plausible: a “what if?” novel combined with a “what when?” one, I suggest. “And what is,” says Yanagihara. What it is not, though, is a response to Covid. She had the idea of the novel in 2016 and started researching it in earnest shortly after the election of Donald Trump, at a point when “history suddenly started to move very quickly, raising questions about whether we were who we had always thought we were”. She can’t explain why she started interviewing scientists about the probability and likely consequences of the next pandemic. “But I can say that it didn’t arise from any special oracular powers,” she wrote in her note to booksellers. By the time New York was locked down, the novel’s structure, characters and themes were in place, the first part was finished and the other two were partly written. “Of course, it would occasionally strike me as strange that I was writing about this pandemic in the midst of one, but not terribly,” she says. “And listen, there’s no way to say this without sounding completely heartless, but Covid really gave me a lot of time. It was not an anxious period for me, because I was extremely lucky to have a job that I knew was secure. I had health insurance, I had savings. I had a place to live that was safe. And suddenly, as someone who needs eight or nine hours’ sleep a night, I had time.” After the taxonomical precision of The People in the Trees, where scientific identification and naming is central, and the introversion of A Little Life – in which external history is airbrushed out, leaving no distraction from the agonies and ecstasies of Jude, JB, Willem and Malcolm, over three decades – the bleaching out of identity associated with names in To Paradise is particularly striking. One of the Davids is actually a descendant of Hawaiian royalty, the reluctant centre of a running argument about sovereignty and the appropriation of people and objects. Nor is this anonymity limited to the novel’s characters: in the world of the 19th-century Binghams, there is no word for “gay”, while the diseases that sweep through the later sections are never named. It’s a bold formal move for a writer whose breakout readership is likely to be expecting another agonised circle of friends. For Yanagihara this play with naming represents one of many negotiations with America’s idea of itself. “We’re often renaming things in the United States, either to eradicate a bad memory or to try to dissociate it from a person who history has not treated kindly or who deserves to be treated with more respect. There’s this idea that naming something changes the fundamental nature of it, but does naming who we are make us more real to others? Or is it simply a way of making ourselves more real to ourselves? Above all, To Paradise offers a profound challenge to the idea of democratic society. The very concept of paradise, she says, is that it is not for everyone but for the chosen few. “The idea of sacrifice for a kind of freedom, the idea of personal freedom, as opposed to social freedom, the idea of a freedom for some, but not for all – these are questions that are integral to the founding, and continuation, of America.” The current disarray around management of wave after wave of Covid pandemic bears out her point, giving the novel a shadow that seems to have warped and elongated even in the two months since I first read it. This is particularly true of its chilling representation of a young woman whose independence, and capacity to make adult relationships, have been sacrificed by her doctor grandfather to the task of keeping her alive. Did Yanagihara have any qualms about being seen as playing to the anti-vax gallery? “I didn’t think about it that way,” she says firmly. “My father’s an oncologist. He doesn’t treat children, but there are certain forms of treatment, as I understand it, that save children while really hurting them and causing long-term complications: I was thinking about the sacrifice that Grandfather, and unwittingly Charlie, end up making for her life. He has a much colder and more clinical idea of meaningful life until she gets sick.” For all this book’s differences from Yanagihara’s previous novels, all three have one striking thing in common: they barely touch on the consciousness of women. Rendered infertile and perpetually childlike by the antidote to the virus, Charlie has little agency. Why such an absence? “You know,” says Yanagihara, “after you’ve written your third book, certain patterns and motifs begin to announce themselves that you’re not conscious of. Sometimes they have to do with your biography, but sometimes they don’t. I don’t know why there’s a grandparent in each one of these books, because I wasn’t close to my grandparents. There are no mothers in any of my books, and I’m not sure why, because I have a perfectly fine relationship with my mother. There are very few women and again I’m not really sure why, but there’s always disease and the body falling apart. The short answer is I’m not sure why Charlie is the only woman.” If one were to go down the psychoanalytical route, one could cite the many interviews in which she has spoken extensively of the influence of her father, who – when she displayed an interest in art at the age of 10 – took her to a pathologist’s lab so that she could draw a cadaver. “I was always interested in the disease, not the human,” she told one interviewer. “I always say that my father came from the last generation of quasi-intellectual men who were completely open and saying that they expected one thing from their daughter, and another thing from their wife,” she says now. “I didn’t want to be a wife and a mother, and was probably very dismissive of the lessons my mother had to teach me, which I regret. And so I deliberately never learned how to do certain things like cook or clean. And as a teenager everything seems like such a binary: you would either be at home cooking and cleaning, or you would be out doing what you wanted, and I wanted to be out doing what I wanted.” * * * Yanagihara was born in Los Angeles, one of two children, to a family that had lived in Hawaii for three generations but were not of Hawaiian blood. Her childhood was itinerant, following her father’s jobs across the US, though she spent three high-school years at the private school in Honolulu that Barack Obama had attended a decade earlier. Punahou School was founded on land given to an American missionary called Bingham, whose grandson, an explorer turned US senator, is listed among its famous alumni (all the surnames in the novel, it turns out, are from prominent 19th-century missionary families in Hawaii). Does she feel American? “Yes, 100%,” she says, though she has Japanese ancestry and considers Japan to be “the country of my heart”. Travelling abroad, she admits, disarmingly, “is a process of constant humiliation. I feel very gauche most of the time. This ugly American behaviour which I can see in myself is kind of what people expect. Especially if you are a non-white American, you will never feel more American than that when you go back to the country of your ancestry, as I do to Japan.” In Hawaii, she grew up at the height of the sovereignty movement with parents who were “classic liberal boomers” and favoured the less radical state-within-a-state solution. In the second section of To Paradise, a range of hopelessly naive separatist movements lay claim to the islands. “I hope the book offers no moral judgment about a craving to return to this era in which things seemed simpler and more noble and respectful. It only says something about how hard it is to try to go back, when history is always in the way,” she says. The Bingham house is stuffed with Hawaii artefacts, which become part of a larger conversation about the ethics of protectiveness: or, as she puts it, “who gets to decide what’s best for people and for cultures”. There’s an unflinchingness in Yanagihara’s writing that can seem gratuitously punishing – a reminder of the little girl who was more interested in disease than people. By the third section of To Paradise, Hawaii has been destroyed. In A Little Life, she pushed the torture and self-flagellation of lawyer Jude so far that some readers recoiled while others hung on in horrified fascination. “This book and its champions seem bound to each other by their mutual disgust and discomfort,” wrote Daniel Mendelsohn in the New York Review. “It’s rare to encounter literary discussion of such dissonant zeal, such enthralled distress,” observed the Australian critic Beejay Silcox, in an essay summarising the Little Life phenomenon. How did Yanagihara herself feel about inspiring such strong feelings? “I don’t read anything about my books and I’m not on Twitter, which is, as I understand it, where the majority of these conversations tend to get slugged out,” she says. She is particularly impatient with the #ownvoice movement, which might question her right, as a woman, to tell the stories of gay men. “It’s very dangerous. I have the right to write about whatever I want. The only thing a reader can judge is whether I have done so well or not.” While A Little Life was a dark adolescent fairy story of a group of friends who attempt to hold historical institutional evil at bay by making their own family, To Paradise takes a more history-hardened view of relationships. People always ultimately choose their family over friends, asserts one of the Charleses. Though Yanagihara says that she disagrees with that position, I wonder how much – as someone who is resolutely single and lives alone – her own idea of friendship has altered during the pandemic. “I think if people did live with someone, whether it was their partner, their family, or so on, they almost always prioritised those people over their friends,” she says. Does that mean she personally lost friends? “It led to some meaningful conversations,” she replies, “…and then there were friends who I became much closer to.” She is wearing a chunky gold necklace featuring her star sign, Virgo, given to her by a friend who is the artistic director of a leading couture house. “I don’t have family,” she says, correcting herself a beat later to: “I do, but they’re in Hawaii and they’re fine.” (She spent two Covid summers there, watching the wildlife return to tourist-bare beaches and disappear again as the industry returned.) Her point, she clarifies, is “I think people divided according to grades of fear, and who they had to protect”. It’s hard to imagine how the 47-year-old author manages to combine such a high-profile, jet-setting job with writing such big books, but she says that being the boss has its advantages, as everything works around you. “I’m not the smartest or hardest-working or most educated person, but I am the best at time management,” she says. “It’s a skill that I’ve worked hard to develop, which is not to say that I’m disciplined. I’m not really that disciplined. But once I set aside time for myself, I know how to sit down and use it.” And besides, she adds, journalism has made a valuable contribution to her writing: “It teaches you to be respectful of grammar and spelling, which sounds like a small thing, but really isn’t. It teaches you structure, which I think is an underrated skill. It teaches you how to turn things in on time. And it teaches you that at a certain point, you have to let it go.” After three novels, her project is becoming clear: as Edmund White puts it, she is chronicling her country just as panoramically as Tolstoy did his, with a similar confidence that the story is interesting. “I’ve really thought about how young America is as a nation,” says Yanagihara. “Despite the frustration and despair – even in countries like France, which pretend they don’t care about it – there is such an admiration for America. It’s our vitality, our childlike qualities, you know – our optimism and generosity, but also our spoiltness, our tantrum-throwing, our inwardness, our myopia. I really do think of it as a precocious and quite bratty child, heading into adolescence: every quality that you would admire in that child and every quality that will frustrate you exists within America as well.” The issues to which America is now applying this adolescent brattiness are undeniably global. “The arguments we’re having about vaccine mandates; the ones we’re having about the kinds of sacrifices we might make to effect greater global change and deal with the climate crisis; the ones that involve a reframing of history, especially when it comes to race and immigration. Those questions feel more urgent now because the threat is much more intense, especially when it comes to climate change and disease,” says Yanagihara. They are questions that fiction needs to address, because there are no easy answers in fact. To Paradise is published by Pan Macmillan on 11 January (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyHotel Amano, London Bringing slick Germanic design and affordable rooms to an area usually known for sky-high rates, the Amano, which is due to open this spring, is the first international outpost of the Berlin-based hotel chain. Housed in a former office building on Covent Garden’s Drury Lane, the hotel will have 141 rooms, ranging from the super-cosy right up to luxurious suites, giving it appeal across all budgets. The Amano’s sky bar and rooftop terrace, which will host DJs at weekends, will be the big draw in the spring and summer, while the restaurant and basement bar will have a moody, dimly lit, Berlin-style vibe. Doubles from £139; amanogroup.de/en/ Leven, Manchester Although the rooms and lobby lounge started taking guests in late November, the Leven doesn’t fully open until spring, when its cocktail bar and huge restaurant will welcome the first diners and drinkers. Converted from an early 20th-century warehouse, it has 42 rooms, combining exposed brickwork and high ceilings with contemporary comforts, including 100% natural mattresses and Grown Alchemist bathroom treats. Conveniently located on the corner of Canal and Chorlton Streets, it is the ideal refuge after a night on the town. Doubles from £88; liveleven.com No 1 by Guesthouse, York York will get a slick new address at No 1, a Grade II-listed Regency townhouse with 39 languidly elegant rooms, which opened its doors last month. Original features have been kept throughout, from the sweeping central staircase in the candlelit entrance to the fireplaces in the bedrooms and the cellar spa, once used as an air raid shelter. The buzzy bar specialises in cocktails and the restaurant’s menu is a pleasing combination of hearty pub classics and more upmarket dishes. Doubles from £160; guesthousehotels.co.uk The Albion, Ceredigion From the team behind Fforest – which redefined the family camping holiday – the Albion comprises two former warehouses, set on the River Teifi. The 23 rooms and communal areas will draw on the building’s maritime history, with much of the original architecture left untouched – including some 19th-century graffiti of tall ships on the third floor. The hotel sits between Fforest’s two campsites, meaning all their facilities – including a wooden, cedar-barrel sauna and Wales’s smallest pub – are easily accessible. Rooms from £125 B&amp;B; coldatnight.co.uk Virgin Hotel, Glasgow The new Virgin Hotel is set to be Glasgow’s most talked-about opening in late spring. Situated on Clyde Street, on the banks of the River Clyde, with many of the 242 rooms boasting panoramic river views, the hotel will house the trademark Commons Club – a hip bar, restaurant and day-working space – and the Funny Library Coffee Shop, which serves up tabletop games and books alongside coffee and sweet treats. Scotland is firmly in the Virgin brand’s sights in 2022; a second hotel is set to open in Edinburgh, also in the spring. virginhotels.com Broadwick Soho, London Promising to be a cross between “your eccentric godmother’s townhouse and a 70s hedonistic disco”, Broadwick Soho is the first London hotel project for renowned designer Martin Brudnizki, who’s set to bring his trademark opulent style to the 57-room townhouse. The Broadwick, which opens later this year, will also be home to a Sicilian-inspired restaurant and terrace, a wraparound rooftop lounge and bar, which will host live music and entertainment, and a classic speakeasy. broadwicksoho.com Gleneagles Townhouse, Edinburgh The first outpost of one of Scotland’s most iconic hotels, the Gleneagles Townhouse aims to bring the glamour and classic style of the Perthshire original to one of Edinburgh’s most impressive former banking halls. The central hall, with glass-domed ceiling and grandiose Roman columns, will house the bar and restaurant, with a second bar on the rooftop, and 33 spacious bedrooms between. The Townhouse, which opens in March, will also have its own members’ club, and a top-notch spa with a diverse programme, including a cryotherapy chamber and infrared sauna. gleneagles.com/townhouse The Artist Residence, Bristol Although officially open since November, this fifth outpost of the Artist Residence chain will be fully up and running in early 2022, when the café/bar and restaurant open their doors. Housed in a former boot factory near buzzy Cabot Circus, rooms range from the super-compact “Broom Cupboard” to suites, all decked out with contemporary art and vintage, reclaimed furniture. Downstairs, the lounge-lobby area does excellent breakfasts and all-day drinks, for a nice mix of locals and visitors. Doubles from £95; artistresidence.co.uk The Retreat, Elcot Park, Berkshire Surrounded by the lush, rolling hills of the North Wessex Downs, the Retreat is housed in an 18th-century mansion, once the former home of poet Shelley. As its name suggests, the accent is on rest and recuperation, with hydrotherapy pools, sauna and steam in the spa, and an outdoor pool surrounded by private cabanas. In the evenings, guests can choose between a pan-Asian restaurant and more informal brasserie, and end (or begin) the night in the whisky tasting room. Rooms are bright and breezy, with splashes of bold colour, standalone baths and sumptuous beds. Doubles from £180 B&amp;B; elcotpark.com Wildes, Chester One to put in the diary for later this year, Wildes is set to put Chester firmly on the short-breaks map. It’s an elegantly restored Victorian building in the heart of the city’s iconic Rows. The 18 rooms will combine period touches – wooden beams, original fireplaces – with plenty of contemporary luxuries, while the restaurant will be helmed by Harry Guy, who cut his teeth with Gordon Ramsay and Simon Rogan. The cherry on the cake is the roof-top pool, with glorious views across the city rooftops; in the colder months, the hotel’s spa will be the place to relax. Doubles from £250; wildeschester.com • This article was amended on 20 January 2022. No 1 by Guesthouse, York contacted us after publication to say that it opened on 10 December 2021.This week I have been wishing people a happy new year so regularly and so earnestly that the phrase has chipped off in my mouth and come loose like a bad tooth. I need to put it together again, piece by piece. It requires elaboration, this year more than most, because a happy new year for me may be an entirely awful one for you, and if the pandemic has taught us anything beyond the benefits of opening a window, it is clear and present empathy. So, to clarify: Happy new year to you if you’re a parent of a primary school-age kid. Yours has been a year lived as if sleeping with one hand in warm water, leaping up desperately at regular intervals convinced you’ve pissed yourself. Being the parent of a young child is stressful at the best of times. At the worst of times it is a struggle akin to trying to cross a motorway in bare feet after too much coffee. The year 2020 saw you teaching them trigraphs while nodding along to a Zoom meeting on mute. Then 2021 saw you watching their classmates’ positive test results flash up on your WhatsApp while nodding along to a Zoom meeting on mute. As you gratefully offered your arm for a vaccine, then another, then another little one for luck, each sharp scratch a little crumb of Valium, your young children were still waiting for their first. Were trotting alongside you, reeling off facts about photosynthesis or how to make purple, every now and then stopping to quietly note the unmasked status of a stranger. Were waking in the middle of the night from surreal nightmares where death arrived on a crowded bus or where they were the monster. It was not a case of whether Covid would visit your house, it was a case of when. Where’s Covid? Is it behind the tree? No! Is it under the rug? No! Is it sweeping through the school canteen like the smell of chips? You’ll find out on Friday. I wish you a new year of vaccinations and small relaxations, and a gradual slowing of your very tapping leg. Happy new year if you’re a Tory MP. Can’t be worse than last year can it? Happy new year if you’re the owner of a lockdown pet. It was a good idea. No! No, it was, it was a good idea. You made the right choice. You did! You did. It’s going to be fine. This year your cat will stop staring at you with those “how dare you?” eyes. Your new sofa will not be gutted like the last, which you rose one morning to find disembowelled, its foamy guts now strewn across the carpet, the cat surveying the devastation from her post on the counter. This year your puppy will listen when you say, “Down!”, will not take it as a challenge to see how many steaks he can grab from the table, will not reply at a volume that causes neighbours to stick livid little notes through your letterbox, will not whine like Veruca Salt. This year your allergy will disappear, your eyes will dry, your itches cease. Your dog will finally become comfortable around men with beards, simply sitting quietly and allowing them to talk to you in the street, the urge to protect you from their aggressive facial hair by leaping up and barking like a fire alarm having passed by mid-Jan. The pressure of having to train and manage them will this year be eclipsed by the comfort of their warm body and hot meat breath. Their grand love will bury the burden like a bone. Happy new year if you’re self-isolating. The stages of self-isolation – anger, fear, boredom, cheese – became blurry the second or third time round and now, as a new year breaks like an egg on your forehead, the feeling is one of cold, white numbness. Long ago you stopped arguing with the internet, shouting at the prime minister that before telling us to get tested and self-isolate it was his responsibility to make sure we had the ability and support to do either. That our “resilience” is running low. It is tempting to slip into familiar psychological patterns of doom, where feelings of pointlessness and anxiety dance badly together across the filthy kitchen table, but I wish you a happy new year, where isolation breeds, not quiet, but creativity. Whether you’re alone or among an overheated family, I wish you… OK not a whole year, too intimidating, but instead a series of hours that spread into days then months, where you’re able to replace the discontent of lockdown with moments of meditative peace, cosiness, time spent counting your various and disparate blessings, before returning to something quite good on TV. Happy new year if you’re a new variant. Ah, come in, we’ve been expecting you. Good journey? Sorry – no spikes on in the house. If you wouldn’t mind just snapping off that one, and that one, yes, all of them off, sorry. Sorry! And then if you just want to pop through to the boiling vat of drugs we’ll meet you in there in a sec. Yep, just behind you. See you in there. Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter @EvaWisemanHair trends in 2021 ranged from the “shallet” – a shaggy mullet preferred by Miley Cyrus and Rihanna – to the buzzcut, as seen on Iris Law and Adwoa Aboah. But this year it’s a technique, rather than a style, that is increasingly likely to be requested at salons. The phrase you’ll need to know is: “instinctive cutting”. This technique is not for the faint-hearted. It involves a hairdresser cutting freehand, based on their thoughts on a client’s face shape, hair type and product routine. This differs from the typical “picture” first approach, where a client shows an image of a celebrity with a haircut they want. With instinctive cutting, the goal – and the aspiration – is a haircut as unique as its wearer. George Northwood, whose celebrity clients include Alicia Vikader, Rachel Weisz and the Duchess of Sussex, practises instinctive cutting. The result, he says, is that “the client will emerge from the chair with hair that works specifically for them; rather than with a reproduction of something which doesn’t look or feel right”. Jacqueline Kilikita, the senior beauty editor at Refinery29 feminist website, recently wrote about the trend, saying she had first encountered the phrase on the websites of fashionable hairdressers such as Northwood, Adam Reed and Hare &amp; Bone. She experienced the technique herself at The Hair Bros. “They chopped inches off of my lengths, layering and razoring as they went,” she says. “The result was a cut that complemented me perfectly and I love it. I haven’t straightened my hair since - huge for me, as I used to do that every day – because the cut allows me to embrace my natural waves.” Kilikita says the growing popularity of such a technique can be seen as part of the wider impact of the pandemic on self-image. “We want low-maintenance hair that’s going to look effortless in real life and on Zoom,” she says. “For many, being isolated has allowed us to be our most authentic selves, and instinctive cutting is all about embracing individuality.” Northwood says more clients are becoming aware of the technique, which tallies with other trends: “Now that personalisation is more commonplace, everyone seems to have higher expectations. Bespoke styling responds to the needs of the individual and rarely disappoints.” A good relationship between client and hairdresser is essential. “More successful hairdressers will have an immediate instinct for what will work best for their client,” says Northwood. “Without this, the outcome can be safe or at worst, unsuitable.” Showing pictures can still be useful. “Bring pictures of haircuts you love so that the stylist can get a feel for your aesthetic,” says Kilikita. “While they probably won’t refer to those images during the cut, they’re likely to take elements of the style – a fringe or layers – and make them unique to you.” Northwood cautions: “Not all hairdressers are aware of what instinctive cutting is, so I recommend that you just ask your stylist to follow their instinct. Be sure to offer a yardstick in the form of images you like, to ensure that both of you are in a similar territory beforehand.” Tom Warr, the academy director at London salon chain Blue Tit, doesn’t use the term “instinctive cutting”, but he encourages trainees to think on their feet when presented with a picture: “If someone shows you a picture of like a really sharp fringe, and you notice they have a massive cow’s lick, that’s something that you may want to talk about with the client in terms of their expectations.” Warr uses images to give him an idea of his client’s ideas and dislikes. “I like to see if I get their personality [so] there’ll be a lot of icebreaker questions, trying to get to know them,” he says. “You’re weighing up their vibe. That can help loads with the end result.”Practically everyone has a view on Boris Johnson. Far fewer, whether friend or foe of his party, have much clue what binds Johnsonism together or even if this is a meaningful taxonomy at all. Whether a leader has an “ism” to their name does not always matter very much in the scheme of political success. Blair’s “traditional values in a modern setting” could just as easily be described the other way round, but the blend was the point. Among Tory progressives, the Cameron era is lauded by rose-tinted memories as a much clearer ideological prospectus than the pragmatic pick-and-mix it was. Angela Merkel’s near decade and a half in power in Germany was a mix of stolid instinct and sudden pivots. And yet the quest to understand what Johnsonism means looms larger at the start of 2022 as the prime minister faces resistance to Covid-era restrictions in his ranks. The introduction of the vaccine passport limiting access to big events to the jabbed has infuriated traditional allies, leaving the PM’s loyalists crossing fingers that the calculation of modest restrictions pays off if the Omicron variant declines in the next few weeks and overloaded hospitals are finally relieved. If, as one of his oldest friends and backers put it to me, his present curse is that “Tories think he is doing unTory things they don’t understand”, he can change those things. Or alternatively, he can explain his narrative more persuasively to keep his internal coalition intact and avoid more uprisings of the kind that left him relying on Labour votes to get his latest Covid measures through the Commons before Christmas. Covid management dominated the end of the year, but the twin squeezes of inflation (predicted by the Bank of England to reach a peak of 6% by the spring) and soaring energy bills have moved higher up the worry list as the Commons returned last week. That provided the political box-office highlight of the week At prime minister’s questions, Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, stood in for Keir Starmer. The result was a zesty Beatrice-versus-Benedict encounter Shakespeare might have applauded: “Disdain and scorn ride sparkling in her eyes.” Rayner hit a nerve with a question that might well be on Tory MPs’ minds too. The 2016 version of Johnsonism had highlighted potential “Brexit dividends”, including the ability to vary or remove VAT rates, currently at 5% on fuel bills. So why not do so? That was the subject of a long debate in cabinet too and the result remains in the balance. Surging global energy price rises are bedevilling leaders across Europe and while the energy price cap has given consumers some protection this winter, many household fuel bills will double by April – the time when national insurance rises will also kick in and May elections will look like a punishing midterm test. This impending “Krakatoa moment”, as one minister put it, means that priorities (cutting NHS waiting lists) collide with a pledge the PM gave his colleagues after the budget to avoid further tax rises to pay for more spending. These choices are also consolidating fresh alignments in the Conservative party. The north-west MP Jake Berry has just accused the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, of introducing “stealth tax” – his rises will affect well over one million taxpayers on the basic rate. The demand MPs are finding in their inboxes, replacing pre-Christmas outpourings of anger about No 10 social gatherings, is for a swift announcement on some form of help to offset the domestic hit of oil energy prices. Unusually, Johnson and Sunak share the same caution on the “simple” solution of removing VAT on energy bills. The PM is wary of a cut that would be both small (relative to the size of galloping bills) and poorly targeted, benefiting consumers with bigger homes; he would rather means-test any relief. Sunak, too, wonders whether removing a relatively small VAT component from household bills would not get the government much thanks. But more targeted relief for poorer households inevitably leaves those just above thresholds aggrieved. While the government equivocates about options, Labour can wield pressure on a subject it knows gets the electorate’s attention. More than any other present-day politician in Britain, Johnson understood a shift in relations between the public and politicians, namely that swing voters were unbothered by inconsistencies so long as they liked the bearer of the message and his eclectic mix of attitudes. The Johnson I have known since his university days has repeatedly applied a vigorous cocktail shaker of aspects of various political philosophies to his purpose. His stump speeches condemned footling bureaucracy whether in Whitehall, local councils or Brussels as constraining innovation and prosperity. In practice, during his exercise of limited but symbolic power in two terms as London mayor, very often his quest was for more money from central government for grands projets – from dockland development to infrastructure schemes like a London airport in the Thames estuary (theoretically not a terrible idea, but destined for the “never gonna happen” file). The objection to criticism of Johnson as a caricature of Tory stinginess is that he has, in fact, turned out to be rather fond of spending other people’s money. And that is precisely the pain point now, as the emergency period of Covid abates and decisions about wider spending priorities cannot be fudged or delegated. The “conversion to (higher-tax) Brownism” is now a frequent jibe from disappointed fiscal hawks, which must be an enjoyable moment for the former Labour chancellor to savour. It is true that Johnsonism remains an edifice built on a complex construction of paradoxes. A freewheeling UK that has shaken off EU constraints via the Brexit he championed ends up raising the minimum wage and the signs are that levelling up will endorse the European habit of guiding industrial policy towards investment in stressed regions. A plan to “rouse Britain in the world” as a mercantilist revival (recall Liz Truss’s valiant dining out at a glitzy private restaurant in her days as trade secretary to coddle US favours on commerce) has so far not offset a sharp fall of imports and exports relative to comparable countries. Getting stuff in and out of the UK has got harder – and often more expensive. A burst of spring inflation plus an energy squeeze sounds like the most miserable bits of the 1970s in one inglorious go. Any leader would struggle with that prospect and the challenge is of allocating resources between an NHS in need of funds or help directed to voters via tax relief or offsets to fuel bills. With a party divided between those who see looser spending as inevitable or even welcome and those who see it as a betrayal of fiscal discipline, Johnson finds himself riding two unruly horses pulling in opposite directions. These differences can be managed, but to do so the tousled helmsman will need to explain which recipe for “cake-ism” he has plumped for. If there is a philosophical core to the Johnsonian creed in power it is “unite and level up” the country. It was the centrepiece pledge of the PM’s conference speech – “the magic sauce – the ketchup of catch-up”. He might propose in the poetry of Edward Lear, but levelling up in practice means governing in the prose of local devolution, including to parts of the country controlled by political rivals. Michael Gove has been entrusted with the detail, working with Neil O’Brien, a shrewd import to the No 10 policy unit with a solid track record in exploring ways to address regional imbalances. Of the everlasting Johnson-Gove frenemy relationship, one veteran who has worked for both notes that “Boris treats Michael like the swotty boy whose essays he borrows in a hurry for exam time”. Financial relief for leaseholders threatened with punitive costs by landlords to replace risky cladding, due to be announced next week, exemplifies Gove’s role as problem solver for the PM. It’s also the first time I remember the Johnson government acting against the interests of property developers, a heavily influential lobby when Johnson was in City Hall. That exam deadline is getting closer if the resulting legislation is to have real impact before the next elections in stressed parts of the country and boost the Tories’ hopes of retaining a swathe of the trophy seats they won from Labour at the last election. Winners and losers will soon become apparent, personal affinities and aversions too. Ministers like working with Dan Jarvis, the affable Labour mayor in South Yorkshire, but find Andy Burnham in Manchester “trying because he’s on a permanent war footing”. The reality is that “rebalancing” the country will demand that ministers and mayors of different politics find ways to pursue common interests. Most likely, the delayed launch of the draft legislation in December was driven by a desire to avoid a keystone policy colliding with headlines about rule-breaking parties and probes into Johnson’s foolish handling of an expensive domestic refurbishment. Much more delay though will make levelling up look like a metaphor in search of a meaning. The redistribution of opportunity, education and affluence can help fill out the hollowness at the heart of the Johnsonism. Tick tock. • Anne McElvoy is senior editor at the Economist.Last summer, I visited a facility run by the Office for National Statistics, a place in which the raw material of history was in the final stages of being made ready for public release. The centre of operations was a large, open-plan office, one half dominated by tall metal racks on which hundreds of large boxes were stored, the other filled with rows of desks on which digital scanning equipment had been set up. There the 1921 census for England and Wales, all 38m entries, held in 30,000 bound ledgers, was being digitised and conserved. My visit took place in the final, scaled-back weeks of a colossal process that had begun three years earlier. The team from the genealogy company Findmypast and the National Archives had almost finished their work and there was a palpable sense of anticipation. Last week, the fruits of those three years’ work were released. The publication of a census is a once-in-a-decade event. After each census is taken, the millions of individual census returns are gathered together and the information within them analysed and condensed into national statistics, the metrics used by politicians to shape policy. But the census forms themselves, filled in by our ancestors, are closed to the public for 100 years. Those returns, the individual atoms of official data, have a significance and a meaning that goes far beyond national statistics. They are the intimate records of 8.5m individual households and that passage of a century, the span of three generations, means that a census bridges the gulf between history and memory. I learned this lesson during my visit to the ONS archives. The team involved in the digitisation had, very thoughtfully, laid out for me two pages from two census ledgers. They contained the entries made by two of my great-grandfathers. Listed on one was my grandfather, then a boy of 16, already apprenticed as an engineer, learning the skills that would carry on through a lifetime spent on industrial Tyneside, a life punctuated by war, booms and recessions. My grandmother, a girl of just 10 in 1921, was listed in the other ledger as living in a tiny house with her six siblings, some of whom I vaguely remember as old people, whom I was to meet more than half a century later. Some I never met as they did not survive their childhoods. Infant mortality is one of the many hard truths that rise from the pages of the 1921 census. Feeling emotions while investigating history is part of my day job, something I can usually (though not always) get through without weeping. That was not the case on this occasion. I have thought about my grandparents, and the north-east they knew as children and teenagers, more deeply than ever, having seen them recorded at the ages of 16 and 10 on the pages of the census. I have thought about what they had been through in the decades before I and their other grandchildren moved from Nigeria in the early 1970s, to live with them in the same Gateshead flat my grandfather was living in when the census form dropped through the letter box in the summer of 1921. For many families, what will be most poignant about the census of 1921 will not be the names listed in the neat columns on the left-hand side of each return form but the names that are missing from those pages – the boys and young men who appeared in the census of 1911 but who are missing 10 years later, on the other side of the rupture that was the Great War. Their names can be found on another census of sorts, inscribed on to the hundreds of thousands of Portland stone headstones and memorials to the missing that are today scattered across the former battlefields of France and Belgium, the work of what in the 1920s was known as the Imperial War Graves Commission. That census of the fallen also contains the names of many men who had been fathers to the 730,000 children listed as fatherless in 1921. While the 1921 census is a record of a moment of unique trauma, it arrives in the public domain at another fraught and disorienting point in British history, making it impossible not to draw comparisons between then and now. The nation of 1921, like that of 2022, was afflicted by a deep and socially corrosive housing crisis. Looking through their family returns many people will make the same calculation that I made when looking at the conditions in which my grandmother grew up. Divide the number of people in any household by the number of bedrooms and the housing crisis of 1921 becomes clear and manifest. Hardly the “fit country for heroes” promised by wartime leader David Lloyd George. But our age is horribly redolent of the postwar era in another way. In 1921, the nation had, just two years earlier, been through a third wave of the influenza pandemic that had begun in 1918. That pandemic claimed more lives globally than the war of 1914-18. In Britain, it sent another 228,000 people to their graves. Beyond what it tells us about housing, class, poverty and changing relations between the genders, what makes the release of the 1921 census especially significant is that for many of us it will be the last we see. In 10 years’ time, the archives will have nothing to say about life in England and Wales of 1931, as the census of that year was destroyed by fire in 1942, a mundane accident rather than an inferno caused by the Blitz. The census for Scotland survived and will be released. The census of spring of 1941, for obvious reasons, never took place. What this means is that after 2022 the next English and Welsh census to be released will be that of 1951, the year of the Festival of Britain and Winston Churchill’s return to Downing Street. Its release is due in January 2052. • David Olusoga is a historian and broadcasterUgandan satirical novelist Kakwenza Rukirabashaija, who was named International Writer of Courage by PEN last year, has been illegally detained and tortured for criticising the president and his son, his lawyer said. Gunmen came to the writer’s house on 28 December after a series of tweets about the country’s president, Yoweri Museveni, including one calling him a thief and his son and presumed successor “an incompetent pig-headed curmudgeon”. In his last tweet Rukirabashaija said he was under house arrest and the men were entering by force. He has not been able to contact his lawyers since then, and no charges have been brought. On Monday police took him with them to search the family’s country home. His wife was there and was horrified to see her husband weak, injured, limping and wearing bloodstained underwear. She said she saw wounds on his feet and he told her there were others on his buttocks, and that he had been deprived of food. “[He] told me he was starved, asked for what to eat, when I served him with a glass of milk, he retched it,” she said in an affidavit to court. His lawyer Kiiza Eron is demanding that the author is released, as under Ugandan law police can only detain people for 48 hours without charge. He has obtained a court order for Rukirabashaija’s release, but the authorities are ignoring it. “Police have admitted holding him, but they are not willing to allow us access... he has been incommunicado apart from the day of the search,” Eron said. A spokesman for the criminal investigations directorate (CID) said on Monday that the author was being held over “abusive” tweets from late December. Charles Twiine of the CID claimed an investigation was nearly complete and Rukirabashaija would be taken to court by Tuesday to face charges of “offensive communications”. But there have been no further comments from the government, and the author remains in jail without charge, despite growing international pressure. PEN America called for his urgent release. “Kakwenza Rukirabashaija is no stranger to the Ugandan authorities’ systematic suppression of dissident views, yet he has courageously continued to speak out,” said Karin Deutsch Karlekar, director of Free Expression at Risk programmes. “These rights violations demonstrate a vindictive abuse of the law and demonstrate the truth of many of the critiques Rukirabashaija himself is being targeted for making in his writing.”EU special representative for human rights Eamon Gilmore is among the diplomats who have raised their concerns. “I’m alarmed by reports of alleged torture and incommunicado detention of author Kakwenza Rukirabashaija. He remains in detention without trial, despite a court order for his unconditional release. I urge Ugandan authorities to uphold the rule of law and due process,” he said. Rukirabashaija is best known for his novel The Greedy Barbarian, which tackles corruption in a fictional country. He was arrested in April 2020 and held for seven days and tortured, then detained again in September of that year. He detailed that treatment in his latest work, Banana Republic: Where Writing Is Treasonous. “In Africa, when you write fiction, especially political fiction, such as the political allegory Animal Farm by George Orwell, the leaders will always think that one is writing about them,” Rukirabashaija wrote. “Yoweri Museveni, the president of Uganda, felt that it was him that I had written about and so he sent his hoodlums to arrest and torture me in order to hamper my creativity. The idea was to completely stop me from being creative.” Uganda is a key western ally in east Africa, and has received billions of dollars of development and security assistance from the UK and US. But Museveni faces pressure over human rights failings that have worsened in recent years, since he started to face significant political challenges. He claimed victory in elections last January, but they were marred by allegations of fraud and the harassment and illegal detention of opposition activists. Ugandan security services even held children for months in prisons, the Guardian discovered. Museveni, 77, has been in power for 36 years and has strong support in some rural areas, as well as among the military, security services and police.Australia, it has to be said, were much the better team. They had the man of the match in Khawaja, and the over of the match in that corker from Cummins, which contained two Waqar Younis inswingers and proved too hot for Buttler and Wood to handle. And yet it is England who will feel the happier in Sydney tonight. They have made the great escape, against heavy odds. They have three batters back in form, in Stokes, Bairstow and Crawley. They have Broad taking five-fors again, and even remembering how to bat. But, most importantly, they’ve regained their self-respect. They’ve given Martin Johnson’s famous line a tweak: can’t field, can bat and bowl a bit, can fight. After a mostly dismal 2021, they are unbeaten in 2022. Thanks for your company and your correspondence, and sorry not to get through it all. Do join us on Thursday for the final Test from Hobart, at the slightly more godly hour of 4am GMT. It’ll be worth setting the alarm just to see who is on England’s team sheet. “Test cricket ...” says my colleague Ali Martin on Twitter, “where bad light can see a batsman trying to bowl his team to victory against two bowlers trying to bat their team to a draw. Beautiful.” “Goodness me!” says Diana Luther Powell. “That was worth a cold, grey early Sunday morning in Yorkshire!!!” And also worth four exclamation marks? Absolutely. And here’s Pat Cummins. “I think it was just a great game of Test cricket,” he says, sportingly. “The weather forecasts are hopeless, I learnt that this week.” “Jos Buttler is going home,” Root says. “Real shame for him and the team. The way he stood up is testament to his character.” “Jonny [Bairstow] played some of the best cricket I think I’ve seen him play in an England shirt,” Root adds. “Zak Crawley played very fluently, looked very comfortable out there today.” Joe Root is talking to Adam Gilchrist, who says it’s good not to be commiserating with him for once. “The guys showed a great amount of heart and character,” Root says. “It’s been a difficult tour to now, but one thing I’m really proud of is the determination, the character, the way we stood up today and got a result out of this game.” “Dame Nelly Melba, Ned Kelly, Russell Crowe, Kylie and Errol Flynn, your boys took one helluva of a drawing.” Thank you, Chris Purcell. England finish on 270-9, with Broad 8 not out off 36 balls – superb stuff – and Anderson 0 not out off six. The players of both sides shake hands, bump fists and exchange knowing smiles. Jonny Bairstow, in a blue singlet, runs out to grab a stump. He and Broad were England’s stars here, but the Player of the Match was undoubtedly Usman Khawaja, who was robbed of the victory his twin hundreds richly deserved. One last prod, and England have secured the draw and avoided humiliation. It will feel like a win. Anderson blocks the fourth , the fifth... Mid-102nd over: England 270-9 (Broad 8, Anderson 0) Anderson blocks one ball, and another, and a third. Three balls left. 101st over: England 270-9 (Broad 8, Anderson 0) It’s Lyon to bowl his last over, and Broad to face. He pokes and prods. Dot, dot, dot, dot, dot. Broad does some gardening. And one more prod! Broad survives, so we are down to the last over. Test cricket, proper Test cricket. 100th over: England 270-9 (Broad 8, Anderson 0) So Steve Smith, who was originally picked as a bowling all-rounder, remembers how to bowl at the crucial moment.The whole over was good, with no full-tosses in sight. Two overs left. Broad and Anderson! The breakthrough! Supplied by Steve Smith, with his occasional leg-breaks. It’s a good one, and Leach can only nick it to slip. The win is on! 99th over: England 268-8 (Leach 24, Broad 8) Lyon continues and Cummins is now at short point, wearing a helmet. What an interesting captain he is turning out to be. Somehow, again, Broad survives. The tension is delicious. And the umpires are discussing the light! They seem to be saying that the quicks can’t bowl any more. Three overs to go – two of them to be bowled by either Smith or Labuschagne. 98th over: England 268-8 (Leach 24, Broad 8) After flicking that yorker from Starc a while ago, Leach now does the same to Cummins. He gets three and reaches 20. Broad, living more dangerously, somehow keeps a couple of straight balls out. Leach off-drives for four, handsomely. Four overs to go. Australia’s chances of a win is down to 27pc on CricViz, and down to about 67 in my book. 97th over: England 260-8 (Leach 17, Broad 7) It’s Lyon to Leach. Is there a spinners’ union? You wouldn’t think so from Lyon’s field, which consists of four close catchers on the off side, and four on the leg. There’s also a whole lotta sledging going on. Leach, unperturbed, pushes for three and leaves Broad with one ball to see off, which he manages. Five overs to go. Nathan Lyon is coming on. He has four wickets in the match, all left-handers. England have three batters left, all left-handers. 96th over: England 257-8 (Leach 14, Broad 7) Cummins, proactive as ever with the bowling changes, replaces Boland with himself. He peppers Broad and fells him – not by hitting him, but by bowling a sharp bouncer that Broad actually plays well, swaying so sharply that he falls over in the process. Six overs left. “As in the first innings,” says Brian Withington, “I am increasingly baffled by the run taking options during a Stuart Broad partnership. Previously he was farming the strike at Bairstow’s expense. Now he’s protecting Jack Leach and the trusty Millichamp &amp; Hall deadbat. What gives?” Who knows? 95th over: England 257-8 (Leach 14, Broad 7) Green gives way to Starc. Leach ducks a bumper and then gets behind the line to block a length ball. He takes the single on offer, showing more faith in Broad than some would. Starc goes round the wicket and dishes up a full-toss, which Broad jabs to third man. A yorker to Leach brings a classy flick for four that carries a subtext. “Dear Jos and Woody, that’s how you deal with them. Love, Leachy.” And here’s Kim Thonger. “I wonder if it’s time for England to accept that Australia is no longer the right type of opposing team,” he muses. “Perhaps a future winter tour to Kazakhstan is more appropriate? I hear the batting and bowling units there are less highly regarded, and helpful bad weather interruptions more frequent, although we should of course take nothing for granted under the current management.” 94th over: England 249-8 (Leach 7, Broad 6) Broad is coping better than some of his more illustrious mates with Boland’s stock-in-trade, the length ball lasering in on the off bail. So Boland tries a bouncer, which is the right ploy to Broad - but he copes with this to, swaying out of the line like the useful No.8 he once was. Eight overs to go. 93rd over: England 247-8 (Leach 7, Broad 4) All three of the remaining batters are left-handers, just to make life even easier for the Aussies. CricViz are giving them a 60pc chance; I make it about 99. But England get through this over from Starc, and take six runs off it as the wide open spaces beckon to them on both sides of the wicket. Nine overs to go. 92nd over: England 241-8 (Leach 4, Broad 1) So England are relying on Leach and the old firm, Broad and Anderson, whose batting has long since been pretty abysmal. The field, at last, is full-on predatory – four slips, a gully and three short legs. Broad nudges a single to join Leach on his signature score, but then Leach goes and spoils it by taking three. Ten overs left. Is it cowardly to pray for rain? The coup de grace! It’s Bairstow, it’s Boland, but it’s also Cummins, who posts a silly point and sees the ball pop up off bat and pad. That, surely, is curtains for England. 91st over: England 237-7 (Bairstow 41, Leach 1) Cummins takes himself off and sends for Cameron Green, who’s been so effective as a bowling all-rounder in this series – the rich man’s Craig White. Bairstow is watchful at first, then hooks him for four and swats to mid-on to get the single he wants. Leach, with one ball to negotiate, leaves it on length. He has survived six overs. Can he manage 11 more? 90th over: England 232-7 (Bairstow 36, Leach 1) Leach plays and misses at Boland, whereupon Marnus Labuschagne gets over-excited and says “There was a noise, there was a noise.” Cummins reviews, wrongly this time, and Australia are down to their last one. Remind you of anything? Meanwhile an email comes in from Colum Fordham. “CricViz prediction of moral victory 5%,” he says. “If Bairstow and Leach survive this onslaught and hold on for a draw, it would do so much for morale in the England camp. And amongst desperate England fans. The strength in depth of the Australia team is bewlidering. Plucking Boland from Sheffield Shield obscurity and recalling as fine a batsman as Khawaja are beyond belief. Still, Crawley’s performance and Bairstow’s renaissance offer a few crumbs of comfort.” They do – plus, for the first time, we have some fifth-day tension. Riches! 89th over: England 232-7 (Bairstow 36, Leach 1) Cummins tries some short stuff to Bairstow, which is surprising when the yorkers were going so well. One bouncer is a no-ball, and another is upper-cut for four, but it stops Bairstow nicking the strike, which may have been the point. There are 13 overs to go. 88th over: England 227-7 (Bairstow 32, Leach 1) Boland’s first ball brings a scare as Bairstow seems to give a chance to leg slip, where Starc can’t hold on. Replays suggest it was off the thigh pad anyway. Bairstow keeps calm and carries on, guiding the next ball into the covers for two, then pushing for a single when he could have had three. Leach, left with just the one delivery to face, plays and misses as Boland swings it back in from outside off. Well this is just what England need. Scott Boland! 87th over: England 224-7 (Bairstow 29, Leach 1) Cummins has a whole over at Leach, but can’t make use of it as his first ball is pushed firmly for a single. Jack Leach has the score for which he is famous. Mind you, Cummins, in this form, could trouble any batter in the world. He comes close to getting Bairstow caught at leg slip with a vicious snorter, but it flies to the boundary and is given as four leg byes. And that’s drinks, with the Aussies right back on top, thanks to one fabulous over from their captain. Not sure who’s trotting out with drinks for the batters, but I hope he’s offering them a flask of brandy. 86th over: England 218-7 (Bairstow 28, Leach 0) England’s faint hopes now rest on the shoulders of Bairstow, without whom they would not have made it to this final session. Facing Starc, he edges to second slip and is dropped by Steve Smith. It was low and not easy, but not that hard either. I’d like to think that Bairstow murmurs, “Mate, you just dropped the whitewash.” 85th over: England 218-7 (Bairstow 28, Leach 0) That was a great, great over from Cummins, leading from the front. Australia’s chance of a win on CricViz, which was down to 7 per cent, has leapt to 24. On TimViz, it’s more like 94. Another one! Another Waqar special! It’s the toe-crusher, and it would be hitting leg stump. Paul Reiffel gives it, Wood reviews but to no avail, and Australia are on the march. Noooo!! Cummins produces a Waqar Younis inswinger, jagging back late and thudding into the back pad. And he gets the review spot-on too. Off goes Buttler, who had looked good, and with him go at least half of England’s hopes of a draw. 84th over: England 218-5 (Bairstow 28, Buttler 11) A less eventful over from Starc, who joins the dots until Bairstow glances for a couple. So Australia still need five wickets, and England have 18 overs to get through. “Hello Tim.” Hello Alisdair Gould. “This is like watching a game of Jenga. Thanks for all.” It’s a pleasure, and that’s a great way of putting it. 83rd over: England 216-5 (Bairstow 26, Buttler 11) Cummins bowls a lifter outside off stump and Buttler is equal to it, pulling out of his back-foot defensive shot at the last moment. Marnus Labuschagne appeals for caught behind when the bat wasn’t even close to the ball. “He’s been on the Smarties again,” says Mark Butcher. 82nd over: England 215-5 (Bairstow 25, Buttler 11) Smith gives way to Starc, who finds some swing back into the right-hander and strikes Buttler twice. The first blow is painful, possibly into the box, but too high to be perilous. The second is on the pad and Cummins reviews, but it’s a Tim Paine of a decision – clearly going down. We’re down to the last 20 overs. It’s not quite a nail-biter yet, but it will be the minute the next wicket falls. 81st over: England 215-5 (Bairstow 25, Buttler 11) Back comes Cummins, with three slips, a gully and a short leg, when Steve Waugh would have had at least five slips. The new ball usually makes things happen, and so it proves. Buttler takes a single off the hip, Bairstow cuts handsomely for four, Bairstow glides for a single, Cummins bowls a no-ball, Buttler jabs the bat down on a low one, and finally Buttler gets a nick that doesn’t carry. It’s a little bit of everything, to quote the great song by Dawes. 80th over: England 207-5 (Bairstow 20, Buttler 9) I take it back about Smith: in his second and surely final over, he dishes up two full-tosses and a long hop. Buttler helps himself to a clip for two and a glance for three, and Bairstow cuts for two. And that’s the end of that chapter of the game, as Australia are about to take the new ball. 79th over: England 200-5 (Bairstow 18, Buttler 4) Lyon to Bairstow, who plays out a maiden. 78th over: England 200-5 (Bairstow 18, Buttler 4) Cummins takes Starc off, which may be a sign that he will take the new ball in a few minutes. Sticking to his policy of being funky with the bowling changes, he sends for Steve Smith – once a proper leg-spinner, now an occasional one. On the evidence of this first over, he may still be better than Labuschagne, because he’s more accurate. Bairstow drives him square for a single to bring up the 200. 77th over: England 199-5 (Bairstow 17, Buttler 4) Lyon, sniffing more blood, has four men round the bat for Buttler. He gets some lavish turn out of Starc’s footmarks and appeals for leg-before as Buttler plays no stroke, but it’s too high. The bounce, which so often gets Lyon a wicket, can work against him too. 76th over: England 199-5 (Bairstow 17, Buttler 4) Buttler is on a pair, out of form and nursing an injured finger, but apart from that he’s absolutely fine. He gets off the mark with no fuss, easing Starc through the covers for three. Australia need five wickets; England need to survive for 26 overs. 75th over: England 193-5 (Bairstow 15, Buttler 0) The ball before that, Stokes had gone down the track and lofted Lyon for four. Now he’s kicking himself in the dressing-room, and instead of him and Bairstow, a natural and prolific pairing, England’s hopes are resting on Bairstow and Buttler, who hardly ever seem to make runs together. That’s the big one! Lyon finds some turn outside off and Stokes goes back and dabs to slip, as giving catching practice. He departs swearing profusely, knowing he may well have allowed the floodgates to open. But what a fine innings that is from a wounded warrior. 74th over: England 189-4 (Stokes 56, Bairstow 15) It’s a double change as the mighty Boland gives way to Starc. Can he find some reverse swing? He can – he produces an inswinging yorker, which Stokes might not clip for a single if his eye wasn’t in. Reverse swing is a killer for a new batter, so the question is whether Australia can separate this pair, who have now been out there for 16 overs on top of the 29 they saw off in the first innings. “Thank you for the clear explanation,” says Jane Evans, “and so glad Boland and his heavy balls are back on deck!” Ha. There’s a reason why that expression tends to be used in the singular. 73rd over: England 187-4 (Stokes 55, Bairstow 14) Cummins, who certainly doesn’t over bowl himself, takes his sweater and brings back Lyon. His over brings a single to each batter and no dramas. The Barmy Army celebrate by singing God Save the Queen. On Twitter there’s a typically good spot from Andy Zaltzman. “Khawaja two hundreds at five; Stokes two fifties at five,” he notes. “This is only the second Test [ever] played in which the number 5 reached fifty in all four innings. The other was the Durban timeless Test in 1938-39, when Nourse &amp; Viljoen for SA, and Ames &amp; Paynter for Eng, all made 50s at 5.” 72nd over: England 185-4 (Stokes 54, Bairstow 13) Boland gets some swing with his nip-backer and appeals for LBW against Bairstow, but it’s too high and Cummins rightly declines to review. Next ball, Bairstow has a wild waft outside off and could easily get a nick. Fine margins, as always in this fiddly old game. 71st over: England 185-4 (Stokes 54, Bairstow 13) Cummins has been uncharacteristically expensive in this innings and now Stokes swings him for four, almost for six. But Cummins may not mind too much as the ball went not too far from the man at fine leg. A telling caption shows that Stokes’s batting average against Australia, 36 overall, is a tale of two mindsets – a frustrating 27 in the first innings, a formidable 50 in the second. 70th over: England 181-4 (Stokes 50, Bairstow 13) I don’t believe it: Boland has conceded two! Off one ball. Bairstow nudges to the keeper’s left and races back for the second, more judiciously than he did when he first emerged. So England have made it through 70 overs, with a minimum of 32 to go if the rain doesn’t return. On CricViz’s predictor, the draw has soared to 85 per cent. Hmmm. 69th over: England 179-4 (Stokes 50, Bairstow 11) Cummins takes Lyon off and gives himself a go. Butcher reckons that’s wrong for two reasons – Lyon has got Stokes out eight times, and he can whizz through his overs, which will hasten the second new ball. Against that, it’s the quicks who can best exploit the uneven bounce. After Bairstow glances to fine leg for a single, Stokes takes a blow on the glove. Being Stokes, he shrugs it off and punches to midwicket to reach his second fifty of the match. What a fighter he is. 68th over: England 174-4 (Stokes 46, Bairstow 10) Boland is bowling to Stokes, round the wicket. Showing no sign of discomfort, he’s as steady as ever if a little wider of off stump. He clocks up his umpteenth maiden and the only alarm comes when one ball keeps low. “Boland,” says Mark Butcher, “has been extraordinary.” Scott Boland is back and seems to be about to bowl. His figures in this series, and his Test career, are ridiculous. He has 13 for 110 off 48.1 overs at an average of 8.46. The last time I reported anything like that was when I was 11, as the scorer for my school team. And many of those wickets have been big ones. According to Will Macpherson on Twitter, Boland has now dismissed Joe Root three times since the last time he allowed him to score a run. I hope someone somewhere is writing a children’s book about him. 67th over: England 174-4 (Stokes 46, Bairstow 10) It’s Lyon to bowl the last over before tea and Bairstow sees him off, so that’s tea. England have done all right since lunch and the rain, losing only Root, to the remorseless Boland – but Australia may have lost him to injury. England have another 35 overs to get through, so they are two-thirds of the way to the draw. But both batters out there are carrying injuries, and so is Jos Buttler, and after him comes the tail. Speaking as a Pom, and therefore a pessimist, I’d still put my money on Australia as long as the skies stay dry. “Ignorant question perhaps,” says Jane Evans, “but are you able to briefly explain what bowling a ‘heavy’ ball means?” No such thing as an ignorant question! I should have been clearer. It’s an old-school term that tries to express what it feels like when a bowler keeps jarring the bat, threatening the gloves, getting the ball onto you a touch earlier than you expect it. It’s no fun to face. 66th over: England 174-4 (Stokes 46, Bairstow 10) Another friendly over from Labuschagne, which allows Bairstow to slip into double figures. 65th over: England 171-4 (Stokes 45, Bairstow 8) Ah – Lyon was just changing ends. Bowling to Bairstow, he steps up his pace, perhaps fancying an LBW. Bairstow is vigilant, playing out five dots before pushing into the on side for a single. 64th over: England 170-4 (Stokes 45, Bairstow 7) As a captain, Pat Cummins has an intriguing approach: let me bore you rigid with my field settings, but entertain you with my bowling changes. Now, just as it looks as if he’s a bowler down, he replaces Lyon with Marnus Labuschagne’s occasional leg-breaks. There’s a rank full toss, which Stokes wallops for four. 63rd over: England 164-4 (Stokes 40, Bairstow 6) if you’ve just come in and you’re up against Boland, your best hope is to play with soft hands and hope the edge doesn’t carry to slip. That’s what Bairstow does now, and he gets two as the ball bobbles away to third man and Warner makes a fine diving save. On Twitter, there’s a good question from someone called Part Time PM. “Could Boland win Player of the Series after debuting in the 3rd Test?” He certainly could. He’s only two wickets behind the leaders, Starc and Lyon (15 each). But ... he’s just gone off the field after falling, not for the first time, in his follow-through. 62nd over: England 162-4 (Stokes 40, Bairstow 4) Lyon to Stokes: yet another maiden. In the space of eight overs, Lyon and Boland have conceded only 11 runs and made any thoughts of an England win look silly. 61st over: England 162-4 (Stokes 40, Bairstow 4) Boland to Bairstow: another maiden. “Hope you’re well,” says Dave Sadler. Not bad, thanks! “I am an ambitious England fan sat in the humidity at the SCG. I was working out how many runs an over we needed to win. It was about five a few overs ago and we were ticking along. And then Boland came in (with Lyon) and we’ve barely scored a run. His pace isn’t that special, what is it that the England batters can’t deal with? It seems remarkable that Aus have pulled someone out the Sheffield Shield who then dominates in such a fashion.” It’s true, there is an element of mystery about him, as he’s mostly no more than 80-82mph. But he bowls a heavy ball, every ball – putting his burly frame into it. And he’s so rigorously accurate that the batter gets no respite. 60th over: England 162-4 (Stokes 40, Bairstow 4) Lyon, who is finding some turn, draws an inside edge from Stokes. It trickles away for two but will only encourage Lyon, who can surely smell some wickets here. 59th over: England 160-4 (Stokes 38, Bairstow 4) So it’s back to Stokes and Bairstow, the ginger ninjas who made a game of it by rescuing England from the depths of 36-4 in the first innings. And Bairstow is nearly run out! Going for a second to backward square – he’d be gone if Alex Carey had gathered the throw neatly. It’s been phenomenal stuff from Boland. He now has two for 17 from 15 overs, while Starc and Cummins, both far more tried-and-Tested, have none for 91 from 24 between them. Boland gets his man! A classic nick, reward for his relentless accuracy. And in that split second the scales tip in favour of an Australia win. 58th over: England 156-3 (Root 23, Stokes 38) Root takes a single off Lyon and Stokes, on the attack again, belts him over mid-on for four. 57th over: England 151-3 (Root 23, Stokes 34) Boland bothers Root again, beating him on the inside edge with the nip-backer and going up for a big appeal. Cummins thinks about a review before deciding against. He’s probably right, but it’s surprising as he has three reviews to play with and Root is the man most capable of batting all day here. I wonder if Cummins was dissuaded by the famous moment at Headingley in 2019 when Tim Paine burned Australia’s last review and paid the price. 56th over: England 150-3 (Root 23, Stokes 34) It’s a double change as Green gives way to Lyon. He’s on the spot to Stokes, who is wary, as well he may be after being LBW b Lyon in the first innings, and that’s a maiden. A couple of things I missed, sorry. That pull from Stokes in the 53rd over brought up the fifty partnership – it’s now 54 off 22 overs or so. And I failed to say thanks to Sam Perry, whose elegant words kept us entertained for the first half of the day, or, in my case, the whole of the night. 55th over: England 150-3 (Root 23, Stokes 34) Here is a bowling change. Cummins takes Starc off and brings back Scott Boland, the man with the fairytale Test career. He’s immaculate as usual: five testing balls to Root in the channel, followed by one that jags away and just evades the outside edge. 54th over: England 150-3 (Root 23, Stokes 34) Still no bowling change from Cummins since the resumption, which isn’t like him. Green doesn’t repay his faith in this over, repeatedly dropping too short. Root plays a measured cut for two, then a less measured one that would bring four if it wasn’t rudely interrupted by a flying save from Nathan Lyon in the gully. Root then plays a watchful pull for a single. He does play at a lot of deliveries, which makes great viewing, but it has got him into trouble on all of his trips to Australia. 53rd over: England 147-3 (Root 20, Stokes 34) Starc continues and it’s Root’s turn to get a harmless edge, a thick one off the inside of the bat as he pushes to leg. He takes a single, leaving Stokes to help himself to a straight punch for two and a pull for four. These pulls are making him grimace, but he’s still playing them. Is he dreaming of a win? 52nd over: England 140-3 (Root 19, Stokes 28) Green overpitches for once and Stokes cashes in with a crunching cover drive for four. He has batted better here, with a side strain, than he did in the first three Tests when fully fit. 51st over: England 136-3 (Root 19, Stokes 24) Starc finds a sliver of movement, squares Stokes up and draws a leading edge, but it goes down not up. Stokes replies with a rock-solid push to mid-on for a single. And England have made it to halfway in terms of overs – while, of course, reserving the right to collapse at any time. 50th over: England 135-3 (Root 19, Stokes 23) Green to Root: dot, dot, dot... maiden. And England have made it to 50 overs, with another 52 to go if the rain stays away. 49th over: England 135-3 (Root 19, Stokes 23) Stokes, facing Starc for the first time in this spell, gets a short ball and thinks he might as well pull it for six. Say what you like about England, they’ve won the battle of the sixes in this match – the score is England 8, Australia 5. As yet, though, neither side has managed a seven. 48th over: England 129-3 (Root 19, Stokes 17) At the other end, Cummins goes with Cameron Green, so it’s height at both ends. Three singles and no alarms off his over. 47th over: England 126-3 (Root 17, Stokes 16) It’s Mitchell Starc to reopen the proceedings. He’s mostly outside off stump, where many batsmen would leave him alone – but not Joe Root, who lives and dies by the glide. He lives by it now, helping himself to a four, nice and controlled. 46th over: England 126-3 (Root 17, Stokes 16) Starc begins the second session and he’s tight enough until he finally offers Root some width, and the English captain obliges with a boundary. It will be Tim de Lisle next! Thanks for having me. We’ll lose seven overs Play to recommence at 2.10pm local That’s in nine minutes Isla on England’s supposed 0% chance of winning via CricViz: Hi Sam, as a mathematician, can I say that’s possible, if there’s no decimal point and numbers behind the decimal point. That is: a probability of less than 0.5%. Though as a cricket fan I’d give England a slightly higher probability of winning - still remember Butcher’s big hundred chasing down 370-odd, and Crawley seems to be in the mood. Cheers, Isla From Gavin: “The ground PA is now playing “I can see clearly now, the rain has gone”. So I think we’ll be playing again soon.” Forecast looking good for the next few hours gif evidence Covers are coming off! I’ll comb around for information about resumption of play, and any overs lost... Possibly getting a little better at the SCG But the big covers are still on... From James: “Hi Pez, as this match is heading towards a draw, obliterating my excitement about the continuing march towards 5-0, I’ve just had a random thought hit me in the early stages of a rain delay. Why, when recounting the score of a series, do we omit the draws from the results? Cricket seems unique among the sports in saying that only a game won by either teams is a ‘result.’ If a draw happened, was it not the result of the game, did the game never happen, is it to be technically legally forgotten? If this match were a draw, couldn’t the series be rightfully recorded as being at 3-0-1? I think it’s purely an aesthetic thing because upon writing that out it looks yuck.” I think your suspicion is correct, James. It looks yuck. And it’s otherwise implicit, provided one knows how many Tests were in the series. On top of that, would we need to delineate between rain-affected draws, abandoned matches, and plain draws? Then again, maybe cricket needs more numbers? There’s been a “seven” over at NZ v Bangladesh Perfect Brad Haddin on Alex Carey From Steve Gannon at 1.20pm, via email: “1:20 pm. It’s the edge of a shower with clear radar from behind. Shouldn’t be long. Steve.” Hope you’re right, Steve! Covers on ... On Alex Carey In fact, “so dark the groundsmen or already laying out the hessian,” says Adam Collins Weather looking ominous An even session where both sides will feel in with a shout for their desired result. We’ve seen a little bit of variable bounce, but not too much so as to make life unmanageable for the visitors. After the early loss of Hameed, soon followed by Malan, we were treated to some of the most glorious batting from Zak Crawley, who truly looked world beating as he carved Cummins, Starc, Boland and co to all parts. At one point he had 77 from 91 runs, before Cameron Green - it is fair to say - outsmarted him with a yorker. To that point Crawley had been imperious on both front and back foot, but particularly the latter. Root and Stokes have since steadied proceedings, looking solid enough against Australia’s rotating quintet. Mitchell Starc has been held back, while the others have maintained their lines and lengths, anticipating some misbehaviour in the pitch. The ghosts of India last year are still there, most evident when Alex Carey recorded another very take-able dropped chance, which will rightly provoke conversation about his keeping credentials. Three wickets is a decent return for most sessions of cricket, but there is plenty of hope for England. This one looks like it’s going deep. Strap in (or, enjoy it however you like, really). 45th over: England 122-3 (Root 13, Stokes 16) Root pushes the second into the gap on the off-side, so Stokes will be left to see it out. Lyon gets one to slide in to Stokes’ pads, but he gets enough bat on it to be safe. There’s a hold up in play while Lyon brings deep square in. Stokes charges(!) but Lyon drags down and Stokes defends. One to go. It’s the straight one, Stokes handles it. Lyon and Root laugh. Lunch! 44th over: England 121-3 (Root 12, Stokes 16) Root is struck again on the inside thigh. Only just! Root falls forward a little and walks away, talking to himself, crouching over (as you do). Cummins really knows how to find Root’s nether areas. The next looks like Root has almost chopped on, but it’s stuck between his legs. Root then misses out on tickling one fine - Cummins is very straight to him. I wonder if the wide one will come. It doesn’t, it’s a fraction short, and Root helps a pull shot down to deep backward square for one. It’s a no-ball too. Cummins bounces Stokes, Stokes pulls it hard, and Boland misfields it into the boundary. He’s done that a good two or three times. Fifth ball, Stokes clips it to Harris at short leg but Harris drops it! It was straight to him - hit firmly enough - but in, then out. He tried to clutch it into the breadbasket, wrapping his arms and legs around it, but it found its way out. One more ‘till lunch. Damian: “Morning. I agree with Mr. Parker about Mr. Starbuck’s coffee, but I’d like to let him know that I always found that the fur round his hood was a poor design choice when it got really damp.Yours etc, Damian” 44th over: England 115-3 (Root 11, Stokes 12) Lyon v Stokes. There are two dots, so something has to change, doesn’t it? No. Stokes defends again. Lyon will want to keep him here. So he’s quick and flat, and Stokes defends. This is where Stokes tries something different. Lyon tosses up, and I am wrong, Stokes defends. Was a half-volley. Stokes then misses out on a short and wide one. A maiden. Quick over. 43rd over: England 115-3 (Root 11, Stokes 12) Root just evades an LBW, squeezing the bottom corner of his bat onto one that would’ve been plumb otherwise. Cummins is picking things up here, 12 minutes to lunch. It’s Stokes now, and he’s leaving before receiving a leg bye to deep square. Root then pulls Cummins handsomely, sublimely, over backward square for four. He digs out the last. 42nd over: England 109-3 (Root 6, Stokes 12) Stokes won’t stay in one spot, it’s cat and mouse etc. He comes down the wicket and wristily flicks it past Lyon for two. He’s down again but Lyon sees it, dragging it down, and Stokes has to lunge to defend. Good from Stokes - he doesn’t want Lyon to settle. From Thomas Bancroft: I am cricket and whisky loving jazz musician who has played a gig at the Bunnahabhain Distillery in the Islay Jazz Festival. It is pronounced Boon-a-Haar-ven with the last 2 syllables rhyming with the name Marvin. After a gig a few of us were taken up to the distillery managers office and given a nip of 40 year old special cask Bunnahabhain. Jazz, test cricket, and single malt - all similar engaging pursuits. Best, Tom Bancroft (he left his number but I have deleted it) 41st over: England 107-3 (Root 6, Stokes 10) Now to Cummins v Root, there’s one that takes the pad down the leg side, Carey falls to his left to collect it, but none of it is real - just a flick of the pad. We’re now seeing vistas of a brooding Sydney sky - it looks stormy. The Penrith boy shoots for the yorker but Root is there, just looking a little stuck at the crease. A single would be handy. Always strange when Root is kept quiet. But he is here, and it’s a maiden. 40th over: England 107-3 (Root 6, Stokes 10) Lyon is bowling to Stokes, and that’s what he’d want. Actually, who am I to know what Lyon would want? It’s a meditation in flight versus forward defence. Stokes then mixes it up and goes back to the same ball. So far, so safe. Then Lyon goes quicker, flatter, straighter - Stokes is onto it. That’s the killer ball. Lyon starts the dance again but Stokes is having none of it - he’s across and sweeping him over square leg for four. A good waltz. 39th over: England 103-3 (Root 6, Stokes 6) Cummins is into the attack now. His first comes back a fraction and Root inside edges onto his pad. “Ohh!” exclaim the Australians. Root is more watchful on the next, his head staying down through the stroke that little bit longer. Cummins challenges fourth stump again. Root is half-in, half-out, he open faces it to gully. Root corrects again. Same line, but straighter in defence down the ground. I like this: we had Green v Crawley earlier on the undercard, now Cummins v Root as the headliner. Cummins gets another to seam in and take Root’s inside thigh. Hope his has a pad there - I’m sure he does. Cummins making it talk. 38th over: England 103-3 (Root 6, Stokes 6) Two close-in for Root now, facing Lyon. Root works him to deep mid-wicket. One now close-in for Stokes. Lyon is quick and flat. Stokes can’t find a gap. 37th over: England 102-3 (Root 5, Stokes 6) It’s Green - second slip (Smith) moves to leg gully. They want to bowl straight. Green is around the wicket, angling in at Stokes’ off stump. Stokes then squeezes one off the inside edge just past the grasp of Harris at short leg. He gets two. Stokes challenged by Green here. 36th over: England 100-3 (Root 5, Stokes 4) Lyon’s back on. He’s straight on the money. Root is so far happy to sit back, though one expects he’ll use his feet soon. I’m still sad Crawley is out. Lyon’s giving it air here, Root is not accepting. It goes like that for the back half of the over. From Alex Gartland: Hi Sam, Can’t help but think that Zak Crawley has bought himself a few more games he maybe doesn’t deserve due to that knock. Is it worth persisting with someone who looks fantastic once every 5-10 innings but consistently fails to make scores? It might be a James Vince situation all over again. Cheers Who else should have his spot? The young man is good enough, his competitors are less so. He needs to remain now. That innings was multiple standard deviations higher than anything any rival for his spot has been able to muster. 35th over: England 100-3 (Root 5, Stokes 4) Green almost takes Stokes’ off stump in much the same way he did in the first innings when the bail failed to move. Stokes replies by straight driving him for four - he is unmoved after the stroke. Always looks better that way. He defends the next and takes one hand off the bat - he looks pained. From johnstarbuck: Sam, I do understand the point about the so-called coffee shops ‘Starbucks’’ and their feeble merchandise but would point out that they have nothing to do with my family. It was a significantly weak appropriation of the character Mr Starbuck, First Mate of the Peaquod in ‘Moby-Dick’ (an American classic) who was something of a Cassandra in that he forecast doom and gloom and was proven right even though no-one believed him. The number of times I’ve had to point this out .... John Starbuck PS Pity about Crawley but well done for having a go. Thank you johnstarbuck 34th over: England 96-3 (Root 5, Stokes 0) Boland looks dangerous again. He’s back of a length and Root is watchful. Sorry, but that was a remarkable innings from Crawley - completely at odds with the rhythm of the innings. There’s no hundred for him but it deeply underscored his ability. Green v Crawley: we’ll probably see that one again. A maiden for Boland, by the way. 33rd over: England 96-3 (Root 5, Stokes 0) Root moves off a pair courtesy of a leg stump half-volley from Green. Nicely clipped, it’s finer than fine leg. Get Root off strike though, I want to watch Crawley. Thank you, Joe - have one to square leg. Can you believe it? He gets a short and wide delivery, but Crawley finds Lyon at point. Is that his first mistake? Possibly, because he makes another, Green yorking him gloriously to remove him. Told you they needed to pitch it up! Yorker, it gets under his bat, and he’s LBW! Crawley reviews extremely unsuccessfully, it’s as out as it gets. That was a sensational knock from Crawley, well played young man. Then again, he’s probably thrown away a double tonne. 32nd over: England 91-2 (Crawley 77, Root 0) Why do they keep bowling on his hip? Who cares? Another flicked boundary for Crawley, this time from Boland’s bowling. I’d call that one “caressed”. He’s 77 from 91 runs. So Australia has a short leg and short square leg. Why would you keep bowling there? Starve him! I’m a guy on the computer. 31st over: England 87-2 (Crawley 73, Root 0) Green is retained, so Lyon’s been removed after a wicket. Interesting. Crawley - you guessed it - whips him through mid wicket for four. He then gets a single (“good cricket!”) and Root sees off the rest. 30th over: England 82-2 (Crawley 68, Root 0) Boland returns, so Lyon is removed! Is Root ... Boland’s bunny? Or is Lyon changing ends? The burly Victorian somehow keeps Crawley at bay for four balls - Crawley is looking to score, almost too much? Or just the right amount? Lots of questions this post. But you can’t keep a form bat down - Crawley takes a quick single to Lyon at mid on. It looks close, but it’s not. From Benjamin Parker: Hi Sam, I believe the Dr Purve “joke” was referring to the good doctor’s first name being Meghan like the oft trolled Ms Markel. I personally found Mr Starbuck’s joke weak and overall disappointing, rather like his coffees :-) Yours in nomenative antagonism, Benjamin Parker Still don’t know what’s going on but enjoying it anyway. 29th over: England 81-2 (Crawley 67, Root 0) Cameron Green is introduced. It’s tall boy on tall boy (what?). Three balls in and Green learns not to bowl short to this guy, he crunches him brutally in front of square for four, another pull short. Okay, says Green, how about short and wide outside off? Sure - another three. Green goes fifth stump to Root and he’s hanging his bat at it out to point, no run. Another short one and Root can’t match Crawley for the pull shot - he misses. 28th over: England 72-2 (Crawley 60, Root 0) Malan happy to prop on the front foot, even with three catchers, and play Lyon from there. He finds a single behind square. Crawley gets on strike, and straight off - dabbing one behind point. Lyon then gets Malan! Malan stays back and Lyon gets one to go straight through and bowls him! He’d been comfortable propping on the front foot - but this one was faster, flatter, and got through him. That’s drinks. 27th over: England 72-1 (Crawley 59, Malan 3) The early lift and carry appears to have subsided, with Carey taking many around his knees now. This is going to be a grind for the hosts. Deliveries two, three and four are left. And the fifth is clipped for four. Easy pickings for Crawley. A leg stump half-volley from Starc. He chops the final one in to the ground and over Green’s head for four. No easy feat! Crawley unstoppable. From George: Hi Sam Freelance, Just by the side, if anyone could tell me how to pronounce “bunnahabhain”, that would be of use. I remain, etc, George Anyone? 26th over: England 64-1 (Crawley 51, Malan 3) Lyon and Malan arm-wrestle an over that ends even - Malan is solid, and Lyon acquires a maiden. Andrew Jolly says: “It’s 11am and I don’t have the taste of English blood in my mouth. I don’t like it and it makes me feel uneasy.” Ben Mimmack says: “Hi Sam, after four tough warm up matches, England look like they’re adjusting nicely to Australian conditions. Now, when do the test matches start? What? Oh...” 25th over: England 64-1 (Crawley 51, Malan 3) Crawley’s off strike straight away as Starc persists with that straight line that Crawley enjoys. Malan, too, times a push into cover nicely and gets a run. Crawley crunches an on drive that’s stopped. Man, he looks like he’s playing a different game here. I realise it looks like I’m putting the “mozz” on him - I’m really not, he just looks imperious at present. An email that I don’t understand but sounds funny: “Dear Doctor Perve, you need to worry more about your first name when it comes to active trolls. John Starbuck” 24th over: England 62-1 (Crawley 50, Malan 2) Enter Nathan Lyon, who may well bowl unchanged for the rest of the game. He’s got the speed dealers on, two men close-in catching, and two men on the boundary. Crawley punches the first for one and there’s Crawley’s fifty, an excellent innings. This is no doubt the start of something for the young man. It’s his fifth Test fifty - there will be many more. How far can he go here? He looks completely untroubled. Malan is meanwhile defending safely enough. 23rd over: England 61-1 (Crawley 49, Malan 2) Starc replaces Cummins - great win for Crawley there, who put pressure on Australia’s skipper and is rewarded for it. CricViz is saying England are 0% chance to win, a provocative number! That simply defies mathematics, doesn’t it? Meanwhile, Malan works one to the onside for one. Starc then makes Cummins’ mistake and bowls short to Crawley. It’s easily swivel-pulled for four. Don’t bowl on this bloke’s hip. Starc is too straight again and Crawley gets one to leg. Malan manages the remainder. Tom writes in: “Hi Sam, there’s an unsettling, tense badinage between Geoff Lawson and David Gower. There’s definite niggle. Regards, Tom, Drumcondra Library” Tell me more! 22nd over: England 55-1 (Crawley 44, Malan 1) Boland isn’t interested in the short stuff, he’s full to Malan and he’s beating him with a beautiful away swinger (to the left-hander). Some thought of a review, but declined, correctly. Malan then sort of walks at Boland’s next one - to break up his length? - and it strikes his pad, making him look a little silly. Malan was outside the line. The next ball then jumps at Malan and he rides it around the corner - it hit him on the glove and he didn’t know a lot about it. Actually that’s not fair, he hit it down. Boland is on serious song here. The good word is in! 21st over: England 54-1 (Crawley 44, Malan 0) Australia building some pressure but it’s not affecting Crawley. Again he pumps Cummins for four, pulling him to deep backward square for four. It raced to Boland at the boundary, he went with one hand but it burst through. Cummins is back on the money for the next couple. Just one slip now. Crawley pulls Cummins again! Wow. These are the strokes of a confident player. Four runs. This one was in front of the wicket. You don’t see Cummins taken down like this. 20th over: England 46-1 (Crawley 36, Malan 0) So Boland picks up Hameed, which gives him four balls at Dawid Malan. He’s around the wicket, and Malan handles him. He’s taken 12 wickets for the series, and Adam Collins on the radio tells us that he’s drawn level with Pat Cummins on that front. Wow. Carey atones! Didn’t have to move as far but it’s low, to the right, and Carey snaffles it with both hands. Hameed was stuck on the crease, Boland nips one away and it gets the edge. Carey will be relieved, to say the least. 19th over: England 46-0 (Hameed 9, Crawley 36) Crawley flicks Cummins off his hip from the first ball confidently for four. Boland can’t get there. Later on Cummins gets one to kick and Crawley gets his hands out of the way. He responds by clipping Cummins strongly through midwicket for four. He leaves the next. Good over for Crawley, good over for England. 18th over: England 38-0 (Hameed 9, Crawley 28) One from Boland’s over here. He’s finding some bounce, but the defending is assured. Crawley flicks one to mid wicket to keep it ticking over. We’re seeing replays of Carey’s drop. Some suggestion it might be Warner’s? I don’t think so. The angle of Cummins’ delivery means Carey’s bodyweight is slanted the other way, but he made the ground easily enough. Two hands? Possibly came too quickly. His feet looked heavy. 17th over: England 37-0 (Hameed 9, Crawley 27) Cummins thinks he’s taken Crawley’s edge through to Carey, but I don’t think he’s got any friends. Cummins is keen, but no one else seems to be. He opts for everyone else’s view and rejects the review. Snicko confirms his judgment to be correct. Great ball nonetheless. Crawley’s on the front foot thereafter, and he scampers through for one behind point. Green has a shy but Hameed is home comfortably. Cummins then squares Hameed up and beats him on the outside. It angles in and nips away. Next one takes the edge and Carey spills it! He was diving away to the right, he went with one hand, he made enough ground, and if anything went too far. That hurts, big time. 16th over: England 36-0 (Hameed 9, Crawley 26) The SEN Radio team are talking about Australia’s ghosts from the India fixture at the SCG last year. The short ball approach, no wickets in the final session. Katich says “you have to go at the stumps”. Boland is at the stumps here, but Hameed is happy defending and leaving on the front foot. 15th over: England 36-0 (Hameed 9, Crawley 26) Some balls are jumping, others are dying. Some are quickening, others are slowing. But England looks assured regardless. Cummins appears to be going wide, wide, wide, then straightening. Crawley is onto it and handling it calmly. Australia’s captain finds an off stump line at the end and Crawley slightly errs in attempting to turn it to the onside, with a hint of a leading edge. Otherwise, well played. 14th over: England 36-0 (Hameed 9, Crawley 26) Boland gets the first three at Crawley before the opener finds a single to fine leg, then Hameed defends the final three confidently. Judging from this tweet on my timeline, Australia has a few final day demons themselves... 13th over: England 35-0 (Hameed 9, Crawley 25) Crawley works Cummins’ first around the corner for one, a leg bye. A conventional field for Australia. Two slips, a gully, a forward short leg. There’s a short mid wicket, all of which points to some variable bounce. Cummins is straight to Crawley again and he works him for three. His next to Hameed seams back in a fair way, but it’s comfortably left. Hameed plays and misses at the next, and Carey collects it on the bounce. That ball died a quick death. 12th over: England 30-0 (Hameed 8, Crawley 22) Boland kicks things off and there’s a bat-pad appeal straight away, but it’s non-committal. Hameed leaves the next and Carey takes it in front of his face. Continuing the theme, Boland gets another to jump as Hameed comes forward and it raps him on the gloves and chest. The next is much the same, but Hameed deals with it. Good signs for Boland. A maiden. The players are heading out onto the field. It’s overcast, there’s a smattering of people, The Temper Trap’s “Sweet Disposition” is playing for the 4000th time this summer, and we’re nearly there. Australia needs 10 wickets. England needs 358 runs. Andrew Jolly on Khawaja: “I know that Harris scores loads of runs in the Sheffield Shield, Burns and Sibley are the dominant openers in the county championship and still average in the mid 20s after however many chances in tests. I’d probably have given Harris another go for Hobart if Khawaja hadn’t done what he’d done, but to me its an absolute no brainer. To keep him in the side would be a very English move.” That settles it, he must be picked! Andrew Benton with a prediction: “Whatever the result, England need to look as though they’ve been learning. It’s all a learning process, after all. So I predict no whack and thwack batting, nothing risky at all in fact, just a desperate attempt to stave off defeat and bat out the day. But my predictions are usually wrong, and they’ll be giving away those wickets all over the place. They’ll need the rain to save them.” From Kim Thonger: “Top of the time of day there to you Sam. Intrigued by your use of just first names when posting emails. Would Don Bradman, emailing you, be just Don? How would we compare his opinion with, say, that of Donald Duck? The former would, in the cricketing world at least, carry more weight? Ian Botham would, I think, not wish to be confused with Ian McKellen, and vice-versa. No names no pack-drill has its place, but is that place on the OBO? Asking for a friend called Isaac.” Hi Kim Thonger! Look, most people are merely signing off with their first name and I’m taking their lead. To those whose surnames I’ve omitted against their wishes, I apologise! Please email me directly with your full names and I will publish them one by one, line by line. Here’s Matthew via email on Khawaja: I think the Aussie selectors are hoping someone tests positive for COVID in the next week or so (not implausible given the current situation), so they can slot Khawaja in the vacant slot and save a load of grief. This is a very sensible analysis and likely scenario Katich on Khawaja: “I thought the case should have been closed for him to stay in the team for Hobart after the first innings, let alone a second innings. I think he’d done enough in that first innings given the way that he compiled the hundred and then to back it up yesterday, he was on autopilot. We know he’s done the aviation degree but he was certainly batting on autopilot yesterday. It was muscle memory. He was carving the ball through covers, extra point, you name it, he hit it there. He’s just in imperious form. There’s no way they can leave him out for Hobart. No way.” Simon Katich on SEN Radio this morning In the meantime we have an email from Finbar: “Good evening Sam, just wondered if there could be any other approach for England today other than guns blazing? Seems obvious doesn’t it? Nothing to lose and all that.” Graham Thorpe made comments last night setting sights on a draw, so while the suggestion titillates, I think we’re in for a day of dogged defence. Can England do it? I actually think they can. The wicket appears to improve as the day goes on, and Australia do historically struggle to remove the opposition once set. The alternative is they lose a few early and the rest go in a hurry. Khawaja: what to do now? He’s 35 and actualised. His rivals are ... not that. Geoff Lemon explores it all, here. For the sake of argument, I’d love to hear views - especially from the UK - on whether or not Khawaja should continue in the side. My view is that he should. While Australian teams deeply value incumbency when they’re winning, they’re also allowed to improve. Travis Head is a lock, so Marcus Harris looks precarious. So far missing from the conversation is Will Pucovski, who has his eye on the Pakistan tour. What do you think? Is there a case for retaining Harris? Hello all. Here we go: a fifth day, a docile-enough pitch, 10 wickets in play, and 98 overs to decide whether a whitewash is on or not. At 30-0, England have reason to believe they can – to use footballing parlance – “get something” from the Test. Though it came from an admittedly low base, last night Crawley and Hameed looked as assured as they have all series, and will be keen to continue on in the day’s opening exchanges. As the day wears on and wickets inevitably fall, the visitors, of course, will be relying on a number of guys carrying injury. Each of Stokes, Bairstow and Butler are walking wounded but are expected to bat. It’s a day for close-in fields, strange plans, and digging in. The weather, as ever, is dubious. The morning is meant to be OK, but it’s meant to get worse as the day goes on. Then again, they’ve said that for the last three days and rain has barely intervened. Hit me at sam.perry.freelance@theguardian.com or on Twitter: @sjjperry.More and more people around the world are suffering because their immune systems can no longer tell the difference between healthy cells and invading micro-organisms. Disease defences that once protected them are instead attacking their tissue and organs. Major international research efforts are being made to fight this trend – including an initiative at London’s Francis Crick Institute, where two world experts, James Lee and Carola Vinuesa, have set up separate research groups to help pinpoint the precise causes of autoimmune disease, as these conditions are known. “Numbers of autoimmune cases began to increase about 40 years ago in the west,” Lee told the Observer. “However, we are now seeing some emerge in countries that never had such diseases before. For example, the biggest recent increase in inflammatory bowel disease cases has been in the Middle East and east Asia. Before that they had hardly seen the disease.” Autoimmune diseases range from type 1 diabetes to rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease and multiple sclerosis. In each case, the immune system gets its wires crossed and turns on healthy tissue instead of infectious agents. In the UK alone, at least 4 million people have developed such conditions, with some individuals suffering more than one. Internationally, it is now estimated that cases of autoimmune diseases are rising by between 3% and 9% a year. Most scientists believe environmental factors play a key role in this rise. “Human genetics hasn’t altered over the past few decades,” said Lee, who was previously based at Cambridge University. “So something must be changing in the outside world in a way that is increasing our predisposition to autoimmune disease.” This idea was backed by Vinuesa, who was previously based at the Australian National University. She pointed to changes in diet that were occurring as more and more countries adopted western-style diets and people bought more fast food. “Fast-food diets lack certain important ingredients, such as fibre, and evidence suggests this alteration affects a person’s microbiome – the collection of micro-organisms that we have in our gut and which play a key role in controlling various bodily functions,” Vinuesa said. “These changes in our microbiomes are then triggering autoimmune diseases, of which more than 100 types have now been discovered.” Both scientists stressed that individual susceptibilities were involved in contracting such illnesses, ailments that also include celiac disease as well as lupus, which triggers inflammation and swelling and can cause damage to various organs, including the heart. “If you don’t have a certain genetic susceptibility, you won’t necessarily get an autoimmune disease, no matter how many Big Macs you eat,” said Vinuesa. “There is not a lot we can do to halt the global spread of fast-food franchises. So instead, we are trying to understand the fundamental genetic mechanisms that underpin autoimmune diseases and make some people susceptible but others not. We want to tackle the issue at that level.” This task is possible thanks to the development of techniques that now allow scientists to pinpoint tiny DNA differences among large numbers of individuals. In this way, it is possible to identify common genetic patterns among those suffering from an autoimmune disease. “Until very recently, we just didn’t have the tools to do that, but now we have this incredible power to sequence DNA on a large scale and that has changed everything,” said Lee. “When I started doing research, we knew about half a dozen DNA variants that were involved in triggering inflammatory bowel disease. Now we know of more than 250.” Such work lies at the core of Lee and Vinuesa’s efforts, which aim to find out how these different genetic pathways operate and unravel the many different types of disease doctors are now looking at. “If you look at some autoimmune diseases – for example, lupus – it has become clear recently there are many different versions of them, that may be caused by different genetic pathways,” said Vinuesa. “And that has a consequence when you are trying to find the right treatment. “We have lots of potentially useful new therapies that are being developed all the time, but we don’t know which patients to give them to, because we now realise we don’t know exactly which version of the disease they have. And that is now a key goal for autoimmune research. We have to learn how to group and stratify patients so we can give them the right therapy.” Lee also stressed that surging cases of autoimmune diseases across the world meant new treatments and drugs were now urgently needed more than ever before. “At present, there are no cures for autoimmune diseases, which usually develop in young people – while they are trying to complete their education, get their first job and have families,” he said. “That means growing numbers of people face surgery or will have to have regular injections for the rest of their lives. It can be grim for patients and a massive strain on health services. Hence the urgent need to find new, effective treatments.”When the siege of Sarajevo began in 1992, Ratko Mladić’s Bosnian Serb army took up positions in the mountains surrounding the city. For his headquarters, Mladić chose Hotel Igman, a breathtaking piece of brutalist architecture that was the jewel of the 1984 Winter Olympics. The hotel was part of the Olympic village, a base for ski jumpers and alpine skiers, but Mladić – now serving a life sentence for genocide and crimes against humanity – used it to oversee the shelling of the city and his enemies used it as a prison and execution site. During the four years of the war, the hotel was blasted and bombed, and since the fighting stopped it has lain derelict, ignored by everyone except graffiti artists and the occasional tourist. Now, as the 30th anniversary of the siege approaches, the hotel is set to be restored to its former Olympic glory. Hotel Igman was sold last week, at the 13th attempt, by the Sarajevo authorities. The new owners, who include former Bosnia-Herzegovina international footballer Emir Granov, paid 5.1m Bosnian marks (£2.2m). Granov told local media that they will spend a further £6m on renovations, in the hope that tourists choose Sarajevo as a new destination. One of Granov’s first decisions will be to consider a proposal from a rival bidder, Dimitri Hegemann, the owner of Berlin’s Tresor nightclub, to include a music venue in the refurbishment. “I wanted to turn it into a cultural lighthouse,” Hegemann said. “It should be a place where people can overcome ethnic differences – it is a special place with a special power. But I don’t have to own it.” The hotel had 162 rooms and a cinema that Hegemann believes would make a perfect venue, and create the same conditions as clubs such as Berlin’s Tresor and Berghain, which were created after the fall of the Berlin Wall and provided a place for young people from West Germany to mix with their eastern bloc counterparts. Such a club would bring tourists to Sarajevo, Hegemann believes, and he has interest from international DJs such as Jeff Mills and Mark Reeder to create an outdoor festival this summer among the ruins of the ski jumps in the hillside forests. “The problem is that the young creative people from the region are emigrating. They feel they have no future there and no space to test themselves and experiment,” said Hegemann. Sarajevo has not prospered since the Dayton peace accords ended the war in 1995, and there are few cultural landmarks left. The Skenderija centre, where Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean won gold in the figure skating for Great Britain, was renovated in 1999 after sustaining light damage during the war and includes a concert venue, but there is now talk of selling it. About half a million people are estimated to have left Bosnia-Herzegovina in the past six years, and a survey by the United Nations in November found that nearly half of the country’s under 30s are considering emigrating. Christian Schmidt, the UN high representative for Bosnia-Herzegovina, warned last year that the country was in danger of breaking apart, with the Bosnian Serb leader Milorad Dodik threatening to create a new army. The US imposed sanctions on Dodik last week, and the EU has 700 soldiers from its Eufor peacekeeping force stationed in the country. Edin Forto, the prime minister of the Sarajevo canton, one of the country’s 10 regions, is desperate to bring investment to revive the city’s fortunes. Granov and his backers opened another hotel on Mount Igman in 2020, and Forto is pleased the Igman hotel has finally been sold to a decent investor. But he believes Hegemann’s plans are important for Sarajevo. “We aren’t going to be the new Berlin but we can be the old Sarajevo, because it was a cultural hub in the 80s,” he said. “Everyone wanted to come here and work here and create theatre, music, the film industry. There was a buzz. Why can’t we just recreate this energy?” Sarajevo used to be the centre of rock and pop music, but that has ebbed away, he said. “It seems like people in the villages won the [culture] war. Urban culture is dying. Now the most popular thing here is turbo-folk. I think it’s disgusting. We were the hub of urban popular culture and now we’re the hub of nothing. Now we import culture from Serbia and not the best kind. I don’t want to sound pessimistic – I’m in politics to change things. But we need allies.” • This article was amended on 14 January 2022. An earlier version quoted Forto saying: “It seems like people in the villages won the war”. To clarify: Forto was talking specifically about cultural issues and not about the 1992-1995 war.My mother, Nancy, is a scientist. The first person in her family to go to university, she was awarded a doctorate in organic chemistry in 1960. A chemistry teacher for 20 years, she enabled scores of young women to enter careers in science and medicine. She learned Russian for the fun of it and, when she retired to north Wales almost 30 years ago to help with our twin babies, she learned Welsh to a level of fluency that enabled her to act as secretary for a local Welsh-language social club. She is a gardener, a cat lover and is fond of owls. She is a hill-walker. She is a practising Christian. She is a lover of opera. She is a maker of marmalade. And she is a mother, grandmother and godmother. As I write this, it feels as though I am drafting her obituary. My mother is alive, but we lost the person I’ve tried to describe in a catastrophic event just over a year ago. Nancy had a stroke sometime between Christmas Eve and Christmas Day at the close of 2020. Overnight, she lost her autonomy and agency over her own life. In November, she’d had a fall and knocked her head and the anti-stroke medication resulted in bleeding on her brain. She was discharged from hospital back to her local authority residential home at short notice and without a care needs assessment. It immediately became apparent that her behaviour had changed: she was constantly agitated, hardly slept. Just before Christmas she fell again and broke her hip. Doctors advised a hip replacement and she is recuperating in another community hospital, Ysbyty Bryn Beryl. She now has a diagnosis of dementia. I do not know whether we will be able to find a suitable placement for Nancy in the county. These are the bald facts. How it has affected us as a family is less easy to put in words, but this is, simply, the saddest and most challenging thing that my daughters and I have ever endured. My mother, who never claimed a penny of welfare before her state pension, who believed in public duty and participated in every community in which she lived, suddenly needed the support of health and care services in an emergency. Many of the key workers with whom we interacted over the last 12 months were extraordinary. We have been beyond lucky to have dealt with a number of nurses, doctors and care workers who had the confidence and humanity to keep to the spirit and not the letter of official edicts. Even so, I touched my mother’s hand only once during the critical six weeks after her first stroke. There were no hugs. Health authority infection policy vetoed family bonds of love as a health hazard to be minimised. I am no Covid-denier. We put in place measures such as lockdowns and visiting restrictions at hospitals and care homes because they were the best we could do with what we knew back in 2020. We had no Covid tests at the onset. The development of effective vaccines happened at pace, but they didn’t become available until early 2021. But we must continue to learn: treating the elderly and people with dementia as units of flesh and bone by meeting the barest minimum of their Maslow’s hierarchy of needs is wrong. We are social animals: take away our social support and we fail to thrive. Denying family contact causes immediate welfare harm to patients and will cause longer term harm to family members. I will live for the rest of my life with the guilt that I let my mother down at the time when she needed me most. Wales has a respectable policy text in place with our Dementia Action Plan for Wales 2018–2022. But there is a yawning chasm between what it describes and the reality of what is happening in Wales’s hospitals and care homes. Northern Ireland, Scotland and England have slowly and patchily accepted the need for essential care givers or care partners, whereby ensuring that people living with dementia and other vulnerabilities in social care can nominate someone who will continue to visit in a meaningful way, keeping to the same infection control measures as a member of staff. Wales finally acknowledged the concept of care partners in August 2021. Nonetheless, there remain many care homes where this is ignored, and where even the most minimal visits can be denied. While we all know that the human rights of people with dementia in residential homes were disproportionately disrupted across the UK, it is to be feared that the human rights of people with dementia in Welsh residential homes fared worst of all. They have lacked public advocacy. This situation must be investigated as part of a Wales-specific Covid inquiry and lessons learned. People living with dementia are progressing through stages of a terminal illness. Isolation, separation, disruption of relationships and routines have an irreversible impact on wellbeing, and hasten deterioration and death. The most recent weekly statistics show that 144 people died in Welsh care homes. Only three died with Covid as a contributory factor. Dementia is the greatest cause of death among women in the UK and the second greatest for men. Given that up to 70% of care residents are living with dementia, it is likely to have been a factor in the deaths of the majority of those 144 people. The human rights of disabled, sick and elderly people are not optional extras to be disregarded when health and social care are under pressure. If the present health and social policy remains unchallenged and under-scrutinised in Wales (and elsewhere in the UK), basic human rights will continue to be ignored and people’s health and welfare will suffer. Not only would this be to our shame now, it also risks leaving a legacy of consequences into the future. • Liz Saville Roberts is group leader of Plaid Cymru in the House of Commons • John’s Campaign, championed by the Observer, campaigns for the right of people with dementia to be supported by their carers in hospital. Visit the John’s Campaign website here.In Italy, it is now obligatory for people aged 50 or over to be vaccinated against Covid-19. Greece is pondering a similar move. In France, which has seen record numbers of positive cases, President Emmanuel Macron has also announced that he wants to “piss off” the unvaccinated, while Austria is contemplating a law to make the vaccine mandatory for all its citizens. By contrast, in the UK, Boris Johnson has confined himself to accusing anti-vaxxers of talking “mumbo-jumbo”. But is that enough? Should the UK take a harder line on those who refuse to be vaccinated? After all, this is a virus that threatens to overwhelm the NHS. As doctors continue to point out, hospital beds are now filling up with more and more seriously ill Covid patients, many of whom are unvaccinated. So, should vaccines against Covid be made mandatory, not just in certain workplace settings but for all individuals? What is the case for making Covid vaccines mandatory? Most British scientists believe that increasing numbers of vaccinated people will give a major boost to efforts to limit hospitalisations from serious Covid complications. However, many question the wisdom of doing this by making vaccination mandatory. The issue is summed up by vaccine expert Peter English. “Unvaccinated people are very much more likely to become ill and consume disproportionate healthcare resources. A single case of Covid-19 requiring admission to an ICU can block a bed that could be used for many critical operations,” he told the Observer. “However, the backlash that could occur as a result of compulsory vaccination – which is not part of our culture, unlike in Italy – might mean even fewer people coming forward for vaccination, so it is not something that I would recommend.” What vaccines are mandatory in the UK? The answer to this is straightforward, said child health expert, Professor Helen Bedford of University College London. “We don’t mandate any vaccine in the UK. We recommend that people have certain vaccines and advise parents to have their children vaccinated against particular diseases but we do not enforce that in law. In fact, the only vaccine we have ever mandated in Britain was smallpox and the legislation enforcing its use was repealed in the 1940s. “Other countries have more of a tradition for mandatory vaccinations, however. For example, Italy now has a total of 10 vaccines that are mandatory.” What has been the impact of the Omicron variant, which is easier to catch but is thought to be less likely to cause serious illness? This is a key question, said psychologist Marie Juanchich of Essex University. “I believe Omicron is changing things. People feel a bit safer with it. It may spread really rapidly but its severity is perceived to be lower. People are much more concerned about the severity of an illness and less concerned about the infectiousness of the virus that causes it.” This point is backed by psychologist Simon Williams, at Swansea University. “There is now a widespread perception that Omicron is milder and I think a lot of people have taken that to mean they don’t have to worry about it and are not adjusting their behaviour.,” he said. A particular problem was the take-up of the booster vaccine last month, which was helped by the public’s wish not to disrupt the festive season with the virus. The fact that this risk has passed might have removed some of the drive to take up the vaccine, Williams added. “One of the things we have come across is a factor we call ‘variant fatigue’, which translates as people saying: ‘Oh, here we go again, a new variant. This is what viruses do; we just need to get on with our lives.’ That’s not great from a public health perspective.” So how should we improve Covid-19 vaccination rates? An important issue is to differentiate between a diehard anti-vaxxer and someone who has nagging doubts about getting a vaccine, said Bedford. “If you lump them together, you will miss the chance to persuade those who have genuine concerns but who could change their minds and get vaccinated. “We need to get to the people in this latter category although that takes time and resources. Some GPs have been ringing up all their unvaccinated patients to have a chat and that has proven to be effective. However, it is hard work. Nor does it have to be a doctor, it might be a religious leader or community leader. “Certainly, from my own experience, I find that if you actually sit down with a doubter, listen to what their concern is, and respond appropriately, very often, you can encourage them to be vaccinated. Certainly, I don’t think we should be thinking about mandating or making a vaccine compulsory.”When Shreena Shah went to check on one of her rental properties, she says she was greeted by an unlikely scene – a man dismantling equipment used to produce cannabis. It was not the first shock she had to endure. Shortly before, the police had discovered a cannabis farm in the other rental property she and her family own. Now, she says, she faces bills amounting to £150,000 for repairs, and the letting agent has been accused of negligence by the family. The case comes amid concern about the lack of regulation in the property sector, despite a government consultation which recommended tightening rules two years ago. The properties, in different London boroughs, were used to cultivate drugs but, the family says, they had been unable to get any enforcement agency to help them. “The house and flat were pretty much destroyed in starkly similar circumstances, and I’ve been shocked at how little recourse I have,” says Shah. “We have been left financially devastated and no authority has been willing to investigate.” Shah says she and her family usually manage the rentals themselves once their letting agent finds suitable tenants, but, when their tenants moved out in 2019, the agency, ABC Estates, offered to take over the management of both properties for no extra charge. Shah says that she was told that both sets of new tenants had had bruising experiences with landlords, and wanted the agent to collect the rent and carry out maintenance and inspections. She claims that, despite repeated requests, she was only sent the signed tenancy agreements and tenant references for both properties in January 2021, 18 months after the first tenants moved in. “It appeared that ABC had done barely any checks on the tenants,” she says. In summer 2020, Shah claims that ABC Estates notified her that the tenants in the house were leaving, and paying rent in lieu of notice. Shah inspected it with the agent and found it in good order. “A couple of weeks later, I was told that the same tenants wanted to come back and I agreed,” she says. The first cannabis farm was discovered by police at the house last November after concerns were raised by a neighbour. “Concerned for the second property, I immediately went round and found a man dismantling cannabis equipment,” she says. Shah claims that ABC Estates acted negligently in failing to safeguard her properties, an allegation the company denies. Her experience appears to show the lack of protections for purchasers and vendors in an unregulated property sector. Two years after a government-appointed working group recommended a mandatory licensing scheme for estate agents and an industry regulator with enforcement powers, there has been no word on reform. Estates agents do not have to have qualifications, despite handling life-changing sums of money and assets on behalf of clients. The only requirement is that they are signed up to a redress scheme that can mediate in individual disputes with clients. Local trading standards teams are responsible for investigating if an agent is in breach of the Estate Agents Act 1979, and the National Trading Standards Estate and Letting Agency Team (NTSELAT) can prohibit an agent from trading if breaches are serious. However, redress schemes have limited enforcement powers, and complaints can take more than six months to be heard, while years of under resourcing appear to have left trading standards ill-equipped to take action. Moreover, all three bodies can only react to individual complaints, rather than proactively vet agents to minimise the risk of potential misconduct. Shah escalated her complaint against ABC Estates to the Property Redress Scheme (PRS), a government-authorised service which considers consumer complaints about property issues. It told her that her allegations were beyond its remit as they involved the cannabis farm and were of a criminal nature, and referred her to trading standards. Her local trading standards department told her that since the properties were in two different local authority areas, it could not help and claimed it was a matter for the police. The Metropolitan police declared that it would not be possible to identify the cannabis growers and that her complaint was therefore a civil issue. When she contacted NTSELAT she was referred back to her local trading standards department. ABC Estates – which is registered with Companies House as Aldermartin Ltd – has three offices in London and was featured in daily adverts on LBC talk radio in the past, including a video endorsement by presenter Nick Ferrari. The agency insists it had no knowledge of the cannabis production at the two properties it managed. Documents seen by the Observer appear to raise questions about the agent’s procedures. The employment reference that it obtained for one tenant stated that she worked for a company that currently has the same director as ABC Estates. Rental payments for both properties were made in cash to ABC Estates, which, Shah says, suggest to her that it had not sought bank details for either party. ABC Estates is one of a string of similarly named property companies established over the years by Richard (Raziel) Davidoff. In August, a first-tier tribunal (property chamber) concluded that Davidoff had breached his fiduciary duty after overcharging leaseholders in a block managed by ABC Estates for repair work that was not carried out. Investigators found that he had charged nearly £100,000 for works that had been estimated at £10,000, and transferred service charges and reserve fund money into the account of a dormant company he owned. It disputes the tribunal ruling. In a statement in November, Davidoff told the Observer: “Many of the facts as you portray them are distorted. The clients clearly have not advised you that after a whole year, they asked the tenant to leave, and at the checkout they found the property was in immaculate condition. “They then allowed the tenant to move back in a short while later, thereafter the property was found to be a cannabis farm. We cannot be held responsible for that. We were as shocked as they were, and we do not condone such behaviour.” In the autumn questions about Davidoff’s record as a managing agent for leasehold properties were raised in parliament by Sir Peter Bottomley. Bottomley, who is co-chair of the all-party parliamentary group on leasehold and commonhold reform, urged the government to heed whistleblower allegations from former staff of ABC Estates, and called for urgent regulatory reform of property agents. He told the Observer: “Police and trading standards must work effectively together to avoid exploitation of a fragmented system which does not work.” The Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government told the Observer that it was considering the recommendations of the 2019 working group report. A spokesperson for Nick Ferrari said: “These adverts were filmed more than five years ago in a standard commercial agreement. These are serious allegations and Nick will seek ways of having the adverts removed.”Isaac Newton apocryphally discovered his second law – the one about gravity – after an apple fell on his head. Much experimentation and data analysis later, he realised there was a fundamental relationship between force, mass and acceleration. He formulated a theory to describe that relationship – one that could be expressed as an equation, F=ma – and used it to predict the behaviour of objects other than apples. His predictions turned out to be right (if not always precise enough for those who came later). Contrast how science is increasingly done today. Facebook’s machine learning tools predict your preferences better than any psychologist. AlphaFold, a program built by DeepMind, has produced the most accurate predictions yet of protein structures based on the amino acids they contain. Both are completely silent on why they work: why you prefer this or that information; why this sequence generates that structure. You can’t lift a curtain and peer into the mechanism. They offer up no explanation, no set of rules for converting this into that – no theory, in a word. They just work and do so well. We witness the social effects of Facebook’s predictions daily. AlphaFold has yet to make its impact felt, but many are convinced it will change medicine. Somewhere between Newton and Mark Zuckerberg, theory took a back seat. In 2008, Chris Anderson, the then editor-in-chief of Wired magazine, predicted its demise. So much data had accumulated, he argued, and computers were already so much better than us at finding relationships within it, that our theories were being exposed for what they were – oversimplifications of reality. Soon, the old scientific method – hypothesise, predict, test – would be relegated to the dustbin of history. We’d stop looking for the causes of things and be satisfied with correlations. With the benefit of hindsight, we can say that what Anderson saw is true (he wasn’t alone). The complexity that this wealth of data has revealed to us cannot be captured by theory as traditionally understood. “We have leapfrogged over our ability to even write the theories that are going to be useful for description,” says computational neuroscientist Peter Dayan, director of the Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics in Tübingen, Germany. “We don’t even know what they would look like.” But Anderson’s prediction of the end of theory looks to have been premature – or maybe his thesis was itself an oversimplification. There are several reasons why theory refuses to die, despite the successes of such theory-free prediction engines as Facebook and AlphaFold. All are illuminating, because they force us to ask: what’s the best way to acquire knowledge and where does science go from here? The first reason is that we’ve realised that artificial intelligences (AIs), particularly a form of machine learning called neural networks, which learn from data without having to be fed explicit instructions, are themselves fallible. Think of the prejudice that has been documented in Google’s search engines and Amazon’s hiring tools. The second is that humans turn out to be deeply uncomfortable with theory-free science. We don’t like dealing with a black box – we want to know why. And third, there may still be plenty of theory of the traditional kind – that is, graspable by humans – that usefully explains much but has yet to be uncovered. So theory isn’t dead, yet, but it is changing – perhaps beyond recognition. “The theories that make sense when you have huge amounts of data look quite different from those that make sense when you have small amounts,” says Tom Griffiths, a psychologist at Princeton University. Griffiths has been using neural nets to help him improve on existing theories in his domain, which is human decision-making. A popular theory of how people make decisions when economic risk is involved is prospect theory, which was formulated by behavioural economists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky in the 1970s (it later won Kahneman a Nobel prize). The idea at its core is that people are sometimes, but not always, rational. In Science last June, Griffiths’s group described how they trained a neural net on a vast dataset of decisions people took in 10,000 risky choice scenarios, then compared how accurately it predicted further decisions with respect to prospect theory. They found that prospect theory did pretty well, but the neural net showed its worth in highlighting where the theory broke down, that is, where its predictions failed. These counter-examples were highly informative, Griffiths says, because they revealed more of the complexity that exists in real life. For example, humans are constantly weighing up probabilities based on incoming information, as prospect theory describes. But when there are too many competing probabilities for the brain to compute, they might switch to a different strategy – being guided by a rule of thumb, say – and a stockbroker’s rule of thumb might not be the same as that of a teenage bitcoin trader, since it is drawn from different experiences. “We’re basically using the machine learning system to identify those cases where we’re seeing something that’s inconsistent with our theory,” Griffiths says. The bigger the dataset, the more inconsistencies the AI learns. The end result is not a theory in the traditional sense of a precise claim about how people make decisions, but a set of claims that is subject to certain constraints. A way to picture it might be as a branching tree of “if… then”-type rules, which is difficult to describe mathematically, let alone in words. What the Princeton psychologists are discovering is still just about explainable, by extension from existing theories. But as they reveal more and more complexity, it will become less so – the logical culmination of that process being the theory-free predictive engines embodied by Facebook or AlphaFold. Some scientists are comfortable with that, even eager for it. When voice recognition software pioneer Frederick Jelinek said: “Every time I fire a linguist, the performance of the speech recogniser goes up,” he meant that theory was holding back progress – and that was in the 1980s. Or take protein structures. A protein’s function is largely determined by its structure, so if you want to design a drug that blocks or enhances a given protein’s action, you need to know its structure. AlphaFold was trained on structures that were derived experimentally, using techniques such as X-ray crystallography and at the moment its predictions are considered more reliable for proteins where there is some experimental data available than for those where there is none. But its reliability is improving all the time, says Janet Thornton, former director of the EMBL European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI) near Cambridge, and it isn’t the lack of a theory that will stop drug designers using it. “What AlphaFold does is also discovery,” she says, “and it will only improve our understanding of life and therapeutics.” Others are distinctly less comfortable with where science is heading. Critics point out, for example, that neural nets can throw up spurious correlations, especially if the datasets they are trained on are small. And all datasets are biased, because scientists don’t collect data evenly or neutrally, but always with certain hypotheses or assumptions in mind, assumptions that worked their way damagingly into Google’s and Amazon’s AIs. As philosopher of science Sabina Leonelli of the University of Exeter explains: “The data landscape we’re using is incredibly skewed.” But while these problems certainly exist, Dayan doesn’t think they’re insurmountable. He points out that humans are biased too and, unlike AIs, “in ways that are very hard to interrogate or correct”. Ultimately, if a theory produces less reliable predictions than an AI, it will be hard to argue that the machine is the more biased of the two. A tougher obstacle to the new science may be our human need to explain the world – to talk in terms of cause and effect. In 2019, neuroscientists Bingni Brunton and Michael Beyeler of the University of Washington, Seattle, wrote that this need for interpretability may have prevented scientists from making novel insights about the brain, of the kind that only emerges from large datasets. But they also sympathised. If those insights are to be translated into useful things such as drugs and devices, they wrote, “it is imperative that computational models yield insights that are explainable to, and trusted by, clinicians, end-users and industry”. “Explainable AI”, which addresses how to bridge the interpretability gap, has become a hot topic. But that gap is only set to widen and we might instead be faced with a trade-off: how much predictability are we willing to give up for interpretability? Sumit Chopra, an AI scientist who thinks about the application of machine learning to healthcare at New York University, gives the example of an MRI image. It takes a lot of raw data – and hence scanning time – to produce such an image, which isn’t necessarily the best use of that data if your goal is to accurately detect, say, cancer. You could train an AI to identify what smaller portion of the raw data is sufficient to produce an accurate diagnosis, as validated by other methods, and indeed Chopra’s group has done so. But radiologists and patients remain wedded to the image. “We humans are more comfortable with a 2D image that our eyes can interpret,” he says. The final objection to post-theory science is that there is likely to be useful old-style theory – that is, generalisations extracted from discrete examples – that remains to be discovered and only humans can do that because it requires intuition. In other words, it requires a kind of instinctive homing in on those properties of the examples that are relevant to the general rule. One reason we consider Newton brilliant is that in order to come up with his second law he had to ignore some data. He had to imagine, for example, that things were falling in a vacuum, free of the interfering effects of air resistance. In Nature last month, mathematician Christian Stump, of Ruhr University Bochum in Germany, called this intuitive step “the core of the creative process”. But the reason he was writing about it was to say that for the first time, an AI had pulled it off. DeepMind had built a machine-learning program that had prompted mathematicians towards new insights – new generalisations – in the mathematics of knots. In 2022, therefore, there is almost no stage of the scientific process where AI hasn’t left its footprint. And the more we draw it into our quest for knowledge, the more it changes that quest. We’ll have to learn to live with that, but we can reassure ourselves about one thing: we’re still asking the questions. As Pablo Picasso put it in the 1960s, “computers are useless. They can only give you answers.”Remarkably, this is the Wombats’ 20th year together, and thanks to prolific touring and streaming they’ve never been bigger. The British trio have gone viral on TikTok with archive track Greek Tragedy, and are booking shows from 200 to 20,000 capacity to promote this fifth album. Like Beautiful People Will Ruin Your Life (2018), Fix Yourself, Not the World sticks to the chummy indie playlist pop the band are so good at. Earnest, lovestruck singer Murph (Matthew Murphy) is front and centre of a shiny stew of easily digestible influences. Everything sounds vaguely like something else, without directly plagiarising anyone, although I thought “U2 at the club” more often than I wanted to. As the song titles warn, the general mood is perky self-help by way of repurposed cliches such as Work Is Easy, Life Is Hard, or stalker anthem If You Ever Leave, I’m Coming With You. The best tracks were released last year: Ready for the High is a deliciously weird cut-and-shut, and Method to the Madness has a lovely collapsed feeling. Mostly the album settles for sprightly mediocrity, and is often quite pleasurable, if you define pleasure as the absence of pain.Reading Xochitl Gonzalez’s opening meditation on how wedding napkins signify wealth in the US, my heart sank. I need not have worried. Gonzalez is interested in far more than domestic one-upmanship and Olga Dies Dreaming is a multilayered debut about identity, race, the power of elites and the marginalisation of the poor. Two Nuyorican siblings, Olga, a successful wedding planner, and Prieto, a congressman, come up against a corrupt and hostile system in their pursuit of the American dream. Olga yearns to be the “Puerto Rican Martha Stewart”, but becomes disillusioned by the relentless drive to accumulate wealth and “its phantom cousin… fame”. Prieto enters politics determined to protect his Brooklyn neighbourhood and its minority community but, as Gonzalez implies, is successful because “he was handsome and eloquent… the perfect salve for White Guilt”. Politically naive, nicknamed “Pollyanna” by his peers, Prieto finds himself blackmailed by property developers intent on gentrifying the area. Brought up by their grandmother and protective of each other, the pair are burdened by their parents’ mistakes. They continue to seek the approval of their activist mother, who abandoned Olga when she was 12 (and Prieto not much older), to fight for self-determination for Puerto Rico. Not long after, their father died of Aids, a junkie traumatised by the Vietnam war and unwilling to match his wife’s militancy. Puerto Rico, a US territory since 1898, has limited representation in Washington and various natural disasters have added to its financial woes. In 2017, Hurricane Maria devastated the island. The humanitarian crisis and the US’s shocking failure to provide adequate relief for its citizens lie at the heart of Gonzalez’s damning indictment of a world where the value of linen is prized more highly than compassion. The author cloaks her polemic in page-turning prose. This deeply satisfying and nuanced novel shines a light on political corruption and the limits of capitalism. It’s also a study of the psychological fallout of poor parenting and a tender exploration of love in its many forms. Olga Dies Dreaming by Xochitl Gonzalez is published by Fleet (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyDr Nate Zinsser, a top US army psychologist renowned for helping lieutenants and officers build their confidence, is giving me a talking-to. We’ve been discussing highly disciplined writers who sit at their desks at 9am each day, no matter the circumstances, and assertively punch out stories. “I definitely don’t do that,” I say, remarking that I envy their confidence to sit and deliver. An aggressive perfectionist streak combined with niggling impostor syndrome insecurities mean I need conditions to be just-so in order to have faith that I’ll produce anything decent. Zinsser blanches. “The statement ‘I don’t do that’ is a decision you’re making about yourself,” he says, speaking over video call from his office at the US Military Academy in upstate New York; behind him there’s a whiteboard, ornamental Japanese swords and photos of athletes he’s counselled, including the Olympic-medal-winning US men’s bobsled team. “A constructive shift in your thinking would be the idea that, ‘Whether or not I got the right amount of sleep the night before or had a good breakfast, once 9 o’clock strikes, I am at my desk, lights on, ready to go – and I’m producing good stuff,’” he says. “That’s a belief about yourself that you can de-li-be-rate-ly cultivate,” he adds, stretching out each syllable in “deliberately” so there can be no question that in this matter, as in all self-confidence-related issues, change lies with me. Delivered with a gentle assuredness, rather than barked across the screen, it’s not the tone you might expect from a man who for 27 years has directed the academy’s performance psychology programme. Indeed, the only thing about him that screams “army” is his black jacket, which has the word emblazoned in capitals across its front. With his snow-white beard and softly yawning New Jersey twang, the 67-year-old has a calm, almost paternalistic presence. His brand of optimism is far more reserved than the full-throttle enthusiasm often associated with self-help gurus. “We don’t live in a world of sunshine and lollipops,” as he puts it. “We live in a real world of deadlines, sweat, blisters and muscle fatigue, and we have to look at what is a constructive way to think in those situations.” In addition to his army duties, in his private practice Zinsser has worked with a glittering roster of clients, including neurosurgeons, congressional candidates, ballerinas, writers and star athletes, such as two-time Super Bowl-winning quarterback Eli Manning. Whether their arena is the surgical table or the running track, they come to him for gamechanging advice on how to dispel those pesky naysaying voices in their head so that they can deliver knockout performances under pressure. And now he’s distilled his knowledge into a book, The Confident Mind: A Battle-Tested Guide to Unshakable Performance. I’m hoping to glean some tips from the famed confidence-whisperer. While hardly a quivering mess, I do have a habit of second-guessing myself in parts of my professional – and social – life. And the thought of public speaking sends me into a cold sweat. The chance to smooth out the chinks in my self-belief armour and come away with a quarterback’s swagger is tempting to say the least. But is it realistic? We tend to view confidence as a magical elixir that’s only available to Olympic sprinters, CEOs and other creatures blessed with rare talent, puffed-out chests and Colgate-white teeth (plus, the odd blustering buffoon). For most of us, being an adult means having a PhD in our multitude of shortcomings, foibles and crippling insecurities. And while I can improve my fitness with a Peloton, and my inner calm with meditation, surely I can’t just learn how to think highly of myself, can I? How to be unflappable under pressure? How to believe – with a surety that overrides any lingering doubts – that I can be good at anything? In his poised, methodical way, Zinsser is here to tell me that, if I doggedly commit to altering the story I tell myself about myself, then yes: yes I can. First, some housekeeping: Zinsser wants to straighten out some common misconceptions around confidence – starting with how we define it. Although we tend to think of it as a sense of belief in one’s own ability, he finds this unhelpful because it neglects a crucial fact: we are hardwired to perform skills unconsciously. When we’re in the zone – whether during a tennis match, maths exam or violin concerto – we’re not critically assessing each movement but operating in a free-flowing state. “If you’re hung up with the mechanics, and trying to think about what you’re doing as you’re doing it, you access a whole lot of neural pathways that tie you up,” he says. He defines confidence, then, as having “the sense of certainty about your ability that allows you to do something without thinking about it: that allows you to execute more or less unconsciously.” Being in this state makes success possible, not guaranteed. It won’t conceal a lack of ability, but it will enable you to go into a performance thinking: “I’ve got this money in my wallet and now I can spend it – let’s see if I’ve got enough,” he says. Without confidence, we’ll never know how good – how talented, how skilled – an individual really is. Zinsser doesn’t particularly see confidence as a product of genetics. Nor is it necessarily linked to competence. Sure, we idolise superstar athletes whose talent and bravado seem to go hand-in-hand, but he comes across just as many gifted people lacking self-belief. “The unfortunate fact I have seen is that our actual competence is higher than our degree of confidence in it,” he says, speaking about the population generally. “It’s the conclusion you draw about yourself from experiences of success [that breeds confidence],” he says. “Unless you make those conclusions, the actual success that you have might not do you any good.” He believes confidence is cultivated during childhood – “how you were encouraged as a young person to think about yourself” – and cites as an example King Richard, the recent biopic showing Richard Williams constantly telling his daughters Serena and Venus that they were destined to become the world’s best tennis players. Can anyone become more confident or is it only attainable for certain individuals? He pauses for a few beats, chewing over his words. “I think it’s quite possible for anyone to develop a greater sense of certainty,” he says, eventually. “Some people might have to overcome more baggage from their past than others, but I’m quite a believer in that kind of human potential.” In any event, there’s no such thing as “a confident person”; it’s more that you’re confident in a particular skill or situation (and even within a skill, you’ll feel better about some things than others). Case in point: Eli Manning. The former NFL superstar, who twice led the New York Giants to Super Bowl triumphs, “was very confident in his ability to throw certain balls and reach certain defences, but he did not like to stand up and talk in front of a crowd,” says Zinsser. “I’m convinced that’s the case for all of us: I don’t think there’s anybody who’s confident across the board.” “Have you ever produced good work in suboptimal conditions?” asks Zinsser rhetorically. We’re back to helping me forge a bulletproof writing mindset. “I would think so,” he continues, “otherwise, you wouldn’t be in the job you’re in. So what you need to be reinforcing, a story that you need to tell yourself about yourself, is: ‘I work well, despite distractions. I work well, in almost any condition. My editor can count on me to deliver quality work, even when things are chaotic around me.’” This rather simple reframing of how I view myself feels pretty significant. And I put it into immediate practice: in a meta situation, I’m writing this article from a cramped plane seat en route to Australia, a series of pre-flight texts from my editor demanding reassurance that I will be able to deliver words by the deadline still warming my phone. With each blood-curdling wail from a baby in a nearby bassinet, I repeat my new mantra about myself with an increasingly feverish vigour. Yet there’s much more to be done. Zinsser likens confidence to a mental “bank account” that we must constantly top up with valuable deposits. That includes mining our memories for instances of when we have done things well. After each training session, or day at work, we should devote about five minutes to reflecting on things we have accomplished and committing them to our “internal hard drive”. No victory is too small for inclusion. (He also notes that it’s worth spending time looking ahead and envisioning, in realistic HD-film quality, the dreams you most desire.) This can apply to whatever knee-knocking situation is keeping you up. Plagued with impostor-syndrome thoughts of not being qualified to do your job? “I’d tell you to give me the whole of your résumé,” says Zinsser. “We’re so good at overlooking the skills that we have cultivated, the effort that we have put in to develop ourselves to the point where we are indeed employable and competent. Look for some of the reasons that you are indeed the genuine person for the job.” His book contains countless tactics for keeping that bank account fat by recasting how you think about your missteps. Some are sourced from Martin Seligman, the father of “positive psychology”. These acknowledge that you will have negative thoughts and will make mistakes, but you can effectively see them off by viewing them as “temporary (“It’s just this one time”), limited (“It’s just in this one place”) and non-representative (“that’s not the truth about me”). There are physical techniques, too: keeping your shoulders slightly back and eyes straight ahead will improve your posture, while focusing on breathing during a performance can be a powerful way to bring a feeling of control and yank you into the present moment. (Note that none of these require you to obnoxiously strut about like The Wolf of Wall Street.) The most extreme example of selective thinking, the “shooter’s mentality” pursued by Golden State Warriors basketballer Stephen Curry, involves treating missed shots as temporary and as an omen that you’re about to experience a return to fortune (“I’m bound to make the next one”), while viewing successes as permanent (“Now I’m on a roll”). One nagging thought I had while reading these passages: building confidence often requires you to ignore logic. This took me back to the late 2000s when, as a tennis-obsessed teen who travelled around Australia competing in tournaments, my on-court confidence was fragile at best. If my warmup went badly, I was convinced the whole match would be a disaster. And I couldn’t get my head into the game if I had assessed, pre-encounter, that my opponent was better than me – smoother technique, bigger shots, flashy overseas academy training. In those instances, I was defeated before the match started. As often happens when we enter a situation devoid of confidence, it became a self-fulling prophecy. If someone had told me about the shooter’s mentality, which Zinsser calls a “thermonuclear psychological weapon”, I would’ve said: “Great, but how am I actually meant to believe these things?” To cast aside all reason and buy into a fantasyland where errors lead to success and success also leads to success? If I’m being honest it sounds slightly delusional, I tell Zinsser now. It is, he replies. But the way to wholeheartedly believe in it is to practise it, repeating these mantras, memories and mental tricks until the story they tell becomes “your dominant way of thinking about yourself in that context”, he says. “It’s got to become your dominant habit of thinking about yourself – just like you brush your teeth every morning and night – if you want it to materialise in a challenging atmosphere. You can’t just turn it on. It has to be already in you.” He can’t say how long this could take: for some clients it’s happened after only a few sessions, while for others it has taken six months of conscientious observance before it became endemic to their thinking. In case confidence wasn’t slippery enough, once you have gained it, the struggle continues. “We’re all imperfect beings and, no matter how many times you practise that second serve, occasionally you’re going to mess it up,” says Zinsser. Confidence is more delicate than a handblown vase. Acquiring some of it “doesn’t mean you’re going to have it for ever. It can easily be knocked down. You’re going to have to wake up again tomorrow and rebuild it.” Talk of confidence has been around for as long as humans have been going into battle. Zinsser’s book opens with a quote from the legendary Chinese general Sun Tzu who, in his fifth-century BC treatise The Art of War, declared: “Victorious warriors win first and then go to war, while defeated warriors go to war first and then seek to win.” Yet now, perhaps more than ever, individuals need to embrace self-assured thinking. Modern society is, at best, “very ambivalent” about confidence and is not about to puff us up, says Zinsser. Growing up, we’re taught that a soupçon of it is good; any more and we risk becoming smug or arrogant and therefore unlikable. Zinsser believes the biggest hurdle to striving for greater confidence is “the misguided impression that if I become certain about myself, I will somehow become lazy and complacent and I will lose my fire and motivation to improve,” he says. “Boy, is that a big misconception.” As part of our education and socialisation, we’re taught to focus on fixing imperfections and mistakes, marking every facet of our lives with red pens. “There is a curious tendency in our modern world to over-identify with our shortcomings and even define ourselves by our mistakes, presumed limitations, and all the things we can’t yet do,” writes Zinsser. While he admits that there’s a time for being a harsh critic, “there’s also just as much value in being one’s best friend”. Social media hasn’t helped the cause. “The 24/7, nonstop barrage of messages are always putting these somewhat false images in front of us: ‘Look at me, at this place, enjoying this wonderful day and this fabulous drink,” he says. “It tends to make us think, ‘Well, gee, I’m not in a beautiful location with a beautiful someone enjoying a beautiful drink. What’s wrong with me?’” Are we less confident than previous generations? There’s another long, reflective pause from Zinsser. In the 1950s and 1960s, he says, “There was a whole generation or two of folks who really grew up believing, ‘Things can be better, I can have a great life, I can succeed. Today, with the generation that’s grown up online, I’m not sure there’s the same general level of optimism,” he says. “My sense is that maybe we’re not quite as confident and optimistic now.” All the more reason to get to work on that movie about your life in which you’re the charming protagonist who completes everything – real feats from your past and wishlist goals alike – at a remarkable level. It takes dedication to stream this flick in your mind each night, sure, but it makes all that other hard work you’ve done – the backhand drills, the weekend reading, the university degrees, the blood and sweat – worthwhile by putting your head in the game come crunch time. Zinsser calls it the cherry on top. “It’s the decision to say: ‘I’ve done the work. I know what I know. I’m going to deliver now. I am enough.’” The Confident Mind: A Battle-Tested Guide to Unshakable Performance by Dr Nate Zinsser is published on 27 January by Cornerstone Press at £14.99. Buy it for £13.04 at guardianbookshop.comWhen I was in Edinburgh last year, I asked around for chocolate recommendations and universal was the name Chocolate Tree. I had heard legendary stories about the ‘best ever’ hot chocolate and ‘giant churros’ and, fuelled by greed, made my way to where the shop was meant to be. We looked, but it wasn’t there, only discovering later that it had sold up and moved out East Lothian way and there was no Chocolate Tree shop front any more. A really good hot chocolate I could easily replicate at home, but I felt bitterly cheated by the lack of giant churros. Back home in England, I decided to order some Chocolate Tree merchandise. They do a great array of chocolate, from bars and boxes to spreads to dip-your-hand-in packets of chocolate-covered nuts and things, plus the aforementioned hot chocolate. I decided on a nut theme, selecting milk chocolate-covered almonds (£7.95, 200g), which were excellent and have become a daily staple, but had the almonds been blanched first they would have been even more excellent. I chose a dark chocolate coffee and hazelnut bar (£3.95, 100g), which ended up being my favourite – a lovely mix of what’s a quite unusual flavour combo with added cocoa nibs for crunch. The dairy-free gianduja (£5.95, 80g) was glorious, too. Just four ingredients, but the hazelnuts made it so creamy I had to constantly recheck the label for milk. I wish I’d been braver and gone for the haggis or winter-spice bars; chocolate covered corn crunchies also looked good. Next time.British businesses are paying substantially more to produce carbon dioxide than their EU rivals because of the government’s refusal to link the UK carbon market to the bigger European market after Brexit. The difference is putting UK industry at a significant competitive disadvantage to European rivals, at a time of soaring energy prices, but does not result in any additional benefit to the environment. UK companies are paying more than £75 (€90) a tonne for the carbon they emit, while similar industries in the EU are paying up to about €85 a tonne. The difference has narrowed slightly in recent days, but was reaching about €8-9 a tonne of carbon in the past month, equating to a premium of about 10% being paid by UK companies. Britain’s carbon price is higher because the UK carbon market, set up last year with the first permit auctions taking place last May, is much smaller and lacks the liquidity of the larger EU emissions trading scheme (EU ETS) that has been operating since 2005 and covers all of the EU’s heavy industries. Under both schemes, companies buy tradeable permits to cover the carbon dioxide they produce, with cleaner companies able to sell spares to laggards. The price acts as an incentive to companies to clean up their operations, and is seen as an economically efficient way to help meet the net zero emissions target. Ministers have a short window in which to reduce UK carbon prices before 18 January, the deadline for the government to release extra permits on to the market, which could reduce some of the price pressure. But experts said linking to the EU market would provide a better long-term answer, and make economic and environmental sense. Tom Lord, the head of trading at Redshaw Advisors, said: “UK companies are paying substantially more than they are in the EU. The big problem for the UK market is liquidity, and the fact that it is new. The EU has a historic surplus [of permits] to fall back on, but the UK has pent-up demand and only a drip-feed of supply.” Lawson Steele, joint head of carbon and utilities research at Berenberg bank, said: “This is a disadvantage [to UK companies]. The reality is that the UK carbon market is dwarfed by the EU ETS. Given that the UK wants to trade with the EU, and the EU wants to trade with the UK, it would make sense for companies to be on the same carbon footing.” British companies already paid higher prices for energy than their EU counterparts, amounting to about £35 a megawatt hour more, added Joe Morris, of UK Steel, which represents the steel industry. “This is a long-running bugbear for the steel sector, and something that continues to hamper our international competitiveness,” he said. The effect of both higher carbon prices and higher energy prices than the EU, as well as the lack of a post-Brexit deal with the US, which recently dropped its tariffs on EU steel, was to deter investment, he said. “This affects the competitiveness of steel companies, which links to investment in these companies. It affects our members’ confidence, and does not help people who work in the sector.” Steel companies were firmly behind the net zero strategy, Morris added, seeing the push for decarbonisation as offering a competitive advantage. “There’s an opportunity to be world-leading in green steel and net zero steel,” he said. Politicians tempted by high energy prices to dismantle net zero policies were mistaken, added Berenberg’s Steele. “Blaming the carbon price is baloney. Increasing energy prices in the last year have been 85% due to the gas price. Carbon is not the problem,” he said. The government has not explained why it has so far rejected a link with the EU system, but many suspect it is part of the desire for a “clean break” hard Brexit, maintaining as few regulatory links as possible. The Liberal Democrats and the Green party called on the government to link the UK ETS to the EU system. If the EU agreed, linking could probably be achieved fairly easily, as the UK system is modelled on the EU market, which the UK was a core part of and took a leading role in designing and updating while an EU member. The Liberal Democrat leader, Ed Davey, said: “The UK needs ambitious climate policies, but they will always be better if we work together with international partners. The Conservatives’ failure to do this is now hitting British business at the worst possible time, as energy-intensive firms are struggling with sky-high gas prices.” Molly Scott Cato, of the Green party, said: “It’s clearly irrational, inefficient and the result of the destructive Brexit ideology to try to run an independent UK carbon trading system with all its additional costs, inevitable inconsistencies and opportunities for gaming the market.” For years, after the 2008 financial crisis, the EU’s carbon market suffered a glut of permits and was largely ineffective, as the carbon price crashed. In recent years, however, reforms and the renewed need to slash emissions have pushed up prices and it is now working as intended, spurring investment in low-carbon technologies. Ministers have no plans to seek a link with the EU ETS, but are understood not to have ruled out the possibility entirely. A spokesperson for the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy said: “The UK ETS Authority is considering whether to take any appropriate action under the cost containment mechanism [to release more permits on the market] and will announce its decision no later than 18 January to provide certainty to the market.”When a new five-party coalition took office in the Czech Republic a week before Christmas, it was expected to herald a reaffirmation of the country’s Europhile and western credentials after years of ambivalence and hedging under an outgoing populist government. Instead, the new administration – headed by Petr Fiala, a former political science professor who replaced the former oligarch Andrej Babiš as prime minister – has found its carefully crafted outward-looking image tarnished by embarrassing revelations about its members’ poor English-speaking skills. The disclosure, by the Hospodářské Noviny newspaper, has raised concerns about how Fiala’s government will cope when the country assumes the rotating EU presidency in July, a responsibility that challenges the ability of ministers to communicate with foreign politicians. It has also triggered a bout of soul-searching on a deeper issue: how a nation that threw off the shackles of communism more than 30 years ago and whose language is little spoken or understood beyond its borders may have failed to acquire the skills needed to interact with an increasingly interconnected world. Such a failing would sit ill with the “return to Europe” philosophy espoused by the late Vaclav Hável, the playwright-turned-dissident who became the president of Czechoslovakia after the 1989 velvet revolution that presaged communism’s downfall and whose liberal credo the new government has publicly embraced. Hospodářské Noviny discovered that several key ministers were linguistically unequipped to don that mantle after investigating whether a pledge by Fiala’s Spolu [Together] grouping – the coalition’s senior faction – to “ensure that every member of the government knows at least one foreign language that they can easily speak” had been met. Five out of 18 cabinet ministers admitted to possessing either only “tourist level” or little English and said they would rely on interpreters in European gatherings – an approach commentators deride as inadequate because it overlooks the importance of face-to-face contacts at informal sessions, where interpreters are generally absent. Some ministers said their working English was reliable – including, ironically, Jan Lipavský, the new foreign minister, whose appointment the Czech president, Miloš Zeman, unsuccessfully tried to block on the alleged grounds that he was academically unqualified. Others failed to respond. Among those acknowledging weak English skills were Jana Černochová, the defence minister, who will be expected to attend Nato summits, and the finance minister, Zbyněk Stanjura, although both claimed knowledge of Polish and Russian, the latter a legacy of the communist past when Moscow’s regional hegemony made it compulsory in Czech schools. Stanjura’s plight is deemed particularly disadvantageous as he will chair the Ecofin council of finance ministers that meets to discuss important financial and economic issues. His incapacity recalls the fate of his predecessor, Alena Schillerová, who was widely criticised after being filmed walking away after a Czech television reporter asked her a question about European finance policy in English and who read speeches in English at EU meetings from a script with stilted pronunciation. It was later explained that she had limited English knowledge. Although some ministers claim to know German, Petr Kaniok, an associate professor specialising in European affairs at Masaryk university in Brno, said English would remain the EU’s working language despite Britain’s departure from the bloc due to Brexit. The inability of many Czech politicians to communicate in it harmed the country’s interests and fuelled Euroscepticism, he added. “We have people who want to be MPs or hold public office who don’t pay sufficient attention to their language skills,” said Kaniok. “That’s surprising because it’s more than 30 years since the velvet revolution and people holding public office are around their 50s, so they’ve had enough time to prepare language training. “Since Czechia joined the EU in 2004, it has been very defensive, especially compared to the Baltic counties [Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia] or Sweden, Finland or the Netherlands, which have similar population sizes but are very active in European policy. It’s partly because of different language skills. It’s a huge problem which is damaging Czech EU policy.” Although fluent English-speakers are common in the Czech Republic – a country of 11 million people – the language’s limited currency among politicians reflects a broader cultural lack of interest in events beyond its borders, according to Jan Čulík, a lecturer in Czech affairs at Glasgow university. “Many Czechs find themselves extremely comfortable at home and don’t display much interest in what is going on outside, despite the fact that for almost 400 years, the political situation in their country has always been shaped from abroad,” he said. “Politicians who have not displayed any interest since the fall of communism in what is going on beyond their own small Czech linguistic patch cannot realistically understand what is going on around them. Their attitudes will of necessity be parochial, limited and wrong.” • This article was amended on 10 January 2022 to refer to those who work with the spoken word as interpreters, not translators.The theft of books occupies a complex place in our moral judgment, depending on motive. In Markus Zusak’s 2005 novel The Book Thief, the actions of the title character are heroic – she steals books to save them from destruction. During the 2011 London riots, it was frequently observed, with a hint of reproach, that the looters pointedly left bookshops untouched and this deliberate spurning was seen as further indictment of the mob’s character, as if we’d have thought better of the rioters if they had heaved a bollard through the window of Waterstones and made off with the latest Jeanette Winterson. In the run-up to publication of the final Harry Potter novel in 2007, the publisher laid on extra security at the printworks after it was claimed that tabloid reporters were hanging about offering cash bribes to any worker willing to slip them a sneak preview. In this instance, the opprobrium was not because such a theft might have deprived the publisher and author of income, but because only a sociopath would deliberately ruin the ending for millions of children. But motive is the one unknown quantity in last week’s story about book theft, in which a five-year-long mystery appeared to be resolved when the FBI arrested Filippo Bernardini, an employee in the rights department at Simon &amp; Schuster UK, on suspicion of stealing hundreds of unpublished digital manuscripts. The sustained scam seems to have been relatively sophisticated on one level; his knowledge of the industry allowed him to impersonate senior publishing figures online, his familiarity with names and jargon meant his phishing emails rang no alarm bells with their recipients and he registered more than 160 domain names from which to send his messages. But on another level, the operation was comically crude: his fake email addresses contained deliberate misspellings such as “@penguinrandornhouse” instead of “randomhouse”, yet for five years publishers, agents and authors were duped into sending digital copies of new books into the ether. Bernardini’s alleged crimes are the more intriguing precisely because so far he doesn’t appear to have profited from them. None of the stolen books, which included big hitters such as Margaret Atwood, Stieg Larsson and Sally Rooney as well as unknown debut authors, was leaked online and no ransom or blackmail demands were ever made. It seemed the thief was not stealing the books either to liberate the texts or to cash in. Why, then? Before Bernardini’s arrest, it was widely suspected that the culprit was a literary scout, engaging in industrial espionage. A scout’s currency is advance information: a heads-up on the next big thing can give their clients the edge when it comes to pre-empts and bidding wars on foreign or screen rights. My first job after university, 25 years ago, was working for a literary scout, the celebrated Anne-Louise Fisher, and I quickly learned that scouting is a highly refined art, built on powers of persuasion, mutual respect and trust established over years, an instinct for the market and the ability to speed-read. It also involved a tremendous number of lunches, but never anything so underhand as deception. In those analogue days, of course, thefts such as Bernardini’s would have been impossible, unless you were prepared to mug a courier. Unofficial advance copies of hot new books crossed London in the form of typescripts, great breezeblocks of A4 paper bound with elastic bands in unmarked Jiffy bags, passed under tables at meetings, with both sender and recipient sworn to secrecy. Often, especially before the London or Frankfurt book fairs, I would lug home a 400-page manuscript in my backpack to prepare a reader’s report by the next morning, living in mortal terror of leaving it on the tube or in the pub. If details of a closely guarded novel had escaped back then, it would have been an easy matter to trace the leak to its source. But I still remember vividly the thrill of turning over that first sheet, knowing that I was one of the first people in the world to dive into a book that would go on to be huge. Perhaps the thief’s initial motive was no more sinister than this: he was hungry for a new story. But the longer the scam continued, the more it appears to have become a power game, with the scammer taking evident pleasure in manipulating some of the most senior figures in publishing and later turning abusive when his efforts were met with suspicion. That’s the interpretation offered by Daniel Sandström, a Swedish publisher who was repeatedly targeted by the book thief. “[I]f the game is psychological, a kind of mastery or superiority, it’s easier to visualise,” he told Vulture last year. “This is a business full of resentment as well, and in that sense, it becomes a good story.” It is a good story and maybe we’re fascinated by instances of literary fraud precisely because publishing is still widely regarded as a business grounded in trust, relationships and old-fashioned courtesy. I’m thinking of Can You Ever Forgive Me? or the curious case of author AJ Finn, the pen name of former editor Dan Mallory, who allegedly spent years creating a fictitious biography for himself within the publishing world. The idea of someone abusing that assumption of decency for their own advantage seems more shocking in this context than it might in, say, the world of finance or arms dealing. I find myself hoping that Bernardini’s motive won’t be anything as banal as money. Ideally, he’ll turn out to be a rejected author seeking revenge or looking for a novel he can fillet and pass off as his own, like the protagonist of Jean Hanff Korelitz’s The Plot. That’s what I’d go for if I were writing the inevitable film adaptation. In fact, I might suggest to my agent that he pitch the idea to a few production companies. I’ll remind him to check the spelling of their emails very, very carefully, though. • Stephanie Merritt’s books include While You SleepAnne (ITV) | ITV Hub Four Lives (BBC One) | iPlayer Mandy (BBC Two) | iPlayer Toast of Tinseltown (BBC Two) | iPlayer Anne, ITV’s four-part drama directed by Bruce Goodison (Leave to Remain), is a reminder that we may all know about Hillsborough – the 1989 FA Cup semi-final disaster in the Sheffield stadium that killed 97 Liverpool fans – but we didn’t live it, and then relive it, viscerally, relentlessly, as the bereaved did. Written by the novelist and screenwriter Kevin Sampson, who was at the game, it stars Maxine Peake as Anne Williams, mother of 15-year-old Hillsborough victim Kevin Williams, detailing her long, tortuous fight, along with others, to extract the truth from a swirling miasma of misinformation, police mistakes, cover-ups and lies. It is Peake’s job to encapsulate a mother’s waking nightmare, and her performance is every kind of wild, shivering scream. Anne is an ordinary Liverpool mum, larking about with her husband, Steve (Stephen Walters), until, fatefully, she surprises Kevin (Campbell Wallace) with a ticket for the match. After Hillsborough, she’s a maternal triple threat – enraged, interrogative, tenacious (“You’re not going away, are you?” “Only in a box”) in pursuit of the truth. What time did her son die? Could he have been saved? What were the Hillsborough deaths if not unlawful killings? As Anne unravels, the city of Liverpool – heartbroken, implacable – becomes a character in itself. Anne is also the story of a failed smear campaign against the working classes, with fans wrongly portrayed, most famously in the Sun, as drunken, marauding hooligans urinating on the dead. At times, the drama feels unwieldy; it would have benefited from more ruthless editing. While it’s important to convey the long campaign for justice – Anne Williams died of cancer in 2013, and, even now, no one has been held directly responsible for Hillsborough – some parts felt repetitive or unnecessary. Still, there’s no arguing with the spirit of the piece. In an early scene in Sheffield, Anne and Steve are led down dim corridors into a room where there’s a noticeboard pinned with Polaroid photos of the dead, and, hysterical, pleading, Anne refuses to accept that Kevin is one of them. It is almost too painful to watch. In a ghoulish accident of television scheduling, there was another primetime factual drama about bereaved families caught up in a very different fight for justice. BBC One’s Four Lives, written by Neil McKay, directed by David Blair, covered the case of Stephen Port, who in 2016 was given a life sentence with a whole life order for drugging, raping and murdering four young men he lured into meeting him via LGBTQ dating and hookup apps. Here was a tragic tale told in three parts of police incompetence, tinged with palpable lifestyle judgmentalism and shades of homophobia. Anthony Walgate (Tim Preston), a life-loving fashion student who did occasional escort work, is found slumped lifeless in the doorway of Port’s apartment block, with Port himself calling the police. When Port spins a yarn about a party drug overdose, he is believed, enabling him to also kill Gabriel Kovari (Jakub Svec), a hopeful Slovakian; Daniel Whitworth (Leo Flanagan), who has a boyfriend; and Jack Taylor (Paddy Rowan), who hides his sexuality from his family. Sheridan Smith, playing Anthony’s mother, excels at these raw, direct roles, spasming with chain-smoking fury. Stephen Merchant veers sharply away from comedy to portray seedy, monosyllabic Port, whose clumsy manipulations – at one point forging a suicide note from Daniel including a “confession” that Daniel killed Gabriel – verge on farce, even as the bodies keep appearing in the same locality. In the main, Four Lives was well done: the actors playing the victims had little time to establish character and do a great job. I wasn’t so sure about Merchant, who underplayed Port to the point of coming across less as a warped human being than a vacuum, though maybe that’s the point. Welcome back Mandy in the second six-part BBC Two series of shorts created by and starring Diane Morgan (Philomena Cunk; Motherland), about the titular gobby, workshy northerner with the towering hair-don’t, bizarre tilting walk (imagine a seasick flamingo) and twisted pout. Expect the unexpected with Mandy. The first episode opens with her explaining why she left her job at a frozen fish factory – “One of the other women who worked there looked like Rose West. Gave me the right shivers” – and segues into a satanic ritual. Elsewhere, scenarios include, among others, Mandy exploring genealogy with Deborah Meaden, space travel, and a sewage plant-based plot co-starring Tom Courtenay and Alexei Sayle (“It stinks, right?”), which evolves into a Chernobyl-style spoof. It’s unsurprising that Mandy attracts such a high calibre of co-stars (others include Anna Maxwell Martin and Jo Hartley): it’s crammed with ingenuity and whip-smart silliness. Morgan had a mammoth task topping the first series, in which Mandy ended up in a wedding shootout involving the Happy Mondays’ Shaun Ryder. This series is even better. Last week also saw the return of cult comedy character Steven Toast, formerly of Toast of London (Channel 4), now back in the six-part Toast of Tinseltown on BBC Two. Played by Matt Berry (What We Do in the Shadows), and co-written with Arthur Mathews (Father Ted), Toast is the hammy thespian with the bizarre elocution (“Telay-viz-ion”) who deals with idiot hipsters at a voiceover studio (“Yes, I can hear you, Clem Fandango”), a running feud with “Ray Bloody Purchase” (Harry Peacock) and tart exchanges with his perma-scandalised agent (Doon Mackichan): “That’s a bit strong, isn’t it, Jane? Your language really has become increasingly fruit-ayy.” Toast was last seen burning down Shakespeare’s Globe to avoid bad reviews. This opener features him in spoof arty hangout the Colonial, and dealing/not dealing with his anger issues. Next week he sets off to Hollywood for a “Star Wars move-ay”, dealing with new car-based US agent Brooke Hooberman, also played by Mackichan. While other co-stars can’t be revealed, Larry David’s appearance in episode one hints that Toast is welcomed by the US comedy elite. However-rrr, as the man himself might say, I’ve viewed the second Tinseltown-set episode and I’m a little anxious: Toast is such an intrinsically British concept; I do hope he travels well. What else I’m watching Pen 15 (Sky Comedy) I’m down to the last few episodes of the second and final series of the pandemic-interrupted US comedy, with creators Anna Konkle and Maya Erskine playing their 13-year-old selves. It’s witty, touching and inventive – though things turn dark when one of the girls is sexually exploited. Andy Warhol’s America (BBC Two) A three-part docuseries on Warhol and how his life and art intersected with 20th-century America. Last week’s opening episode explores his genesis, from impoverished Pittsburgh childhood through to Campbell soup cans, fame and beyond. The Book of Boba Fett (Disney+) Disney’s latest Star Wars-derived series follows intergalactic bounty hunter slash warlord Boba Fett, played by Temuera Morrison, and is also a spin-off from their Mandalorian series. Created by Jon Favreau (Swingers), think fantasy western set in deep space.‘How big is a baby dinosaur?’ my son asks. ‘It depends,’ I say, ‘but that’s not really what we…’ ‘Will it be green?’ ‘No, we’re trying to tell you…’ ‘Will it be as big as a bus?’ Conversations like this have been relatively frequent for the past few weeks, since my wife and I told our son that we are expecting… a baby. I guess we’re telling you now, too. Congratulations us! We’re thrilled, to be honest. We’d had a hard go of it second time round and were beginning to think it wasn’t to be. But then all of a sudden, it was, and now, it is. She’s a little girl and, at 27 weeks, we don’t know an awful lot about her. She seems nice, has fingers and toes in the right places and appears to have a passion for thumbsucking. We also know she’s categorically not a dinosaur, but it’s taking her older brother a while to get used to this. We’d already broken the one rule of these things – which is not to phrase the news as a question. ‘Would you like a little brother or sister?’ we’d asked him, which received a cheerfully adamant, ‘No!’ a couple of months ago. Luckily, we’d caught him in an off moment, so by the time my wife started visibly showing we were able to ‘tell’ him for the first time all over again. In fact we ended up having to telltold him for the first time on three or four occasions. I don’t know what we expected. Ambivalence, I suppose. Resentment? Disbelief? But all we got was delight, interrogation and a good deal of poking and prodding. Some nights he bounds over, lacking the tact usually desirable when charging towards a pregnant woman and plants his ear to his mum’s stomach, tuning out the world and hearing, well, not very much at all. The fact that she will be a little girl seems exciting to him, albeit a source of confusion. He still refers to people of all genders as ‘he’, with a patriarchal mindset we hope to dislodge through careful social programming. Mostly, however, she’s ‘it’. ‘Will it have blue eyes and red hair?’ he asks, on those evenings he has grasped she will not be a dinosaur. We tell him we don’t know and ask what he would prefer. He thinks she should be bright white, but with black eyes, and her name should be ‘Pizza’. This preference will last a few minutes before he decides her name should be ‘Pea’, then ‘Minnie’, then ‘baby Alexander’, with no reason given for such choices. He conjures these while belly-eared, like an eavesdropping butler in an Edwardian farce, or a survivalist listening to the ground for news of a storm. He says thoughtful, adoring things like ‘Hello’ and ‘Shhhh’ and ‘What are you?’ He has even been known to sidle up and kiss said belly in a display so self-consciously adorable it’s hard not to believe he knows exactly what he’s doing. As we consider the pitfalls and anxieties of going round the newborn carousel again, we’re not sure what to think ourselves. ‘Can it be a dog?’ my son asks. Sure, we have concerns and worries of our own. But other questions take precedence for now. Did Ye Hear Mammy Died? by Séamas O’Reilly is out now (Little, Brown, £16.99). Buy a copy from guardianbookshop at £14.78 Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeatsPatricia Lockwood, 39, is a poet, critic and memoirist whose first novel, No One Is Talking About This, was shortlisted for last year’s Booker prize, as well as the Women’s prize for fiction. A contributing editor at the London Review of Books, she lives in Savannah, Georgia. On the night of the Booker ceremony, you looked absolutely thrilled for Damon Galgut when his name was announced. I was. I was also relieved on my own behalf. To win the Booker is a very big thing, particularly when you’re younger and you have a debut novel. I was relieved that it was Damon because he had been held in the torturous flames of the shortlist for so long. He’d been through two normal ceremonies [in 2003 and 2010] and he said those are really brutal because you’re just sitting at a dinner for three hours and you have to eat while not knowing who’s going to win and everybody’s getting a little bit drunk, which seemed exciting compared to what we had. It was quite tense. I was offering everyone pills and no one was taking them; they were like, what are these pills, and I was like, it’s a dog anxiety pill, they give them to dogs, you’ll be fine. Anyone who saw that online clip of you ejecting a crystal egg from your mouth when you (and the other shortlistees) were asked how it felt to be nominated might have been hoping your name would be called, just to see what you would do on stage... I did have the egg on my lap and I knew that if I had to go to the podium I would sort of have to run up the stairs, take the award, set it down again so I didn’t break it, turn, pop the egg in my mouth, turn back to the microphone and extract the egg... it seemed like it was going to be really complicated, but I was ready. The egg reminds me of my niece. I take it around when I travel, I feel like I’m showing her things. I think everyone thought it was a reference to the wellness thing [from the novel, in which the protagonist inserts a crystal egg into her vagina] and I never explained that it’s actually a meaningful crystal egg. I don’t usually have it in any of my orifices! Did you have any qualms about fictionalising your baby niece’s death in No One Is Talking About This? I was writing the first half of the book [about the protagonist’s Twitter addiction] and thinking it could just go on for ever. And then I got a text from my mother, about my sister’s pregnancy, and I began to write about that situation, moment by moment. The qualm was not there because at that point I did not know my niece would die – she wasn’t even supposed to be born [she was diagnosed with a rare genetic disorder in utero]. My sister’s fear was that this would be an episode in her life that people would want her to forget; I think, in her mind, the fact that I was writing made that less likely. It’s jarring to be nominated for awards for a book that you wrote to keep a beloved person alive. You want to keep inhabiting the reality with the beloved, not the reality that contains prizes and accolades. Was there a worry, as someone who is very active online, that it would seem an excessively punitive narrative about the seductions of social media? For some people, the book’s takeaway is a bit like, “Yeah, so, the internet: it’s not the same as a baby, is it?”, but I don’t mind. If it had been constructed inorganically, it would’ve been a gotcha, but for me it never felt that way – I was just following the thread of my life. It’s also a very funny book. Do you see yourself as a comedy writer? I’ve long had the idea, only in fantasy, that there was an alternate timeline where I would have been a standup or sketch person. Look at my notebook and all of the lines are that way. It’s the thing that is the most natural to me; even when I’m writing essays, what comes immediately to mind is a joke. Your essays, especially the one on John Updike, are such a joy, in part because they’re so far outside the normal register of literary criticism... I work myself into a pitch of ecstasy where it’s like all my forces gather inside my chest into a ball and I can just aim it straight at the piece. I think Brits like my criticism more than Americans do, but it was never a conscious decision to shake things up. I never really felt like I knew how to do that very sort of authoritative critical prose that I had read so much growing up. I don’t feel I should take pride in the fact that it comes out from me differently, but just allowing that little bit of laxity does help rejuvenate a form. You once tweeted a five-line story imagining Jonathan Franzen shushing his pregnant wife by saying: “No, it is I who am pregnant... Pregnant with the next great American novel.” I remember the morning I wrote that Franzen tweet. It was when I lived with my parents and I’d just gotten out of the shower and I thought, “That’d be funny”. I mean, that was the extent of it. I do think it meant in people’s minds that I was like his most ferocious critic, which wasn’t true. There is this envy of him, because it’s a sort of wealth to not be on the internet at all, right? He doesn’t have to be. What are you working on now? After I had Covid [in 2020], I simply did not realise you could continue to have symptoms for so long; I think there was a sense that it should really all have stopped after six months. I had neurological sequelae that bordered on what you would call psychosis, but I kept notebooks throughout and I thought they could be shaped into stories. They felt exciting; talking about your own work, you don’t want to call your sanity into question, but maybe it’s interesting if you do. • No One Is Talking About This by Patricia Lockwood is published in paperback by Bloomsbury (£8.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyIn his sun-filled office in north Nicosia, Şener Elcil is plotting his next protest. Anger, he says, is in the air in Turkish-occupied northern Cyprus. The economy is in freefall, thanks to the self-declared republic’s financial and political dependence on Turkey. Thousands have taken to the streets, spurred by inflation rates that have left many struggling to make ends meet; ahead of parliamentary polls later this month, calls for a boycott are mounting, while a blacklist of Turkish Cypriot dissidents, reportedly drawn up at the behest of Ankara, has spawned consternation and fear. “Turkey is our biggest problem,” says Elcil, who heads the Turkish Cypriot teachers’ union and is a vocal proponent of reunification of the war-divided island under a federal umbrella with the Greek-run south. “It should keep its hands off Cyprus and take its lira and go away.” Elcil, 58, is among the statelet’s most outspoken opponents of the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, and his unorthodox economic policies. The recent gyrations of the Turkish lira – adopted by the territory in 1976, two years after the Turkish invasion – have had a devastating effect on daily life for a populace that remains under international embargo and cut off from the rest of the world. The use of foreign currency for property transactions and the purchase of imported goods has made a bad situation worse – even if the lira has regained some of its dramatic loss in value against the dollar. Amid rising desperation, along with demands for the entity to adopt a “stable” currency, Elcil is far from alone. “People are tired of international isolation, and they’re aware that it will only get worse,” he says. “Five years ago, a teacher first entering our system earned the equivalent of €1,100 (£920) a month. Today, because of the lira, they’d take home €350 a month.” The protests come as hopes of reuniting Cyprus have rarely been as bleak. Last week, nearly 15 months after Ersin Tatar, a nationalist hardliner, won presidential elections in the north, the UN secretary general, António Guterres, issued his starkest report yet, warning that “without decisive action” further efforts to reach a negotiated peace settlement appeared increasingly slim. “Partition is so close,” says Izzet Izcan, who heads the United Cyprus party, one of three leftwing groups that have announced they will be abstaining from the 23 January parliamentary vote. “Tatar is Ankara’s puppet who was elected only after Turkey intervened in our democratic process. His pro-partition policies are not in the interests of our community. The only way to oppose them is to fight all together.” In the 38 years since the breakaway republic unilaterally declared independence, Turkey’s interference in the entity’s affairs had never been as flagrant, claimed Izcan, echoing a widely voiced concern. “Elections are no longer representative of the real will of ordinary Turkish Cypriots. They’re like a game planned and played by Turkey,” the former MP said. “Our main problem is political. Our economic difficulties are the result of a political situation, of Turkey continuing its military occupation of the north by means of the lira.”Cyprus has been split between a Greek Cypriot south and Turkish Cypriot north since an Athens-backed coup, aimed at union with Greece, prompted Ankara to launch a military operation to seize its northern third. Although Turkish Cypriots voted in favour of reunification in a referendum in 2004, the island entered the EU as a divided state after its majority Greek Cypriot population rejected the prospect of power sharing. Until reunification is achieved, EU laws are suspended in the north despite it also formally being part of the bloc. The growing disgruntlement follows alarm over the deportation from Turkey of prominent Turkish Cypriots opposed to Ankara’s policies. Until recently the self-styled state – acknowledged solely by Ankara – was regarded as a safe zone for opponents of Erdoğan and his governing AKP party, one in which Turkish Cypriots and exiled mainland Turks indulged freely in criticism of the president’s authoritarian leadership. But the appearance of a blacklist, published by Avrupa, a local newspaper, in October has heightened anxiety over the lengths to which Turkey is willing to go to silence dissent. The paper identified 42 politicians, writers, journalists, lawyers, trade unionists and artists as being on the list. “It’s created fear and uncertainty,” says Mehmet Harmancı, the mayor of North Nicosia, drawing on a cigarette in a cafe near the divided capital’s UN-patrolled buffer zone. “Nobody knows exactly who is on it. All we know is there is a list, a blacklist of people seen as a security threat in Turkey who are blocked from entering the country.” People previously unafraid to voice opinions were increasingly concerned, he said, about the consequences if they did so. Turkish Cypriots expelled from Turkey had learned of the ban only upon arrival in the nation. “Even if ours is an unrecognised country we’ve had a longstanding democratic tradition of freedom of speech, of respecting each other’s values and ideas,” says Harmancı. “Since the election of Ersin Tatar, that has changed.” Tatar, who was raised in the UK and educated at Cambridge before returning to Cyprus, has used his term in office to advocate for a two-state solution to the island’s division after years of failed negotiations to reunite it as a bi-zonal, bi-communal federation – a proposal flatly rejected by the EU. He has defended the travel ban, saying: “Every country has the right not to allow entry foreign nationals on the grounds of security when faced with threats and insults.” However, Turkish Cypriots thought to be on the list are united in their desire for reunification and opposed to any suggestion that the EU’s most easterly member state should remain partitioned. For Ahmet Cavit An, who co-founded the Movement for an Independent and Federal Cyprus, the island’s first such organisation, the memory of being stopped by immigration officers at Istanbul airport last summer is still painfully vivid. “I was at the passport control when they said I was persona non grata,” says the 71-year-old retired paediatrician. “I was then told I should write to the Turkish embassy in Nicosia for more information. Five months after my lawyer sent a registered letter demanding an explanation we’ve still not had a reply.” In a landmark case, won in 2003, An took Ankara to the European court of human rights for being prevented from crossing into the island’s buffer zone to participate in bi-communal meetings. “What I want to know is the duration of this ban so I can get on with my life,” he says. In October the European Federation of Journalists condemned the arrest of Ali Kismir, who heads the north’s press trade union, after he was detained at Istanbul airport and denied entry into Turkey. “I was taken to a special deportation area where my photograph and fingerprints were taken,” he recalls. “It makes me very angry to think that I was treated like a terrorist when all I do is write the truth.” Kismir, the fourth Turkish Cypriot to be barred entry to Turkey, is a well-known columnist who took issue with Ankara’s electoral meddling to ensure Tatar’s election. His convictions are such that he sports a tattoo bearing the word “peace” in both Greek and Turkish on his right arm. In recent weeks, Turkish opposition MPs have also raised the plight of Turkish Cypriots being banned from Turkey, arguing that this runs counter to the motherland’s professed desire to protect the minority. But, like almost every Turkish Cypriot opposed to Ankara’s policies, Elcil says time is running out for a community already outnumbered by settlers imported from the mainland. About 2,000 Turkish Cypriots have relocated to the south, lured by jobs and better living standards. “There have to be more protests that target Turkey, because Turkey is the biggest obstacle to a solution of the Cyprus problem and reunification,” he says. “They call us traitors and Turkish-speaking Greeks but we’re not giving up. We’re here to stay and we’re here to fight.”On 4 January 2002, Brig Gen Michael Lehnert received an urgent deployment order. He would take a small force of marines and sailors and build a prison camp in the US-run military enclave on Cuba’s south coast, Guantánamo Bay. Lehnert had 96 hours to deploy and build the first 100 cells, in time for the first plane-load of captives arriving from the battlefield in Afghanistan on 11 January. The job was done on time: a grid of chain-link cages surrounded by barbed wire and six plywood guard towers manned by snipers. There were five windowless huts for interrogations. It was named Camp X-Ray. Camp X-Ray was built in three days, but the sprawling Guantánamo Bay prison camp which grew out of it has proved very hard to dismantle. About 780 detainees have been held there over the past 20 years, many of them swept up arbitrarily on the battlefield. One university study found that 55% of them had not committed hostile acts against the US or its allies. Three of the past four US presidents (Donald Trump being the exception) have tried to close it, but 20 years on, it is still there, a legal anomaly and lead weight wrapped around America’s global reputation. As the 20th anniversary approached, Lehnert, now retired, appeared at a Senate hearing and looked back in regret. “The speed of Guantánamo’s creation and the urgency to gain information had bad consequences,” Lehnert told senators. “I am not an attorney, but even I know that when you forego generations of legal thought and precedent, bad things happen.” Lehnert had been part of a group of military officers who tried to make Guantánamo a conventional prisoner of war camp, subject to the Geneva conventions, but they were overruled by their superiors in the Pentagon, which had chosen the site precisely because it would lie outside the rule of law. “I remember overhearing conversations that it was useful to put a facility for holding captured terrorists in Guantánamo, because basically there was no clear legal context and that was seen as an advantage,” Daniel Fried, a career US diplomat who was working in the Bush White House at the time, told the Guardian. “What I kept hearing in those days was it’s a brand new world, the old rules don’t apply. “It turned out to be a horrible mistake,” he said. It has been a hard mistake for the US to erase, as Fried knows first-hand. In the Obama administration, he was made special envoy for closing Guantánamo. He had some success in the first year of the administration in persuading allied governments to accept Guantánamo detainees, and the camp’s population was reduced to 41, but Barack Obama failed to fulfil his pledge to shut it down completely. His administration gave up on efforts to hold trials in New York and place long-term detainees in an empty prison in Illinois in the face of furious local opposition. Guantánamo Bay (known in the US military by its abbreviation GTMO) has been left to fester. Conditions have improved: the detainees are no longer in solitary detention and are kept in cell blocks with refrigerators and communal pantries, but the fact of detention without trial remains a constant. Over the 20 years of its existence, only 12 detainees have been charged, and only two have been convicted by the military commissions. The trial of the five accused of direct participation in the 9/11 plot, including its supposed mastermind, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, has not even started. They are entering the 10th year of pre-trial hearings. At the other end of the scale, 13 “low-value” inmates have been cleared for transfer, in some cases many years ago. Tawfiq al-Bihani, a Yemeni picked up in Iran in 2001, was recommended for repatriation in 2010. But because of congressional Republican opposition, bureaucratic inertia and the difficulty of finding countries willing to accept them, they are still stuck on the island. Chairing last month’s judiciary committee hearing, the Democratic senator Dick Durbin noted: “A generation of conflict has come and gone yet the Guantánamo detention facility is still open, and every day it remains open is an affront to our system of justice and the rule of law. “It is where due process goes to die,” Durbin said. It is also where an increasing number of inmates may end their lives. Over the past 20 years, nine inmates have died in the camp, seven of them by apparent suicide. One of those was Yasser Talal Al Zahrani, a Saudi teenager at the time of his capture in Afghanistan in 2002. He was found dead in his cell four years later. His family insist he did not take his own life. “A lot of people don’t realise the gravity of being imprisoned in GTMO” said Omar Deghayes, a Libyan citizen and UK resident, who spent five years there without charge. He was blinded in one eye in what he said was an assault by a guard. “It’s not how people imagine. It’s worse,” Deghayes said. “I don’t see why GTMO is open when the Afghanistan war has ended. Put people on trial, let them see the evidence, and represent themselves, or release them.” As time goes on, more prisoners face death in Guantánamo by natural causes. It will increasingly become a very expensive, yet very rudimentary, nursing home in the Caribbean. The Pentagon has asked for $88m to build a hospice for ageing detainees, the New York Times has reported. The prison camp already costs over half a billion dollars a year, working out at nearly $14m per detainee, compared to about $80,000 an inmate in US ‘supermax” prisons. Joe Biden, like Obama, has pledged to close the camp, but so far has only reduced the prison population by one. Abdul Latif Nasser, a Moroccan captured in Afghanistan, was returned to his home country in July, after being held 19 years without charge. He had been on the point of release in 2016, but the required paperwork was not put together in time before the Trump administration took office. All work on releases stopped, and Nasser had to wait nearly five more years. His lawyer, Thomas Durkin, is doubtful that Nasser’s release is part of a broader administration plan to shutter the prison. “I’m not sure what their strategy is,” Durkin said. “They say they want to close Guantánamo, but they seem to be running into all the same problems that Obama did … Guantánamo has taken on a life of its own. It’s a huge political albatross, and frankly Obama dropped the ball.” In 2010, a Republican-led Congress passed a defence spending bill that included clauses aimed at preventing prisoner transfers to the US and placing restrictions on transfers from Guantánamo. Those restrictions have been renewed and adjusted every year since. Biden’s critics claim Biden is using Congress as an excuse for his slow progress. They point out he has not appointed a special envoy, and his administration declined invitations to send officials to the Senate hearing on Guantánamo. The ranking Republican on the Senate judiciary committee, Chuck Grassley, taunted the Biden team, saying: “No one from the administration has come to defend the president’s plan to close Guantánamo, and I’m not sure there is a plan.” Administration officials insist that a lot of the groundwork for emptying the camp is being done behind the scenes without fanfare, and that with a relatively small number of remaining detainees, a special envoy was not longer necessary. “The state department staffs a team of officers in its bureau of counter-terrorism that focuses on Guantánamo transfers and related issues,” a senior administration official said. “The department is committed to ensuring that it can effectively address the needs of this priority mission. With only 39 detainees remaining, we are facing a far different landscape now.” What has not changed in that landscape is the adamant Republican opposition to any move towards closure of the prison camp. Congressional Republican leaders, who supported transfers under the Bush administration, now portray all Guantánamo inmates, from the 9/11 accused to those cleared for release years ago, as “terrorists”. In the December hearing, Grassley invoked the “over 4,000 service members have given their lives in a war on terror in Iraq and Afghanistan”. “The veterans of those wars gave life and limb to protect Americans from terrorists, like those at Guantánamo Bay,” Grassley said. In the face of such absolutist opposition, Hina Shamsi, director of the national security project at the American Civil Liberties Union, said the best administration strategy would be to drop its opposition in habeas corpus cases, and allow the courts to order prisoner transfers. Those could be done “responsibly, lawfully and safely”, Shamsi said. “With court-ordered transfers, there are no congressional notification requirements.” As for those inmates who have been charged, she argued the administration should pursue plea agreements, which would entail, among other compromises, taking the death penalty off the table. The political storm that would erupt over any plea agreement would be explosive, and would be grist to the mill for the Republican portrayal of Biden as weak in the face of America’s enemies. But Bernard Harcourt, a law professor who also represented Abdul Latif Nasser, said the politics for Biden are not going to get any better. “These are the kind of thorns that you need to pull out immediately,” Harcourt said. “With the midterms on the horizon and then another presidential election, the pressure is not going to ease up. It’s just going to get worse.” Additional reporting by Noa YachotAnna* was 10 when she built her first video game on Roblox, a digital platform where young people can make, share and play games together. She used Roblox much like a child from a previous generation might have used cardboard boxes, marker pens and stuffed toys to build a castle or a spaceship and fill it with characters and story. There was one alluring difference: Roblox hosted Anna’s tiny world online, enabling children she had never met and who maybe lived thousands of miles away from her home in Utah to visit and play. Using Roblox’s in-built tools – child-friendly versions of professional software – Anna began to learn the rudiments of music composition, computer programming and 3D modelling. Game-making became an obsession. When she wasn’t at school Anna was rarely off her computer. As she became more proficient, Anna’s work caught the attention of some experienced users on Roblox, game-makers in their 20s who messaged her with a proposition to collaborate on a more ambitious project. Flattered by their interest, Anna became the fifth member of the nascent team, contributing art, design and programming to the game. She did not sign up to make money, but during a Skype call the game-makers offered the teenager 10% of any profits the game made in the future. It turned out to be a generous offer. Within a few months, the game had become one of the most played on Roblox. For Anna, success had an unfathomable, life-changing impact. At 16 her monthly income somehow exceeded her parents’ combined salaries. She calculated that she was on course to earn $300,000 in a year, a salary equivalent to that of a highly experienced Google programmer. Anna cancelled her plans to go to college. After it launched in 2006 Roblox was, for a while, a relatively obscure piece of educational software. Co-designed by two engineers, David Baszucki and the late Erik Cassel, who had become millionaires in the 1990s by designing and selling physics-simulation software, Roblox was built as a playful method of teaching children the rudiments of game-making. The roughly hewn, blocky aesthetics and ugly text that typified most user-made games on the platform were offputting to adults. But children loved the fact Roblox offered access to an endless stream of new and free experiences – a kind of YouTube for video games. Best of all, one’s customised avatar could be used in any game on the platform – as if Super Mario could also moonlight as the hero in FIFA Football, Call of Duty or Pac-Man, a feature that made thousands of disparate games feel like part of the same universe. Initially, there was little incentive or encouragement for children to make money from their games – a feature fraught with potential legal complexities. Then something changed. Roblox began to advertise itself as a way for young game-makers to make money. On its website, it adopted the slogan: “Make Anything. Reach Millions. Earn Serious Cash.” The company encouraged users to create and sell costumes and accessories for Roblox avatars. These items, the digital equivalent of doll’s clothes, could be bought using Robux, the platform’s digital currency, which the company currently sells at a rate of about 80 to the pound (the exchange rate varies depending on the amount bought in a transaction). Roblox took a 30% cut from the sale of each pair of virtual sunglasses or sports car; the rest went to the original creator and seller. The shift proved profitable. More than half of all US children now have a Roblox account, an astonishing statistic for a company that hardly advertises. Buoyed by the Covid-19 pandemic, by the end of 2021 more than 27m games and experiences had been published on Roblox, many by children inspired by success stories such as Anna’s (5% of Roblox players publish something of their own, the company says). According to the firm’s latest figures, an average of 49.4 million users logged on to Roblox each day in November 2021. When Roblox floated on the stock market in March last year, it was valued at $41bn. Viewed by some as a blueprint for the next generation of virtual economies where users can trade artificially scarce digital assets, Roblox has now surpassed industry titans such as Activision Blizzard and Nintendo to become the most valuable video game company in the world. It is an empire built on the sale of virtual boots and hats and considering that almost half of its users are aged 13 or under, the creativity and labour of children. From the moment she joined the project in 2016, until 2018, when the game reached the heights of its popularity, Anna saw herself as a partner in the venture, where her skills proved invaluable. “I contributed basically everything to the project – animations, sounds, 3D modelling, level design and programming,” she told me. Anna’s transition from amateur game-doodler to professional developer had been so imperceptible that she had not thought to ask for a formal contract, for which she would have required a guardian’s consent to sign. And even though Anna was a child involved in a project that had made more than $2m, no one from Roblox contacted her to provide advice or support. Anna’s income was instead reliant on the unregulated benevolence of the game-makers who owned the account into which Roblox paid the game’s earnings. They decided unilaterally how to distribute funds among the rest of the team. With no contracts in place, the scale of earnings soon caused the fragile financial arrangement to collapse. The game-makers scheduled a call with their young team and announced they were now making the children independent contractors with fixed salaries. Anna did the sums. Her demotion amounted to a 40% pay cut. “I had no say in the matter,” she told me. It was a wounding betrayal. Anna and another colleague quit that day and watched from a distance as, in the months that followed, Roblox promoted the game as an example of self-made success on the platform. There seemed to be no one to whom Anna could turn for advice. Her grandmother urged her to bring a case against the game-makers, but she was afraid that a lawsuit would wipe out her savings. “There is no HR to call,” she told me. “Roblox’s forums would have flagged any post I made about the situation as harassment. And, as I wanted to keep making games on Roblox, I was aware of the reputational risk associated with speaking out against people who were well regarded within the developer community.” Proponents argue that by teaching children how to make, market and sell their creative work, Roblox equips young people with a set of valuable skills for the digital workplace. Max Entwistle and Simon Burgess, 24-year-old co-creators of one of the most popular Roblox games, SharkBite, met on the platform when they were 12. They learned how to make games together, sharing development responsibilities and profits evenly. Their game, which has been played more than a billion times, became profitable while they were studying at university and now generates millions each year. “When I graduated, I wouldn’t have been able to find a job that was higher paying than what I was already doing,” Entwistle told me. Rather than strike out as a junior employee at an established studio, Roblox provided a fast lane for both men to co-found a successful studio, something that might have taken years outside the Roblox ecosystem. Few Roblox games earn major income. Craig Donato, Roblox’s chief business officer, told me that while the company paid out more than half a billion dollars to creators last year, only 1,000 games generated more than $30,000 in 2021. For many of its young users, Roblox is their first experience of the many challenges of managing a team on any creative project, where egos jostle and commitment is tested. With so many projects made by young teams with no previous experience of how to collaborate, little supervision, and often unrealistic expectations, stories of projects gone bad are as prevalent as stories of miraculous success. Roblox offers an accelerator programme – a 12-week course run three times a year – to educate its users. But these tools are focused on how to make better games, not on the interpersonal challenges required to manage a successful creative team. So, while the early success experienced by Anna in Roblox is unusual, stories of exploitation on the platform are rife. Sixteen-year-old Regan Green, from Ontario, Canada, joined Roblox when he was six. Like Anna, he soon began to dabble in the software’s suite of creative tools. In 2017, Green fell in with the creator of Sonic Eclipse Online, a pastiche of Sega’s seminal Sonic the Hedgehog series. Like many 12-year-olds, Green loved the character of Sonic, so when the game’s creator, known on the platform by the handle “DoctorRofatnik” and who also uses the name Jadon Shedletsky on the Discord chatroom (hereafter Jadon), offered him the chance of a lifetime to work on the game as its programmer, Green eagerly signed up. Jadon, who indicated in his messages that he was 24 at the time, proved to be a demanding leader. Green claims that he was encouraged to work long hours to improve the game or be replaced. “It began to have a negative effect on my mental health,” Green, who now makes games outside the Roblox ecosystem, told me. “I was constantly trying to find ways to improve the project, but [Jadon] always wanted more out of me and I became incredibly burned out.” Green worked on Sonic Eclipse Online constantly between the age of 12 and 14. “The pressure caused me to break,” he said. Jadon denies that he threatened collaborators with replacement if they did not produce enough work. “We have no such thing as hours because we’re not professionals,” he told me. Like Anna, Green felt there was no one at Roblox to whom he could turn for support. “I didn’t reach out to Roblox themselves about it, because even then I knew about how unhelpful they were for their developers,” he said. “Things like developer credit and fair pay just aren’t their problems to deal with, I guess.” As well as game-making tools, Roblox includes communication features that enable teams to organise their work. Any messages sent this way are subject to Roblox’s code of conduct and are moderated by proprietary software that checks for abusive language. Sonic Eclipse Online’s development team ignored Roblox’s chat facilities in favour of the popular third-party chatroom, Discord, where more advanced functionality made it easier to communicate and allowed freer use of language. Rachel*, like Green, started playing Roblox when she was six, drawn to the range of games on offer and the community of children with similar interests. She became involved in Sonic Eclipse Online when she was 12 and joined the game’s Discord chat forum. The forum was run by Jadon as a place to discuss development of the project, but also as a typical internet hang-out, characterised by meme-sharing and ironic in-jokes. It was, she says, “an absolute cesspool of toxicity”. Jadon started a private chat with Rachel soon after she joined the server. He began sending her private updates on the progress of the game, which she says made her feel special, like she was party to insider information. He interspersed these messages with innuendo and sexual jokes. “I liked the attention and, very early on, started developing feelings for him,” she told me. “I was a child who just wanted love and attention she couldn’t get elsewhere.” Jadon soon changed his tone. In messages seen by the Observer, he made repeated jokes about raping Rachel and sent her sexually explicit images. Jadon was aware of Rachel’s age. “It’s fine, you’re 12, I expect you to be a little slow, but soon I’ll corrupt you beyond your wildest dreams,” he messaged her in September 2017. “Sexualising other women in the server, underage or not, was already a huge thing but was most common with me,” she recalled. Other members of the team were aware of the charged dynamic, jokingly referred to her as Jadon’s “underage sex doll” in the main chatroom. If ever she challenged his messages, he told her it was all said in jest and not to take herself so seriously. Jadon gave Rachel free Robux to spend on Roblox. “He used the fact that I cared about him a lot to his advantage,” she said. “He was very manipulative, right up until the day I left.” Sonic Eclipse Online launched on Roblox in late 2018. Users could buy access for 400 Robux – £4.59 – for which they would receive a Sonic costume for their avatar. Rachel became a moderator of the game’s community on Roblox. By now, she had a boyfriend and was increasingly uncomfortable with the behaviour she witnessed. She says she saw Jadon’s talent for manipulation in the way he treated Green, constantly demanding more work, while oscillating between criticism and praise. As a co-member of the team, she felt culpable. “He should not have been in this environment, period.” Rachel left the development team in early 2020 and later that year, at the urging of other friends she made on the platform, began to speak publicly about the abuse she suffered. Her friends created a Google document composed of dozens of screenshots of Jadon’s messages sent to Rachel and others during a two-year period. Jadon posted a response video in which he claimed the messages he sent had been jokes and that Rachel had only come forward for attention. After she saw the video, Rachel began to self-harm. Jadon has since deleted it, but recently told me that he stands by most of what he said. “[These] were jokes made in poor taste that could be misinterpreted at face value as something more serious,” he said. “I do not stand by the comment I made about Rachel coming out to seek attention. I made a judgment without the appropriate information.” Friends Rachel had made on Roblox rallied. “KK”, a 19-year-old Japanese game developer, wrote to Roblox asking the platform to ban Jadon’s account and remove his game so that he could no longer profit from the project. KK, who joined Roblox when she was seven and learned to speak English by playing games and making friends on the platform, wanted to prevent similar incidents. “If Roblox had provided the genuine support needed for this situation, it would have never happened,” she said. Roblox told KK that Rachel needed a parent to lodge a formal complaint. Thirteen days after Rachel’s mother filed the complaint (she still has not told her father about what happened), Roblox removed Jadon’s primary account. Sonic Eclipse Online remained available for several months after Jadon was banned and was finally deleted on 27 December after Sega demanded Roblox remove the game for infringing its copyright. Jadon, who now provides only “narrative consultancy” on the game, told me that he did not earn any income from Sonic Eclipse Online. “I have never gotten a percentage from the game and have never profited from it,” he told me. “All the money the project makes goes back into paying for assets or developers.” Yet in December he posted a message to someone on another forum boasting: “I make more with Roblox than both of your parents combined.” Roblox declined to comment on this or any other specific cases. KK has found the company’s response gravely lacking. “Roblox’s lack of care for the safety of its users has opened my eyes,” she told me. “My trust in them to maintain a safe environment is completely gone.” During an investor call in November, co-founder David Baszucki, known to users as “builderman”, assured shareholders that safety was at the core of everything the company built. It was, he said, “what everything rests on”. The firm employs more than 2,000 moderators around the world who review content uploaded to the platform, manually check anything flagged as inappropriate and escalate incidents of suspected grooming. The company’s technology scans communications for certain keywords. Nevertheless, Laura Higgins, Roblox’s director of community safety and digital civility, told me: “You can’t retrofit safety.” Under-13s are not able to share personal information or hyperlinks, while users can self-moderate by blocking other users from communicating with them. “We also conduct a safety review of every uploaded image, audio and video file before these assets become available on our platform,” the company told me. Parents can limit how much their children are able to spend on Robux, a recent feature designed to stop kids from racking up stratospheric bills or frittering away earnings from their games. “There’s a tremendous amount we do to make sure that it’s safe,” Donato said. “What we do well exceeds whatever regulations exist.” Certainly, there are challenges for a company trying to manage the deluge of content uploaded to its servers each day, the millions of messages being sent between children on its platform, all while running a vast experiment designed to replicate the adult workplace and markets with a user base that, until recently, was predominantly under 13. None of Roblox’s existing tools, however, would have prevented Anna’s alleged financial exploitation, Green’s alleged labour exploitation or Rachel’s alleged sexual grooming. Supporters argue that Roblox provides a helpful introduction to game-making. The company provides the tools to make games, the servers to host games, an audience to find and play games and the financial ecosystem to enable young developers to profit from them. Yet Roblox also reflects many of the challenges and shortcomings of the wider commercial games industry: the risk of exploitation, of abusive managers, of miserly revenue splits and, most prevalently, of worker burnout, all of which Roblox claims fall outside its responsibilities. The firm has a limited-access talent hub – a kind of LinkedIn for game-makers to advertise their skills. The hub requires no age verification, has no mechanisms for drafting contracts or securing a guardian’s consent and offers no tools to resolve disputes. “Roblox has no employment relationship of any kind with the creators who develop experiences on the platform,” the company said. For some critics, this is not good enough. “If you’re making or doing anything for kids, you don’t just have to be as good as the version made for adults,” Quintin Smith, a journalist who published a critique of Roblox’s practices on YouTube last August. “You have to have more safety, more care for your audience. If we’re saying: ‘Well, this Roblox stuff sounds bad, but it’s just as bad as adults have it’, that’s not a great place to be in.” For Anna, who had spent her teens learning to make games on Roblox, her brief taste of success proved irresistible. She returned to college to study computer science but quit after one term because the course was too basic and the siren call of her previous earnings too difficult to resist. She lived off her savings, working on new Roblox projects she hoped might replicate her former success. She rarely left the house, lunging from long days of focused activity to periods of bed-bound burnout. She spent so long staring at a screen that she says she developed myopia. “Most of my new games have been flops,” she told me. “I’ve only recently realised exactly how toxic my relationship with Roblox has been and how many years of life experience it has taken from me, all out of a desire to finally build that one game that makes it.” For now, however, Anna feels unable to step away from Roblox. “I just need to give my current project a decent chance at a successful launch, then I can walk away.” * Some names have been changed • This article was amended on 20 January 2022. After publication we were informed that the name “Jadon Shedletsky” as used elsewhere by DoctorRofatnik may not be the legal name of the person connected to that avatar. We have been unable to confirm the identity of the person who is behind DoctorRofatnik.The Matt Black Barn is a “forklift-friendly” live-work space belonging to the renowned British sculptors, Laura Ford and Andrew Sabin. It sits between the villages of Emsworth and Bosham, just north of Chichester harbour. “To the south are trees, a field or two and then the sea,” explains Sabin. “To the north, some fields and then the South Downs.” It is a world apart from their previous live-work space – a converted pianola factory in Kentish Town, London. Before the Matt Black Barn, there was (and still is) the Brown Barn – a beaten-up, 6,000sqft industrial barn that the couple bought in 2014. It served as a vast storage space for their collected works and was conveniently located between their London home and their family-owned holiday home in Selsey. “We just really started to enjoy working there,” recalls Ford. “We worked there more and more in the summer months, and found that it gave us a lot more freedom. We also just enjoyed the bits between work – having a cup of tea outside and looking at the birds. It was this completely different atmosphere.” A year later, the freeholder decided to sell the two adjoining mechanics’ workshops, giving Ford and Sabin the opportunity to permanently relocate. After a lengthy planning battle, the couple sold their London property, razed the two workshops and began work on a new live-work space with the local architect, Roger Lilley. As they were doing so, the remainder of the site – a historic lake and 14 acres of land – came on to the market. “We are accidental estate owners now,” says Sabin. The foundations had just been freshly laid when the pandemic struck. “We were about to put up the steel frame when the site effectively closed,” recalls Sabin. An experienced metalworker, he had constructed the frame with a friend in the Brown Barn. With a crane and a forklift truck, he decided to carry on alone. “It was beautiful weather,” he recalls, “and strangely quite serene.” For Sabin, the conditions were ideal: “No one was watching.” The Matt Black Barn is a minimal two-storey building on an industrial scale. On the ground floor is a gallery space with views out across the beginnings of an informal sculpture garden. (The couple plan to open the gallery for occasional educational visits, open days and events.) Behind this is their “messy studio” – a hangar-like place for work in progress and archival material. The studio is lit by high clerestory windows. Ford explains their significance: “When Andrew and I met many, many years ago, we were both on an MA at the Chelsea College of Arts. We were based in a building on Manresa Road that was designed especially for sculptors. It had these high windows that gave you natural light without taking up too much wall space.” The old college building has since been demolished and Sabin has created a memorial sculpture in its place. At the side of the barn, a flight of steel steps ascends to the first-floor living space. While industrial in scale, there is a softness to the space, which has been organised by the thoughtful placement of bespoke joinery made by the furniture and kitchen designers Uncommon Projects. A free-standing, oak-veneered cabinet creates a screen between the front door and the living area, making the space feel more enclosed and intimate. The double-sided shelves have been designed specifically to display the couple’s smaller sculptures, while black sliding doors allow them to change the display and conceal the television. Sabin also worked with Uncommon Projects to create the 5m kitchen island, designing and welding the red steel frame before craning it into position during the build. It was then fitted with a concrete worktop and drawers. Behind, bespoke cabinetry conceals kitchen appliances while also acting as another display shelf for the couples’ smaller artworks. “When you’re making work in the studio, it’s good to bring it up and live with it for a while,” explains Ford. “Then you can slowly get to know what’s right or wrong about it.” A glazed courtyard garden featuring one of Sabin’s sculptures encourages light into the centre of the upper floor. It also separates the living area from Ford’s open-plan yoga studio and the bedrooms beyond. In the master bedroom, a luxurious ensuite bathroom is arranged behind a half-wall and a bold, geometric tiled floor unifies the space. “We visited India years ago and loved seeing everybody washing out their houses with a hose pipe,” Ford recalls. “I kind of wanted a bit of that here. Besides, these are the kind of shoes we have to deal with here…” We peer down at Sabin’s dust-coated, steel-toe-cap boots. Beyond the yoga studio is Ford’s first-floor drawing studio. The plywood ceiling that demarcates the domestic space is stripped back to reveal industrial corrugated steel. To the left is a huge floor-to-ceiling window that was designed to enable a forklift truck to manoeuvre awkward objects from the outside world in, and vice versa. Ford describes the space as “a whole other world” – albeit one she can still enter in her slippers and pyjamas at the end of the day. The Brown Barn, “messy studio” and drawing studio are all places in which this tirelessly creative couple can make and store their work. But there is, Sabin explains, a fourth workspace: the paved area between the barns, where concrete is mixed and sculptures are rotated, examined, washed or ground down. Here, Sabin is experimenting with a new series of water sculptures that make use of the rain runoff stored in the drainage swales beneath the car park. The location and building are inspiring and facilitating new work. “I would love to replace everything we made in the past with things we’ve made here,” says Sabin. “That would be very exciting.” mattblackbarn.co.uk; @mattblackbarnIn the old days, vandals and hooligans simply knocked things over, be they flowerpots, bus stops, old ladies or standards of common English decency. But these days anything that is knocked over, as long as it is knocked over with a sense of clear moral purpose, isn’t merely knocked over, it seems, but “toppled”. Indeed, a court judgment in Bristol last week opened the floodgates for a summer of 2022 epidemic of righteous toppling. Let the games begin! On Wednesday, the four committed young people, opportunistically identified as part of a much larger group that toppled the statue of the slave trader Edward Colston into the Bristol docks in 2020, were found not guilty of criminal damage. They clearly broke the letter of the law of the land and Colston’s sculpted, slavery-funded cane and fancy frock-coat coat-tails specifically were definitely criminally damaged during the toppling, but the jury acquitted the four by referring to a higher moral standard – the new religion of wokery, as Dominic Paddleboard Raab would have it! Or admirable sensitivity to local public feeling in a city once riven by racial tension that is now proudly multicultural, as it is also known. Tribal war! Signs and wonders!! Move on!!! Last February, Conservative MP Robert Jenrick, whose 2020 luxury housing development approval is now officially more illegal than toppling a Bristol slave trader, said: “Our view will be set out in law, that such monuments are almost always best explained and contextualised.” “We cannot now try to censor or edit our past,” said the prime minister, Boris Johnson, whose 2013 extramarital affair was concealed by an injunction and who lied in an investigation into the recent past of his own interior decorating irregularity. It’s as if there’s one law for statues of slave traders and one for proved liar prime minister adulterers. Only last summer, the then culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, declared: “The government believes that it is always legitimate to examine and debate Britain’s history, but that removing statues, artwork and other historical objects is not right”, arguing for a “retain and explain” approach to “defend our culture and history from the noisy minority of activists constantly trying to do Britain down”, before adding: “The first time I saw Phantom of the Opera I thought a real chandelier was actually falling down from the roof and I cried out like a monkey. But then I went to see it loads more times and realised it was a theatre trick because it happened the same every night, which would be too much of a coincidence. It was still exciting though, like when you hold your wee in for ages and then finally go to the toilet and your winky goes off like a firework.” Where are Dowden’s and Johnson’s and Jenrick’s dogmatic proclamations left by the Independent People’s Republic of Bristol’s decision to give free rein to this woke, righteous effigy-toppling and to support its disrespectful sons and daughters? The historian David Olusoga told the court about the “rape rooms” of the slaver fortresses on the African coast and explained how Colston’s company branded slaves as young as nine. Sticking a plaque on the bottom of a statue to acknowledge this would seem insane, an Elastoplast on a brain haemorrhage, a sick joke. Anyone with a heart reading it would surely wonder why the statue was still standing. At the site of Hitler’s bunker, next to a car park somewhere south of the Brandenburger Tor in Berlin, there is no official commemoration, for obvious reasons. Presumably Johnson would favour a blue plaque that retained and explained. New measures in the government’s forthcoming police, crime sentencing and courts bill would see the Colston Four face up to 10 years in prison because “there has been widespread upset about the damage and desecration of memorials with a recent spate over the summer of 2020”. But even though the justice secretary, Dominic Calais Raab, doesn’t think the police investigate crimes more than a year old, the enforcement of the new bill’s rules must surely see all statue vandalisers from the recent past prosecuted. In 2012, cowardly, woke council officials removed from the Scotstoun leisure centre in Glasgow a wooden effigy of Jimmy Savile, the predatory paedophile sex offender. New government policy surely means the Savile statue must be subject to the same “retain and explain” policy that Johnson has endorsed. The Savile sculpture must be retained and returned to its original position in the foyer of the leisure centre, with a small plaque appended to its foot, detailing Savile’s horrendous sex crimes. And if, as is thought, it transpires that the council destroyed the Savile effigy, then those responsible must be tried for criminal damage. And if they aren’t, then it appears there is one law for those who destroy effigies of predatory paedophiles and quite another for those who topple slavers into a dock. On a lighter note, the Colston Hall in Bristol has now been renamed the Bristol Beacon. It is a superb venue, run for the benefit of the people of Bristol and not for faceless shareholders, with a genuinely diverse programme and staffed by the most accommodating and professional and friendly people. I am delighted to see it reopen and glad it has weathered with sensitivity the storms its historical name meant it was caught up in, to continue to serve the people of the mighty musical city. That said, there is also a tiny part of me that is sad that, next time I do standup there, I won’t be able to violently condemn my woke, Guardian-reader audience for patronising a venue that celebrates slavery. Nonetheless, it’s a small price to pay for a city’s efforts to do the right thing. God speed the (former) Colston Hall and the current Colston Four. Rescheduled national 2022 dates of Stewart’s 2020 tour, Snowflake Tornado, are on sale now; the autumn 2022 London dates of his 2023 tour, Basic Lee, are also on sale; Stewart Lee T-shirts are available hereAbout 30% of former Guantánamo detainees who were resettled in third countries have not been granted legal status, according to new analysis shared exclusively with the Guardian, leaving them vulnerable to deportation and restricting their ability to rebuild their lives. Of the hundreds of men released from Guantánamo since the prison first opened 20 years ago, about 150 were sent to third countries in bilateral agreements brokered by the US, because their home countries were considered dangerous to return to. Publicly, the US committed to transferring them in a humane way that would ensure rehabilitation after years of incarceration – and, in many cases, torture – without charge. But many remain in legal limbo, unable to work or reunite with their families, and have been subject to years of detention. Others have been forcibly returned to dangerous conditions. The new data was produced by the human rights organization Reprieve, which assists former detainees, and illustrates how the lawlessness that has marked the prison from the beginning can follow men years after their release. The analysis indicates that approximately 45 men have not been given residency documents upon resettlement. Ravil Mingazov was held at Guantánamo for more than 14 years before being transferred to the United Arab Emirates on the last day of the Obama administration. A Muslim Tatar from Russia who had been harassed by authorities because of his religion, he feared returning home, where UN human rights experts warned he could face torture. He was assured he would live freely in the UAE after a short stint in a rehabilitation facility. Instead, he has been held in solitary confinement and severely mistreated, according to his family and attorneys. His 23-year-old son, Yusuf Mingazov, spoke to the Guardian from his home in London. “I’m not saying that Guantánamo is a good place. It’s one of the worst places in the world, one of the worst prisons. But comparing to UAE right now, it’s a nice place.” Last year, fears of forced repatriation mounted after Russian authorities visited Ravil’s mother in Tatarstan to produce travel documents. Monitored phone calls to relatives ground to a halt. A UN opinion has likened Mingazov’s case to incommunicado detention and enforced disappearance, holding both the US and the UAE responsible. A state department spokesperson said that concerns regarding the case had been raised with the UAE government. Martina Burtscher, a caseworker with Reprieve, said that addressing the needs of former detainees became much harder when the Trump administration eliminated a state department office dedicated to closing Guantánamo. That office had been led by a special envoy charged with finding solutions for the men who remained and monitoring the conditions of those resettled. Without the office, there was no way to press host governments, who now “had a free hand” to do what they wanted with the men, said Burtscher. “Who do you call in the state department to try to ensure that there is a follow-up? You can go to the US embassy in the host country, which I tried to do in several locations. The answers were largely the same: ‘It’s not our problem any more. The men are now at the [mercy] of their host countries, and we are sure that their human rights are being met.’” For many former detainees, that was not the case. The UAE has deported 22 other men to their home countries, Yemen and Afghanistan. One of the Yemeni men is being held by a militia group; one of the Afghan men died from “torture, mistreatment and medical neglect both at Guantánamo and in the UAE”, according to a UN report. In 2018, Senegal forcibly repatriated two men to Libya, where they were detained by militia. They have since been released but remain “vulnerable to re-detention”, according to Reprieve. Other ex-detainees may be nominally free in host countries, but without documentation, they often can’t work, travel or see their families. Mansoor Adayfi, a Yemeni man sent to Serbia in 2016, has complained of persistent surveillance and other restrictions, calling post-detention life “Guantánamo 2.0”. The state department spokesperson said that the government registers its concerns with host countries when it is not clear ex-detainees are being treated humanely. The Biden administration has not re-established the special envoy role for closing Guantánamo. Only one person has so far been released under Biden, to his native Morocco, and 13 detainees are eligible for transfer. Ambassador Daniel Fried, the special envoy during Obama’s first term, said monitoring the progress of resettled detainees was a central part of the job. “We knew the status of every third-country transfer. I knew the one who got married and where he worked and who his wife was,” he said. “There are some problems of Guantánamo that will never go away,” Fried continued. “The way you deal with that is to step up and make sure that the people that were there – if you found them eligible for transfer – are given the support they need.”Force Majeure, Ruben Östlund’s 2014 film, is, on the face of it, begging not to be adapted for the stage: it involves a majestic alpine landscape and skiing – and that’s just for starters. It is also an uncategorisable, ambiguous narrative that risks being misunderstood and that, in the wrong hands, could have turned out to be a snowy bellyflop. But it’s precisely because of its high-risk content that this show is a triumph and a wonder to behold. Director Michael Longhurst and his tremendous cast have pulled off a dazzling production that entertains and unsettles, and Tim Price must take a bow too, as his adaptation is even more nuanced than the film. In front of us, a snowy mountainscape (designer Jon Bausor) is bathed in icy blue light (Lucy Carter) and framed by a gauzy proscenium arch as though to say (a matter pertinent to what follows): this is engineered, this is theatre, keep your head. The skiing issue is stunningly resolved as the more balanced of cast members swoop dynamically down the slanted stage into the stalls, while others stay put and practise on-the-spot, sporty, disco-like choreography with neon-bright skis. All this – the flashing skis, the bodies bent double like bunnies, the frenzied Vivaldi soundtrack – might make you laugh with pleasure, but what happens next will wipe the smile off your face. The story hinges on a single false move: Tomas, brilliantly played by Rory Kinnear with blokeish pallor and a bordering-on-terminal lack of self-knowledge, is on a family holiday, and, after a first day on the slopes, is having lunch with his wife and children when what is understood to be a deliberately engineered avalanche swoops down – no problem, except it appears to be out of control. Tomas grabs his phone and runs away from his wife and children. His act might be small and forgivable – a shameful reflex – except that he denies it, won’t apologise, and it becomes a potentially all-encompassing, defining betrayal. The story is partly about shifting scale: is Tomas’s action a detail or a domestic avalanche? Lyndsey Marshal is marvellously convincing as Ebba, his honest grafter of a wife who, at first, laughs hysterically as her way of expressing hurt. Their children (Florence Hunt and Henry Hunt) are astonishingly natural, bickering with each other and suffering their parents fallout. Their skiing friends, Sule Rimi as Mats and Siena Kelly as Jenny, who juggle related issues about trust, are amusing too, and Nathalie Armin is spot-on as Charlotte, self-appointed femme fatale of the slopes. Throughout, the actors slalom between slapstick and trauma and their slippery story never misses its footing. Folk is based on the life of Cecil Sharp (1859-1924), who was a Hampstead resident and a Cambridge-educated collector of English folk songs – an important but controversial enterprise. Nell Leyshon’s new play centres on Sharp’s encounter with two sisters, Louie Hooper and Lucy White, who worked as glovers in Somerset. Her plot is like an unaccompanied voice: fine, subtle and carrying. For the sisters, folk music is a mother tongue (they learned it from their mother, who has just died as the play opens). It is their living heirloom. But after Louie has given Sharp custody of the songs, she reacts with disbelieving horror at the mediocre aspic of his settings. His cultural appropriation is, for her, personal theft. But it is too late to take back her gift about which the real Sharp wrote, presumably to quell his conscience: “exchange is no robbery”. As Louie, Mariam Haque is wonderful: intense, stricken and inward, an unselfconsciously blunt critic of Sharp’s music, her face comic when most underwhelmed. Her unforced naturalness as a singer brings out the starkness in the folk songs, their unmediated appeal to the heart. Sharp is plausibly played, too, by Simon Robson, as a condescending enthusiast who applies himself to the piano with aplomb. And as Lucy, Sasha Frost gives a vivacious performance as she grabs life amorously by the lapels – or, more specifically, handsome young layabout John (robustly played by Ben Allen). Subtract the “g” from glover, her teasing eyes seem to say, as she hand-stitches the gloves. Roxana Silbert directs with homely simplicity, supported by musical director Gary Yershon, and the result is a charming, touching, unusual evening that asks: who owns folk song? I wished only that we were not confined to a basement theatre. This play pines for fresh air – what a wonderful outdoor piece it would make – with a field or three in view. Star ratings (out of five) Force Majeure ★★★★★ Folk ★★★★ Force Majeure is at the Donmar Warehouse, London, until 5 February Folk is at Hampstead theatre Downstairs, London NW3; until 5 FebruaryA call to arms from Richard Fenton in Katowice in Poland. “‘Missing in action’ is the term used to describe the situation of someone who has gone into battle and failed to return and whose fate is otherwise unknown. As such, the term describes someone who has done, or tried to do, their duty. So why is it being used to describe politicians who are deemed not to have done what was expected of them? “I suppose terms like ‘skiving’, ‘shirking’ or ‘swinging the lead’ are a bit too direct, although the latter could be dressed up as ‘inclinata plumbum’.” I confess that I hadn’t noticed this, but Mr Fenton is spot on. Consider the following recent headlines: “Republicans missing in action as Democrats emotionally commemorate Capitol riot anniversary”; “World Bank under fire for being ‘missing in action’ on climate change”; “Rishi Sunak ‘missing in action’ as hospitality venues face closure”; “Boris Johnson is missing in action and is not up to job as Prime Minister”. You get my drift. I think Mr Fenton would agree with me, therefore, that the perpetrators should be put on jankers. Condign punishment is the only answer. Ditto for the author of the following: “While you may think onboarding only takes place the first few days on the job, it actually begins before a new hire starts and extends through the first month. And employees are 58% more likely to stay in a role for three years or more when there is a strong onboarding program. That’s why we put together this complete guide to virtual onboarding, so you won’t miss a step.” That drivel comes courtesy of LinkedIn, and was brought to my attention by Duncan H Brown after I wrote about this execrable term. Thank you, comrades Fenton and Brown, I feel that I’m not a lone voice crying in the wilderness. • Jonathan Bouquet is an Observer columnistIn the Russian-Jewish community of Brighton Beach in Brooklyn in the 1980s, gay yeshiva student David (Samuel H Levine) is having an identity crisis. Closely monitored by his overbearing parents, he moves in with his newly widowed grandfather, Josef (Ron Rifkin), on the basis that he will complete the building’s “minyan” – the minimum number of people needed for communal worship. Josef’s apartment is only a few blocks away, but in such a tight-knit community it might as well be another country. From this new home, David begins to explore his sexuality, taking the train to a gay bar in the East Village, embarking on an affair with a gorgeous bartender, and reading James Baldwin’s Giovanni’s Room in the local library. The film’s bluesy woodwind score has a teasing, goading quality that feels tinged with melancholy; the spectre of Aids hovers around the film’s edges. What’s most interesting about Eric Steel’s tender coming-of-age drama is the queerness hiding in plain sight. When fixing the toilet of the two men who live next door, David clocks that there’s only one bed. In cinemas and on demandDawn Basciano’s ancestors arrived five generations ago in Coloma, California, as enslaved people, forced to leave behind an infant son enslaved to another family in Missouri. Those ancestors, Nancy and Peter Gooch, were freed in 1850 when California joined the union as a free state, and 20 years later, their son and his family were able to join them in the fertile agricultural land north-east of Sacramento. Their journey west was funded by the sweat and hard work of Nancy, who grew and sold fruit, mended clothes and cooked for the local miners. Nancy and her descendants would go on to purchase more than 400 lush acres of farmland in Coloma. But what should have been a story of triumph ended instead as a tale all too familiar to formerly enslaved Black Americans across the US. The state of California seized the majority of that land under the guise of eminent domain to build a state park, and the family never received just compensation. “We were denied the financial security and wealth associated with land ownership,” Basciano said. Pearley Monroe – Nancy’s grandson, and Basciano’s great-grandfather – spent the rest of his life mourning the loss. Now, the story of Basciano’s family and others are under review by a California reparations taskforce. The first of its kind in the nation, the committee is tackling the daunting and unprecedented work of recommending reparations – whether they be monetary or through policy – for Black Californians, particularly those who are descended from enslaved people. Shirley Weber, the California secretary of state, who authored the law that formed the taskforce, has said California must forge its own path on the thorny topic of reparations, an issue the federal government has tried and failed to resolve for decades. “We came to understand very clearly that California has the ability and the power to do it,” she said at a public hearing in June. “And if not us, then who?” The taskforce was formed in 2020 after the legislature and Gavin Newsom, California’s governor, approved a law requiring the study and development of reparations proposals. Since then, the nine-person taskforce, comprising civil rights leaders, attorneys, lawmakers and academics, has spent months gathering evidence, listening to expert testimony, hosting public meetings and considering proposals, with the goal of submitting its recommendations to the legislature next summer. The taskforce is undertaking this vast challenge with the knowledge that the historic injustices suffered by the descendants of slavery are deep, systemic and difficult to quantify. “The economic injustices, the education injustices, the social injustices, the judicial injustices go on and on and on,” said Weber in June. “We must be aggressive in our efforts to be honest and direct and to figure out what we need to do in California and be an example to the rest of the nation in how we begin to reckon with ourselves.” Reckoning with history California’s unique history with slavery and its aftermath has made addressing reparations a particularly complicated task. Though California joined the union as a free state in 1850, 11 years before the civil war, many who took to the Sierra Nevada foothills during the Gold Rush in the years before statehood brought enslaved people with them. While the state constitution proclaimed “neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, unless for punishment of a crime, shall ever be tolerated”, the legislature passed a fugitive slave law in 1852 that allowed those who had been brought to California before it became a free state to be returned to the south. In one case that went all the way to the state supreme court, a slaveholder brought a man, Archie Lee, to California after statehood and after the fugitive slave law had lapsed. But the courts argued that the slaveholder was so “young and ignorant” of California’s laws that he should not be deprived of his human property, Stacey Smith, an associate history professor at Oregon State University, testified at a public taskforce meeting in September. Other experts testified about the years of discrimination that followed after slavery was abolished, from environmental racism to the state’s history of redlining – a discriminatory practice of denying financial services to specific people to prevent them from moving to or living in certain areas – and how discriminatory housing practices led to segregation in schools. They also testified about the Great Migration, when millions of Black Americans fled the south and Jim Crow to places like California, hoping for a better life, but found instead “structural barriers of exclusion” like restrictive housing covenants that forbade homeowners from selling to Black people, said Isabel Wilkerson, author of The Warmth of Other Suns: The Epic Story of America’s Great Migration. “The caste system followed the migrants wherever they went and became not merely a southern phenomenon, but a national one,” she testified. Black Californians also faced rampant racism in the communities where they tried to settle. Wilkerson spoke of how after Emory Hestus Holmes, a second world war veteran, purchased a three-bedroom home for his family in Pacoima, California, in 1959, the neighbors led a relentless harassment campaign in an effort to get them to move away. They prank-called them at all hours, threw rocks through their windows, burned a cross on their lawn and spray-painted on their garage: “Black Cancer Lives Here, Don’t Let It Spread”. Injustices that ‘can’t be quantified’ Early on in the process, the taskforce reviewed other examples of reparations programs throughout the world. Germany paid $89bn in restitution to Holocaust victims while the United States paid $20,000 each to the 82,219 Japanese Americans who were unlawfully incarcerated during the second world war. In 2015, the United States authorized payments of up to $10,000 per day – a total of $4.4m each – for the dozens of people taken hostage in Iran in 1979. A Kirsten Mullen, co-author of From Here to Equality, told the taskforce that following that same math, the payment for one Black American who endured a single decade under Jim Crow would be $36.5m. But the challenge before this taskforce is that so many of the injustices suffered and opportunities lost by Black Americans “can’t be quantified”, Weber said at a September meeting. Weber’s father was a sharecropper in Hope, Arkansas, who had to flee to California after he tried to organize for fairer wages. Descended from enslaved people, his community had been terrorized into deference following a number of race riots that ripped through the country. “You can’t quantify my father’s lack of education and the negative experience that he had just trying to survive for himself and his family,” Weber said. “You have to begin to say, OK, what do we do in terms of opening up this particular society in a way that really makes an effort to create the opportunities not just for those who are here but also for the next generation to come? Weber added: “You can’t buy that with $20,000.” The scale of the injustices under assessment by the committee is almost inconceivably vast. Given stolen land and housing discrimination alone, Black Americans were denied the greatest source of family wealth today – home ownership, Wilkerson testified. This robbery of family inheritance and generational wealth has created a wealth gap between Black and white Americans that some studies say would take 228 years to close. For Dawn Basciano’s family, the loss was enormous. Not only did they lose the majority of their farmland on her paternal side – land that would have provided steady employment for extended family as well money and legacy – her fourth great-grandmother on her mother’s side had assets unfairly taken from her as well when her brother died and the state auctioned off the swaths of property he owned in downtown Sacramento under the pretense that he had no living heirs or descendants – “although his sister, my fourth great-grandmother, was alive and well”, Basciano testified in September. “What do reparations look like? There is so much,” Basciano said. “I almost feel guilty for feeling the pain that I feel, but it’s real. It resonates with me. This is my family. These are the stories that have been told and retold, and it hurts. How do you fix that? How do you right a wrong that is so systemic?” Basciano pointed out that there were hundreds of thousands of families that had stories like hers. In September, Newsom signed a law that would return a lucrative beachfront property in Manhattan Beach, California, that had been taken from the Bruce family in the 1920s through eminent domain. The Manhattan Beach city council had voted to oppose issuing a symbolic proclamation to apologize to the Bruces, citing concerns it would make the city liable for future lawsuits. Though any recommendations made by the taskforce will not be binding, Weber urged its members to be bold in their proposals, including universal preschool for all children to help address educational and childcare inequities. Other witnesses and experts have suggested monetary reparations, low-interest loans, public apologies, just compensation for stolen land, the return of historically stolen land and ways for descendants of slavery to attend university at no cost. The taskforce will continue to meet in the new year. Weber acknowledged that whatever the body comes up with will probably only be the beginning. “This 400-year challenge is not going to be solved in 400 days,” Weber said. “It will take much more than that, and a commitment from the state of California, the fifth-largest economy in the world, to make that happen.”The middle ages are a sort of paradox, write the authors of this engaging history. “When people want to kick a current problem back into the past – whether Islamic terrorism, bungled responses to Covid-19, or even the process for getting a driver’s licence (it involves a lot of bureaucracy) – they call it ‘medieval’.’’ So too do white supremacists, who look to the middle ages to seize on “golden and glorious artefacts, big castles and cathedrals when they want to claim an origin story for whiteness”. Part of the reason for this is because the thousand-year period that followed the sack of Rome in the 410s has often been thought of as the dark ages, a “centuries-old understanding of the medieval world” that still pervades popular culture and evokes an “isolated, savage, primitive medieval Europe”. Matthew Gabriele and David Perry set out to provide a corrective, setting out “a new story” of “the Bright Ages” that stresses continuities over change, and emphasises connections and mutual influences over exceptionalism. The authors essentially address the subject chronologically, picking out individuals to illustrate a wide range of talents and achievements – such as Galla Placidia, the patron of the gorgeous chapel that is one of the glories of Ravenna; or Bede, the industrious monk in Northumbria whose accounts of early England are so important; or Ibn Rushd and Moses ben Maimon (better known as Maimonides), outstanding scholars of the 12th century, whose works were hugely influential. Misconceptions and bugbears are addressed with gusto, such as the 16th-century scholar Giorgio Vasari, blamed for coining the term gothic as “a negative description of medieval art”, or Charles Homer Haskins, whose concept of the “12th-century renaissance”, which is almost 100 years old, is misleading and casts women as well as “non-Christians and non-white people in the shadows”. Edward Gibbon is upbraided for longing for “a purer Italy” while gazing at Rome’s ruins “as a dilettante traveller” and thus coming up with the classic “ages-old idea” of the collapse of the Roman empire. In fact, the authors argue provocatively, “Rome did not fall.” Gabriele and Perry, both medieval historians of considerable distinction, are writing here for non-specialist readers, drawing on references to the modern world that range from Hollywood movies to blockbuster video games, from the Ku Klux Klan’s terminology to the flags waved during the storming of the US Capitol in January 2021. They write with spirit and a breezy style that makes for an enjoyable read. We learn that the Vikings were “snazzy dressers”, that the fall of Jerusalem to the First Crusade in 1099 was met by many Muslims with “a collective shrug”, and that many who went from “west to east and east to west” at the time of the rise of the great Mongol empire were seeking to “forge a military partnership based in realpolitik”. This makes the book and its themes easily accessible – the merits of which the authors themselves seem to sometimes be uncertain, with the reader being repeatedly reminded that history is not straightforward, but complicated and complex. Such is the price of reaching outside the halls of academia, and something the authors are to be commended for. Given Gabriele and Perry’s determination to be inclusive and retell the story of Europe’s “Bright Ages”, it is a shame, then, that there is no coverage of half of the continent’s histories, peoples and cultures. Poland and Hungary, political and cultural powerhouses in Europe in the middle ages, are absent, while Kievan Rus’, which stretched from the Baltic to the Black Seas, appears briefly and only in passing. The two Bulgarian empires and the Great Moravian empire are not even mentioned. Most strikingly of all, the eastern Roman – or Byzantine – empire, its scholarship, art, literature, politics, trade and religion is effectively (if implicitly) dismissed as an irrelevance to Europe, rather than an essential and deeply rooted part of its history, if not its very core, for some or even all this period. These omissions attest to a wider problem of how history has been used to exclude those who do not fit into the triumphant narrative of the rise of the west – ironically the very thing The Bright Ages sets out to challenge. What the authors have done well, they’ve done very well and with passion and verve, challenging the reader to tackle assumptions, bias and prejudices about the past to create a more joined-up, inclusive picture of the thousand years that followed the sack of Rome. But I, for one, would sing from the rooftops if Gabriele and Perry penned another volume that looked at – or simply included – the poor cousins in the half of Europe whose rich and important pasts remain firmly enveloped in darkness, rather than bathed in light. Peter Frankopan is the author of The Silk Roads: A New History of the World (Bloomsbury) The Bright Ages: A New History of Medieval Europe by Matthew Gabriele and David Perry is published by HarperCollins (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyAt 9pm, on a Sunday in early May last year, almost one in four of us on our scared, fractious, divided island hunkered down to watch the finale of the sixth series of the BBC police procedural Line of Duty. It was the largest television audience for a drama in Britain since modern records began almost 20 years ago. It was also a rare moment of mass connection, between genders, ages and demographics, that usually only occurs during football tournaments or the Olympics. One that felt especially heightened because of the crappy, house-bound year we’d all just lived through. Mainly, though, it was just fizzing, nerve-jangling TV. The woman at the centre of it all, DCI Joanne Davidson, also known as the 45-year-old Scottish actor Kelly Macdonald, was not one of the 16 million people watching. For the previous six episodes, we’d tried to figure out just how much of a bad egg she was – whether she was a “bent” copper, in the lingo of the AC-12, Line of Duty’s dogged anti-corruption unit. The denouement was a true water-cooler moment, even if many of us had not seen a water cooler, or even a colleague, for 15 months. So Macdonald really didn’t watch it? “Nooo,” she replies, looking horrified by the notion. Why not? “If I don’t watch something at the time, at, say, a premiere, it’s not something I’m going to go out of my way to do. I’ve got other things to do. The dishwasher always needs unloading.” Macdonald is hardly a stranger to big productions. She made her debut in the 1996 instant classic Trainspotting, opposite Ewan McGregor, and has gone on to work with directors such as Robert Altman in Gosford Park, Martin Scorsese, in a five-year stint in the TV series Boardwalk Empire, and the Coen brothers in No Country for Old Men. Her latest movie, the feature film Operation Mincemeat, about a secret project in the Second World War, sees her share top billing with Colin Firth and Matthew Macfadyen. Still, being the “guest” lead on Line of Duty – a role previously taken by Keeley Hawes and Thandiwe Newton – took Macdonald aback. “Oh my God, it was all a bit much for me,” she says, her eyes wide, when we meet in a hotel in central London. “It’s just of such interest to everybody. And everybody’s got an opinion. Everybody seemed to be watching it. I’m used to flying vaguely under the radar when it comes to things I’ve done. And it was a strange time, with Covid, so it was a shock to the system. “I was warned by people I was working with,” she continues. “They were like, ‘Are you ready for this?’ And I thought I was, but it was more than I expected. I was very grateful for wearing a mask when I was out, I tell you that much.” Macdonald was superb in Line of Duty, vacillating between tough and vulnerable, never an easy read, always offering a suggestion of both guilt and misunderstood naivete. This was especially evident in the penultimate episode of the series where DCI Davidson endured a gruelling, uninterrupted, 30-minute interrogation with the AC-12 trio of Steve Arnott (played by Martin Compston), Ted Hastings (Adrian Dunbar) and Anna Maxwell Martin’s DCS Carmichael. The scene felt like an age, in televisual terms, but the payoff, as the intensity ratcheted up and up, made it one of the most iconic moments in Line of Duty lore. For Macdonald, who spent two intense days filming the scene, it was a satisfying moment: proof, 25 years after her exhilarating arrival in Trainspotting, of what she’s capable of as an actor. “I got to do the thing that I was cast to do, so it was a good day at the office,” she says. “It was the scene that everyone kept talking about nonstop when we were filming, and I put a lot of hours into preparing for it. I knew why I was there. And I knew that I was doing it. And I suppose it’s one of the most dramatic, emotional scenes I’ve had to do…” Macdonald stops – she’s getting uncomfortably close to talking about acting in a pretentious way (which she hates). “You just sound like such a wanker when you talk about this stuff. But you asked!” I did, and with some encouragement, Macdonald goes on: “I used to think my prep was just to stress myself out and lose sleep and think I can’t do it. Then hopefully prove myself wrong. And oh, it’s exhausting and pointless. But that’s just age. I know it’s in me to do it and I’ve been doing it for a long time, and to just let it happen rather than trying to second guess it, because you can’t really.” Macdonald lets out an anguished yelp. “So wanky!” So, in short, Macdonald sweats stuff less than she used to? “Yeah, definitely, I sweat less,” she says. “Having said that, I am perimenopausal possibly, so I’m definitely sweating more.” Macdonald explodes in giggles: “But metaphorically, I sweat less.” Macdonald never trained as an actor, unless you count endlessly rewatching Doris Day in the 1953 musical Calamity Jane as a child and then acting it out. “I would try and get friends involved, but nobody knew it as well as me,” she says. “So it was quite tricky.” Born in Glasgow’s Southside, Macdonald’s parents separated when she was nine and she moved on to a council estate on the outskirts of the city with her mother Patsy and her younger brother. She left school at 16, and was working in a bar, aged 19, when she was handed a flyer for an open-call audition for “the new Patricia Arquette”. The movie was Trainspotting, Danny Boyle’s adaptation of Irvine Welsh’s novel about a group of heroin-addicted Edinburgh miscreants. Thousands tried out and Macdonald made it to the final two for Diane, a sassy schoolgirl. “I remember getting on the bus after my final audition,” says Macdonald. “It was a screen test and I left their makeshift studio that we filmed in on Alexandra Parade [in Glasgow], and I waited for the bus and I sat up on the top deck. And I knew it was between me and one other person. And I sort of knew I’d got it. I had a feeling: ‘This is my life starting now.’ It was a clear fork in the road.” Macdonald pauses, hugs her stomach and looks apologetically at my Dictaphone. “Yeah, sorry, I’m really rumbling, I hope you’re not picking that up,” she says. “I had a very disappointing croissant for breakfast.” Dressed today in a Bella Freud “1970” jumper, with matching red lipstick, Macdonald is funny and winningly self-deprecating. When I call her a “film star” she visibly bristles. “I just don’t think of myself as a film star,” she says. “I felt it a bit checking into this hotel, I didn’t even check in. They were all very nice and met me and I thought, ‘Oh God, they think Tom Cruise is here.’ I’m not that person. Like, I’m fine. I can make my way from the train station, I’m good.” Tom Cruise would insist no one else stayed in the hotel, I suggest. “Yeah, I haven’t seen anyone else,” Macdonald says, smiling. “It’s been quite quiet. Maybe Tom Cruise is like, ‘Kelly can stay here. But no one else!’” Whatever she says, Macdonald is a film star and her new movie Operation Mincemeat shows again what a dexterous, unshowy performer she is. The action retells a far-fetched true story about a covert MI5 team that was charged by Winston Churchill in 1943 to come up with a plan to convince the Germans that the Allies intended to invade Greece not Italy. At their head was a pair of “corkscrew thinkers”, Ewen Montagu (Firth) and Charles Cholmondeley (Macfadyen), who devised an audacious ruse to pass off an already dead homeless man as a British officer who was travelling with secret documents when his plane crashed. Macdonald’s Jean Leslie is a smart, resourceful MI5 secretary who worked closely with the men, including hashing out a detailed backstory for the officer and supplying a personal photo that was left on the body as a suggestion of the sweetheart he’d left behind. Operation Mincemeat proved to be a turning point in the Second World War, and is now regarded as one of the most inspired and strangest military deceptions. “It’s bonkers,” says Macdonald. “I feel like if it was an original idea, the screenwriter would have lots of objections from producers and people saying, ‘Oh, this is not believable. Nobody’s going to buy this.’ Yeah, you couldn’t make it up.” The real Mincemeat team became tight, Macdonald’s Jean and Firth’s Ewen especially so. This is a Second World War story not of mud-caked battles and rations, but of romance and intrigue. Nights were spent dancing in the Gargoyle club in Soho, with its interior designed by Henri Matisse and Edwin Lutyens. “Jean’s not just the woman in the office,” says Macdonald. “She’s having a wartime experience like a lot of women were having. It was a very dark time, but there was also this grabbing of life by the nuts, not to be too crass. That thing of living it, while you have it.” Macdonald describes Operation Mincemeat as a “big, shiny job”. That means? “The catering changes,” she says. “You get slightly nicer cars to take you to work instead of vans.” There was also money to splash on dance lessons for Macdonald. “That was amazing fun, to learn that stuff with a real dancer,” she says. “I really enjoy it, so the more dancing the better. Not Strictly, though.” So Macdonald is ruling herself out of a future appearance on the show then? “I don’t know why I even mentioned that, don’t mention that!” she replies. “I said it like I was putting myself forward as a dancer. I’m really not!” Outside work, Macdonald lists her main interest as: “I move furniture.” She lives in Glasgow with her two sons, Freddie, 13, and Theodore, 9, (she shares custody with her ex-partner of 14 years, Dougie Payne, the bassist in Travis), and moved house this year. I ask Macdonald to clarify “move furniture”. “I don’t move other people’s furniture,” she says. “It’s not like a side job I’ve got: Macdonald’s Movers. No, I move furniture too much. It’s getting slightly to be a problem. And the kids don’t even think about it, they walk in and go, ‘Oh, that used to be over there.’” Macdonald sighs, and decides it’s just the stage of life she’s at. “I’ve started growing my own flowers,” she says. “I’m gardening. It’s all falling into place.” The work continues to roll in. Macdonald’s just filmed a road movie with Gina McKee, directed by Carol Morley, called Typist Artist Pirate King. She is also very happily sending herself up in the English-language remake of the hit French comedy Call My Agent! In the transfer, she plays a character not a million miles from actor Cécile de France in the original, who is turned down for a role in a new Quentin Tarantino film because she’s too old. “I had a very Call My Agent! moment, actually, when my agent was telling me about the part I was going to be playing,” she says. “And she couldn’t get the words out and then I realised it was the Cécile de France storyline-ish but different.” For someone who couldn’t envisage ever becoming an actor and who, even when she got her break, couldn’t foresee it becoming her career, Macdonald has – even she accepts – done all right. Earlier in our conversation, she said that, if she weren’t doing what she does now, she thinks she might have been a journalist. So then, as our time winds up, how would she finish the article? “My son is having to do essays at the minute where the last paragraph has to start with ‘in conclusion’,” she says. So, in conclusion…? “In conclusion, I’ve not concluded yet,” Macdonald decides finally. “And yeah, we’ll see how it goes.” Operation Mincemeat is released on 22 April Fashion editor Jo Jones; makeup by Liz Pugh at Premier Hair and Makeup; hair by Paul Donovan using Kérastase; fashion assistant Peter Bevan; shot at the Rosewood Hotel“I am not a man for soldiering, although I do tolerably well at it in a very minor role. But there is nothing about it that pleases me, and much that offends … It is a corrupter of morals in the widest sense and a gross waste of man’s time and effort.” These words were written by George Devine, the actor and founding artistic director of the Royal Court theatre, in a letter to his wife from Burma, where he served in the second world war. The views he expressed reflected what his family – and many in the arts world – regarded as his essential humanity and compassion. So, half a century after his death, they were shocked to discover among his possessions an item that appeared to be a trophy taken from the body of a Japanese soldier. A battered suitcase discovered in a neglected cupboard contained medals, chess pieces, eyeglass lenses – “pieces of him”, said his great-grandson, George Pritchard. But it also held “something utterly out of place: a piece of someone else”. The item was a Japanese flag inscribed with good luck messages by the soldier’s relatives, neighbours and community figures. Yosegaki hinomaru were carried into battle by their recipients, and were believed to hold the owner’s spirit. Who did this flag belong to, and how did it end up in Devine’s suitcase? A three-year search for answers to these questions is the subject of a documentary, Hinomaru: Homecoming of a Flag, made by Pritchard, which won best short documentary at the Tokyo International Short Film Festival last month. “We didn’t really know what it was when we found it, but once we started researching we began to realise its significance,” Pritchard, 26, told the Observer. “It was a shock. It was out of touch with his character. It definitely threw things for us in the way we viewed him. So I needed to get to the bottom of it, and figure out what actually happened.” During the war, Devine was a captain in the Royal Artillery based in Burma and was twice mentioned in despatches. In 1954, he co-founded the English Stage Company, a radical theatre company that began staging new plays at the Royal Court. Its first big success came in 1956 with John Osborne’s Look Back in Anger. Devine later wrote that his objective was to persuade “writers of serious pretensions back into the theatre”. He died in his prime following a heart attack in 1966, aged 55. In 2017, when family members unfolded the newly discovered flag, they found hand-written messages radiating from the national symbol of a red circle, representing the sun. It was typical of yosegaki hinomaru, which were given to young men setting off to war by their communities. There are numerous accounts of Allied soldiers taking such flags from the bodies of dead Japanese troops as souvenirs. According to one memoir, “the men gloated over, compared, and often swapped their prizes. It was a brutal, ghastly ritual the likes of which have occurred since ancient times on battlefields where antagonists have possessed a profound mutual hatred”. In recent years, hundreds of yosegaki hinomaru have been returned to families, often in highly emotional circumstances, through the work of the Obon Society, a charity dedicated to peace and reconciliation. Pritchard wanted to track down the flag’s owner, but “I didn’t know where to start”. He spent hours examining war records at the national archives to plot the movements of Devine’s regiment and eventually, in a “huge breakthrough” helped by a Japanese academic, identified the name and the home town of the soldier. The young film-maker wrote letters to people of the same name in the town, local officials and a nearby shrine. Finally, after months of painstaking research, contact was made with the soldier’s family. But the mystery of how Devine acquired the flag was still to be unravelled, and a few further twists were yet to come. In the end, both families – Devine’s and the Japanese soldier’s – had learned more about the past and their loved ones. The 25-minute film is the first Pritchard has made since graduating from the University of the Arts in London. “I funded this entirely myself, it’s been a passion project. People from university helped me out. I lived at [my parents’] home for the time it took, working in a pub kitchen, saving up enough money to go out there,” he said. He had always known that his great-grandfather was “a fairly big deal in terms of theatre history, but I hadn’t really looked into it until this flag turned up. Now I definitely appreciate him more”.Scotland’s largest parents’ organisation is calling for the SNP government to withdraw its schools’ health and wellbeing census, which has attracted opprobrium for asking 14-year-olds about their experience of anal sex. The controversial poll has united rightwing pro-family campaigners and progressive children’s rights advocates, with both groups fearing it may end up causing harm to the young people it intends to help. The census, which is administered by local authorities and due to be completed this school year, has been declared “not fit for purpose” by Eileen Prior, the executive director of Connect. The survey has previously attracted disapproval for asking secondary pupils in S4 and above about relationships and sexual health, with one much-reported question asking pupils to list how much sexual experience they have had, ranging from kissing to vaginal and anal sex. Prior has written to the first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, and the education secretary, Shirley-Anne Somerville, asking them to withdraw the survey “until it takes a children’s rights approach, which has clearly been missing”. Raising particular concerns around pupils’ privacy and informed consent, Prior echoes recent comments from Scotland’s children and young people’s commissioner, Bruce Adamson, who urged the Scottish government to pause the introduction of the survey “until it can ensure a rights-compliant process”. In the letter, seen by the Guardian, Prior raises a succession of serious concerns about the survey, which asks pupils in primary and secondary schools a range of age-related questions. The information commissioner is investigating data protection concerns about the census, with at least 10 councils unilaterally deciding to withdraw or review it. On privacy, Prior notes “mixed messaging” for parents and pupils. Despite several declarations of confidentiality, “the information gathered clearly makes children and young people identifiable at school, local authority or national level”, she says, with young people asked to fill in their unique Scottish candidate number and parents told this may be used to identify a young person “in exceptional circumstances”. Subjects covered in the census include attitudes to play, exercise and school work, as well as body image, mental health, alcohol, drugs, bullying, relationships and sexual health. Prior also argues there is a “very heteronormative slant” to the questions, such as using the terms “girlfriend” and “boyfriend”. More broadly, she questions why “policymakers need to know about oral sex”. Other questions relating to mental health are “deeply personal and potentially very upsetting for vulnerable children and young people” she says, adding the census lacks sufficient advice for parents and teachers on supporting young people detailing traumatic events. She also asks why the surveys were not tested on young people and why guidance was not sought from youth organisations, and sets out “deep concerns” that young people are not given clear enough information on the contents or purpose of the survey, or how their data will be used. Asked about the chorus of criticism at first minister’s questions last month, Sturgeon stressed that the census was not mandatory for local authorities to use in school, and that both parents and pupils could opt out. But she added her government had a “serious responsibility” to ensure that public services were informed by lived experience. Sturgeon said: “Either we can bury our heads in the sand and pretend that young people are not exposed to the issues or the pressures that we know they are exposed to. Or we can seek to properly understand the reality that young people face and provide them with the guidance, the advice and the services they need to make safe, healthy and positive decisions. I choose the latter.” A Scottish government spokesperson said: “Parents/carers and children and young people are informed of how their data will be used in advance of any taking part in the census and they can decide to opt out if they wish. If children and young people do take part, they can skip any question they don’t wish to answer or state that they would ‘prefer not to say’. “Whilst the Scottish government has worked with stakeholders to design a set of questionnaires, it is for local authorities to determine which questions they ask.”“Alvin Ailey is black and universal,” says the actor Cicely Tyson as she presents him with a lifetime achievement award in a clip from 1988 that opens this thoughtful documentary about the African American dancer and choreographer. Film-maker Jamila Wignot pays particular attention to the specificity of Ailey’s black influences: the church, blues music and his southern upbringing, all of which informed his best-known work, Revelations (1960). Though Ailey was widely acclaimed, interviews with his former dancers, including Judith Jamison and George Faison, reveal the extent of his personal alienation. Being “the only one” in the predominantly white field of modern dance was only one aspect of his plight. Wignot subtly teases out the fact that despite having relationships with men, Ailey was not integrated into the queer community. He died from Aids-related complications, aged 58, in 1989. Ailey’s story is interspersed with rehearsal scenes of a new work celebrating the 50th anniversary of the company he founded. Yet behind-the-scenes images of the dancers preparing for Lazarus are never as interesting or as graceful as the archive footage of Ailey himself. In cinemas and on demandI experience frequent, urgent cravings for very specific things and act on them immediately. As soon as I open my eyes I often know exactly what I want: to wear a particular little outfit, buy a sandwich of a certain heft and filling from this shop in this postcode, eat it (for instance) on a bench under a tree. It’s a shame that the place in me capable of conjuring these whims also regularly churns out other, much more boring urges, and occasionally dangerous ones too. My brain is a constant game of Hungry Hungry Hippos, my dopamine receptors snapping noisily at an alarming rate, urging me to do things that actually bring me very little pleasure at all. Why do I want things that don’t make me feel good? I’m at the mercy of my lizard brain and the mechanisms of society designed to exploit it. The concept of the three-tiered brain – a primitive reptilian brain nestled like a living fossil in the clay of our most recently evolved, superior brains, was proposed in the 1960s by the neuroscientist Paul MacLean. Its scientific credulity holds about as much significance to me as that of the astrology app that sends me notifications each morning – it just provides a structure for me to think about my habits and how to change them. In short, the reptilian brain is the most primitive part of the brain. I visualise it quite literally as the lizard-like baby from Eraserhead, mewling and requiring constant attention from the other parts of the brain, the parts that have evolved over 10m years to quieten its cries. The less regulated this part of the brain is, the more regrettable the desires. We are generally more capable of regulating these desires as we grow out of childhood, although for some people – myself included – it is harder than others. Desires can run away with themselves, and become all-consuming, without us really noticing. The caterpillar that simply wants a lovely apple on Monday is the same caterpillar that wants two pears on Tuesday, three plums on Wednesday, four strawberries on Thursday, five oranges on Friday and then, inevitably, a piece of chocolate cake, ice-cream, a pickle, Swiss cheese, salami, a lollipop, cherry pie, a sausage, a cupcake and a slice of watermelon on Saturday. Giving in to our reptilian desires has been encouraged, rebranded as a sort of self-care both by a society that wants us to consume and those of us who enjoy consuming with impunity. But often we are simply experiencing anxiety dressed up as hedonism. If you have experience of any kind of addiction, this is obvious. Saying yes to every desire that occurs to us seems quirky and fun if it involves dyeing your hair orange and eating too many Haribo, but a little less so if instead what you’re doing is climbing into a stranger’s car to buy cocaine. The truth is though, cravings and their related behaviours don’t have to involve life-destroying habits to rob us of joy. I may no longer lose days of my life to bingeing booze and drugs, but the same lack of impulse control insidiously robs me of my time. I, like the majority of people, pick up my phone over and over again and open apps that I’ve just closed, scrolling and refreshing without agency. How did my phone even get into my hand? I watch reality TV instead of the films that I’ve been meaning to watch for years because my lizard brain tells me that it will feel good: instead what it often feels like is closer to nothing. It urges me to do things that require little energy and, in return, provide little in the way of reward. Dopamine controls our desire for things, but it isn’t cognitive. It isn’t that it doesn’t know what’s good for us – it doesn’t even know what we actually enjoy. To submit to these desires and consider that submission as an act of self-care is extremely misguided. Our lizard brain doesn’t know what we like doing, and it doesn’t care. It has very little purpose and succeeds, ultimately, only to make a noise annoying enough to distract us from what we originally set out to do. So how can I want what actually brings me joy? How can I quiet the Eraserhead baby – which nobody is convinced is actually a baby at all but instead simply various unhappinesses, swaddled – and reach for the things that provide lasting joy and satisfaction? If only I knew. We are taught to want, but not too much. We are rewarded for consuming, but judged for taking more than our fair share. It is a strange thing to navigate a world that encourages and shames us for the same behaviours, and difficult not to assign moral value to our urges – to categorise each desire as either good or bad. Instead I focus on remembering times when I have felt calm and fulfilled – not the sweet little drip, drip, drip of dopamine throughout the day but the deep, quiet satisfaction at the end of a difficult task, or a long journey with something beautiful at the end of it. Of course, it’s not about one or the other. Thankfully for me. I will try to live life mindfully, to create long-term goals, etc – but ultimately I will always serve my lizard-brain king. Eli Goldstone is the author of Strange Heart BeatingNobody is quite what they seem. And actors? Well, for actors that’s the job. Dame Helen Mirren, as well as being herself for 76 years, has by now notably been Lady Macbeth, a London gangster’s moll, a thief’s wife, an alcoholic cop, an action hero, Prospero and also a British monarch at least four times. Now she takes on Golda Meir, the late prime minister of Israel, in a new biopic, and the casting has caused controversy. The choice of a non-Jewish actor to star as a woman with such a prominent place in the history of Israel has prompted irritation on both sides of the argument. Another illustrious dame, Maureen Lipman, was first to raise the issue – or “blast” Mirren, according to some reports last week – and then Dame Esther Rantzen defended the director’s choice. It is the latest instance of a ‘Jewface’ row, a backlash to the assignment of a major Jewish role to someone not from that minority background. But the list of things that Mirren ‘is not’ is long, and it does not necessarily start with ‘not Jewish’. For openers, she is not of English descent. She was born Illiana Lydia Petrovna Mironova into emigre Russian aristocracy in 1945 in Chiswick. This means that her Oscar-nominated role as Leo Tolstoy’s wife Sofya in the 2009 film The Last Station may be the closest to her own natural ‘type’. Certainly, she is not the bun-baking, clothes-shedding Yorkshire woman she played in the 2003 hit Calendar Girls. In fact, her great grandmother was a White Russian countess and her grandfather, Tsarist officer Pyotr Vassili Mironov, was caught in London, where he had been negotiating an arms deal, after the Bolshevik revolution and was permanently separated from his funds. Mirren’s father was a taxi driver and mother the 13th child of an East End butcher. As a result the actor sees her family as “Chekhovian” displaced gentry, rather than one of Tolstoy’s elite. “I grew up in a middle-class family who were living in a working-class economic situation,” she has explained. As a Catholic schoolgirl alongside her sister Kate in Leigh-on-Sea in Essex, the family Russianness became “an awkward thing you didn’t mention”, Mirren has recalled, although both daughters still have what they call “our soulful Russian moments”. To please her father, Mirren went to teaching college, but also won a place with the National Youth Theatre. Working at both, she quietly hoped the stage training would pay off first. It did. As a rising star at the Royal Shakespeare Company in the 60s, Mirren played Lady Macbeth in 1974 and was duly dubbed Sex Queen of Stratford. Her often provocative film career kicked off in 1969 with The Age of Consent, in which she was the young object of desire for James Mason. But the long path to stardom she has since followed was far from certain. “When I started acting I felt like I didn’t fit in to the Zeitgeist, if that’s the right word, of British theatrical culture,” she has said. “I wasn’t an ‘English Rosey’ sort of person.” Last week Mirren kept her own counsel on the Jewface dispute, but it is an issue that soon took some illuminating, even amusing turns. Speaking on BBC Radio 4 on Friday, David Baddiel and Lipman examined the case and largely concurred. “Actors should be allowed to act,” said Baddiel, “But if there is now outrage about casting against type, then why is there no outrage when it comes to Jews?” The writer and comedian went on to point out a string of recent examples of casting non-Jewish actors in substantial Jewish roles, including Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Joan Rivers. The widespread notion that, to cite the title of Baddiel’s latest book, ‘Jews don’t Count’ when it comes to fair representation, stems, he argues, from the fallacious and “ridiculous” belief there are so many Jews of influence in entertainment that it doesn’t matter. Praising Mirren and predicting a “fine” performance as Meir, Lipman added that she also is opposed to the kind of “narrow casting” that would see parts matched up closely to an actor’s background and so prevent Benedict Cumberbatch playing a cowboy. Dame Maureen argued, nevertheless, that a Jewish actor should have been considered first and that a Jewish audience will recognise the difference. “Hilda Schwarzkopf from Hendon will know,” she said. The putative Mrs Schwarzkopf has yet to comment. It will not be the first leading Jewish role Mirren has played. In Woman in Gold, she was Maria Altmann, niece of the muse of Viennese painter Gustav Klimt.. Altmann’s aunt, Adele Bloch-Bauer, had been the model for a famous 1907 portrait seized by a Nazi collector. In 2006, after a long legal case, the Klimt was returned to the family by the Austrian state and was sold for £73m. Altmann, who died ten years ago, donated money to arts institutions and Holocaust survivors’ groups. “It was justice,” Mirren said at the time. Not usually shy of expressing her views, Mirren has called for change in Hollywood, championing the career of black directors and publicly objecting to the surfeit of violence towards women on screen. In 2010 she ticked off an assembled group of Hollywood women, many of them powerful executives, for making films that chiefly served “the 18 to 25-year-old male and his penis”. Happily, things have improved a little for women in the industry since the TV appearance Mirren infamously made at the age of 30 on Parkinson. The chat show host harped on about her physical attributes in a way that she now considers “outrageous”. “I was terrified. I watched it and I actually thought, bloody hell! I did really well. I was so young and inexperienced. And he was such a fucking sexist old fart.” Professionally Mirren has herself been accused of being drawn to the edges of acceptability, or perhaps to sheer naughtiness. You might have seen her on screen in Lindsay Anderson’s O Lucky Man! Or in the louche 1980 film Caligula. Before Prime Suspect’s Jane Tennison marched on to small screens in 1992, Mirren was probably still best known as Bob Hoskins’ uninhibited paramour in The Long Good Friday, a part she played when she was 35. But at 44 she starred in Peter Greenaway’s The Cook, the Thief, His Wife &amp; Her Lover, involving intimate scenes in a ladies’ loo. Then at 61 she played her first Queen Elizabeth, the Tudor one, in an HBO miniseries that got her properly noticed in America. Her time as the current Queen, before it became normal for British actors to play Elizabeth II, came with the Stephen Frears film The Queen, which won her an Oscar in 2006. (For Americans, she noted, “You are, for the rest of your life, an Oscar winner. It’s like winning an honour here, it becomes part of your name.) The actor does not like to repeat herself and has recounted a violent initial reaction to screenwriter Peter Morgan’s invitation to return to the part of Elizabeth on stage in his play The Audience. “You bastard!” she recalled thinking, claiming Morgan had calculated she would not be able to resist. “How could I? And yet at the same time you don’t want to go backward; you really don’t want to be a one-trick pony. And when something has been as successful and as high profile as The Queen was, it’s a dangerous thing.” It was all right, though. She won an Olivier for her portrayal. Before Mirren met her husband, director Taylor Hackford, 35 years ago on the set of his 1985 film White Nights, her boyfriends were suitably glamorous. The Russian emigre Prince George Galitzine was on her arm in the 1970s and for a while in the 1980s she lived with “my darling Liam Neeson”. It was he who Mirren said listened when she felt early pangs about ageing: “I remember getting very drunk and just sobbing because he was eight years younger than me: ‘It’s all over. It’s all very well for you, my career is about to come to an end and nobody will ever employ me again and in a few years’ time I will be finished.’” Neeson, apparently, was “completely unsympathetic”, merely replying, “Ach, shut up.” Today it is evident just how right he was.Rahim (Amir Jadidi) is on two-day leave from debtors’ prison when his girlfriend, Farkhondeh (Sahir Goldoust), chances upon a pile of gold. Sure, it’s in a handbag that doesn’t belong to her, but has been abandoned at a bus stop, so she decides the coins are fair game. The pair plan to pawn them and pay off some of Rahim’s debt, but ultimately decide to return the money to its owner. Yet in this wry moral drama from the Oscar-winning Iranian film-maker Asghar Farhadi (A Separation, The Salesman), no good deed goes unpunished. Rahim’s simple act becomes the talk of the town; much like a tweet gone viral, it’s quickly taken out of context. Gossip spreads through the city of Shiraz, warping his story into a feat of nobility and turning him into an inadvertent public figure. It’s an opportunity the desperate Rahim embraces all too readily, eager to improve his reputation. Jadidi is brilliant as a man whose hangdog expression miraculously melts away in front of the camera. The local TV news station laps it up. “Where in the world are people celebrated for not doing wrong?” fumes Bahram (Mohsen Tanabandeh), Rahim’s antagonistic creditor. Meanwhile, a charity organises a community fundraiser to help the reformed convict. In his appeals to the public, Rahim enlists his son, who has a severe speech impediment, as a kind of sympathetic prop. Refreshingly, Farhadi is ambivalent towards his “hero”, and his control over the film’s tone is masterful; what begins as funny and almost farcical, soon shifts into something much sadder and more sobering. In cinemas now and on Amazon Prime Video from 21 JanuaryRichard Ford: ‘Something about Biden isn’t rubbing through’ Richard Ford is a novelist and short story writer best known for his quartet of novels featuring the protagonist Frank Bascombe, a failed sportswriter turned novelist, which includes The Sportswriter, the Pulitzer prize-winning Independence Day and The Lay of the Land. Ford’s acclaimed memoir, Between Them: Remembering My Parents, was published in 2017 and the following year his 1990 novel, Wildlife, was made into a widely praised film starring Carey Mulligan and Jake Gyllenhaal. His most recent short story collection is Sorry for Your Trouble My wife and I, last week, were watching the NBC nightly news at 6.30 – a usually profitless exercise which, when Trump was president, often eventuated in both of us cursing and shouting execrations at the television and having to go pour ourselves stronger drink. This time, however, the reporting concerned Joseph R Biden, who is now president of the United States. The suggestion was that Biden’s presidency – a year old this month – has actually produced considerable good for our country and the world, despite poll numbers that indicate many Americans think he hasn’t gotten much done at all. The list of accomplishments might obviously surprise you. Serious, hard-won new infrastructure legislation; aggressive federal prosecutions of seditionists and white nationalists; spurting jobs numbers. And more, on the domestic front. On the international list, there’s the renewal of US membership in the Paris climate accords; efforts to reframe an Iran nuclear treaty – impulsively abandoned by Trump; a re-pledging of old Nato affiliations. This list is long as well. Still. Muddling over the dinner dishes and wondering aloud about why Mr Biden’s having a rough go getting credit for his accomplishments, my wife pointed out she really doesn’t know much about President Biden, whom we both voted for, campaigned for, contributed money to and lost a few old friends in behalf of. We knew the Biden saga – the tragically lost young wife and daughter; the folksy, pliable Catholic; all about riding the Amtrak home each weekend. The lost son. We know about Scranton and Wilmington, the pretty, savvy second wife with the PhD, the Senate years, Anita Hill, the go-to union constituency, the Barack sidekick of loyalty, mirth and patience; the pivotal South Carolina Black vote. The boilerplate stuff anybody knows about any politician. Yet it seems that something about Biden isn’t rubbing through so as to confer on him the credit due. One wonders – I wonder – if it’s his fault or ours. Americans at ground level – bobbing along in a political culture that prefers light-operatic campaigning to grinding out legislation, implementing it and delivering on promises – Americans seem to care much less about who’s in office than, incongruously, who’s kept out. It’s the Hillary syndrome. Winning, for both national parties, feels second best to making the other guy wear the scarlet “L”. Americans also don’t really see national politics and governance as a pressing home-front concern – more as an annoying obligation they’re happy to stay un- or misinformed about. If you live in Billings, Montana, Washington DC’s a long ways off. People here believe politicians there don’t know or much care what’s going on here. We may all consider ourselves good Americans – citizens, patriots – but we do so mostly only in emblematic and ceremonial ways. Our core geo-identity (after our racial and gender ones) originates in regions and states – even in cities. It’s true, as you have heard, politics really is local. Probably it’s the same in Thailand. And yet Joe Biden, where both these political conjecturings are concerned, suffers from being precisely an old-playbook, elderly white man committed to nationalised policies and delivery schemes; a patient, behind-the-scenes, self-deferring deal-maker with the plying mentality of a legislator – somebody who has to win and stay in office to get things done. Plus, for 36 years he was known to us, if at all, as the senator from Delaware – somebody we didn’t need to think much about if we didn’t live in Delaware (which almost no one does). On top of all that, being vice-president – for Americans, now an almost comical office – didn’t help the way you’d think it might, having a seat so close to power. Lyndon Johnson is the great countervailing case, of course – senator, VP, bodacious, arm-twisting chief executive. But Joe Biden, for better and for worse is no Lyndon Johnson, who unlike Biden governed with a historical, two-house congressional majority that couldn’t resist him. Succeeding Trump, of course – while lifesaving for our country – hasn’t been easy. The guy who follows along behind the elephants traditionally has a hard time being seen as part of the parade. Biden, in my view, has been pointedly successful in advancing much more than a reverse’n’repair un-Trump agenda – legions of federal judges seated, industrial production up 0.5% as of November 2021, aggressive Covid vaccine distribution and advocacy – along with just plain being willing to show up when citizens are in trouble – killed in Afghanistan, storm-ravaged and homeless in Kentucky, murdered in school rooms in Michigan. But Trump remains ludicrously popular among infatuated Republicans, 53% of whom think he actually won the 2020 election, and 42% of whom fear this fall’s midterm elections will not be fairly run, in spite of all evidence to the contrary. Which means, treacherously, that both parties now fear our most vital democratic institution – our elections – has been de-legitimised. Twenty-three million Americans bought a gun last year. Not all of them are Republicans. But many are the same people who believe the Covid vaccine contains magnets that’ll cause a soup spoon to stick to your forehead if you touch it there. I mean… why would a majority of Americans bother to support earnest old Uncle Joe, when you have fun facts like that to take your mind off your miseries? When Bill Clinton was running for president in 1992 his campaign clarion call was: “It’s the economy, stupid.” Now you’d be better to exclaim: “It’s the people (stupid).” I’ll concede that for the past year it’s been a relief to feel merely “among the governed” rather than what citizenship felt like under Trump – a bizarre, civic death dance. This relief may have caused me and others to let our minds wander from how it was before Biden became president, and from what’s being done now to make that bad time not come back. This kind of vigilance – the kind that remembers and then acts – may not be native to our side. After all, our side has the high ground, doesn’t it? It’s been a hell of a year to be president of the United States if your portfolio says you’re here to restore sound government. Forget about trying to gain separation from the other guy. In 2021, we saw a violent attempt to overthrow our presidential election, a multiply-resurgent killer pandemic, a seditious chief executive, an impeachment, no fewer than 470 mass shootings that claimed 482 of our citizens. Thousands of lives have been lost to global climate calamity. Immigrants are massing at our southern border and aren’t going away. Meanwhile, the party in nominal power is fractured nearly beyond repair and can’t find a common vision of what’s good for the country. While the opposition remains smirkingly disloyal and often appears dislodged from its senses. It’s a lot. Race relations may be the best thing that’s happening. It must seem, sometimes, to Mr Biden that what unifies all sides of the political chasm is an urge to let the whole contraption of America collapse just to see what that’ll look like. The American presidency is an optic on to the state of the nation. The president’s job is to cause citizens to see that nation more clearly, more as a unity worth preserving, and then to show us how that preserving can be done. Donald Trump did it – in spades – by lying about most everything. But here at the beginning of year two of the Biden administration (so it seems to me, though I wish it didn’t) our citizens’ gaze doesn’t seem to linger on Mr Biden himself – even in the way it lingered on Donald Trump; but instead seems given to stray away – toward our fractious, individual rights, toward new sources of complaint, toward our irredeemable differences from the other side, even when the other side is our side; and then absent-mindedly to shove on to who will assume the presidency next. As if now didn’t matter. What I don’t know about Joe Biden maybe doesn’t matter as much as what he gets done in his four years. My wife tells the story of briefly believing that self-respecting American women would never vote for Donald Trump, only to find out that indeed they would – because they understood they’d never have to know the man. Yes, I’d feel better if I knew what made Joe Biden really angry, and beyond that could know who fears him. These are just my private metrics of what’s intrinsic about other humans. But whether we need to know him or not, it is Mr Biden’s peril and it will be our great loss if he fails to make us look truthfully at our country through him and through the prism of his beliefs. Today, it’s one down and three to go before we have to face up to our worser angels again. There’s still time, I think, to get it right. SA Cosby: ‘He’s the grownup in the room after four years of temper tantrums’ SA Cosby is a mystery and thriller writer from Virginia whose breakthrough novel, Blacktop Wasteland, won an LA Times award in 2020 and topped the New York Times bestseller list. His latest book, Razorblade Tears, is a revenge thriller that confronts homophobia in the deep south. Film rights have been bought by Paramount Players To properly assess the first year of Joe Biden’s presidency we have to take a look back at his predecessor’s tenure. For many Americans not indoctrinated into the cult of 45 the previous four years was like being in a house that was simultaneously on fire and also possessed by a demon that was trying to kill you while a sink hole was opening up in the basement. It was a nearly daily emotional rollercoaster that veered from embarrassment to rage to abject apathy like battle hardened survivors in some dystopian epic. Compared to that the Biden presidency is like being in a house with a leaky roof and a few faucets that drip and the kitchen could use a new coat of paint. It’s not perfect but it’s salvageable. I think the one thing Joe Biden brings to the office is something all Americans, even those that voted for his opponent, didn’t realise they needed. Stability. Whatever Joe’s issues, and he has a few, the one thing he exudes in spades is a sense of calmness. His is a sure hand on the wheel. Sure, it may tremble a bit but one never fears he will steer the ship into the rocks on purpose. There is a quaint anachronistic nature to President Biden’s managerial style that is a step or two behind the times. He still believes in the real art of the deal. In the quid pro quo that was the bedrock of the American legislative branch during his time as a representative and senator and even during his time as vice-president. The smoke-filled backroom or the wood-panelled office where the real business of government takes place. I fear that moment has passed in American politics. In some ways President Biden refuses to accept that notion. The Republican and Democrat parties are no longer just ideologically distinct. One party is fractured between a centrist pragmatic philosophy and an earnestly progressive one. The other party pretends that their followers didn’t attempt a coup on 6 January 2021. They count among their constituents white supremacists and fascists who live in an alternate universe where elections are only legitimate if they win and science is whatever causes you the least inconvenience. Given this monumental divide it’s difficult really to quantify the president’s job performance. He’s had some big wins. His bill to improve America’s roads, bridges and digital superhighways passed, although with a significantly smaller price tag that he originally envisioned. He has made vaccines a cornerstone in his fight against Covid-19. The fact that vaccines are free all across America is an achievement in itself. He has implemented policies to slash childhood poverty and medical inequality. His justice department is defending a woman’s right to choose while also holding police departments across the country accountable for corruption and violence. He’s also had some remarkable mistakes and defeats. His Build Back Better plan has been stymied by two senators in his own party for… reasons that seem at best vague and at worst nefarious. He has resisted the calls to use executive orders to erase student loan debt or extend Medicare for All or address voting rights. But for me most of those wins and losses don’t matter. In terms of my own politics, I would probably be classified as a liberal. I tend to vote the Democrat ticket, especially since the Republican party has seemingly lost its ever-loving mind. But philosophically I’m a pragmatist first and foremost. I fully see politics as theatre. All politics is a show upon a stage. And that’s where President Biden has impressed me the most. He knows this instinctively. He has a true politician’s gift for communication and artifice. Even his enemies don’t realise the performance he is giving is award-worthy. After four years of [Trump’s] buffoonery and brat king antics Joe Biden is most successful at acting like… an adult. Republicans like to mock his age and his speaking style, which was influenced by a stutter that he overcame as a young man, but even his most ardent critics can’t pierce the armour of his single-minded seriousness. He is the grownup in the room after four years of temper tantrums. During the worst pandemic of modern times and also one of the worst economic catastrophes in decades, President Joseph Robinette Biden has walked up to a podium and spoken to the people he leads in clear and concise tones that are measured and weighted by the gravitas of the moment. I haven’t always agreed with the president’s decisions but I’ve never once doubted he wanted what was best for the entire country. Even the folks that didn’t vote for him or are actively hostile to him don’t doubt that. That itself, in this age of bellicose strongmen and disingenuously self-effacing leaders and outright authoritarian autocrats, is a minor political miracle. Margo Jefferson: ‘There’s a lack of inventiveness – the great political movements were all imaginative’ Award-winning writer and academic Margo Jefferson taught journalism and writing at New York university and Columbia university before joining the New York Times, initially as a book reviewer, where she went on to win the Pulitzer prize for criticism. Her 2006 book On Michael Jackson won widespread praise, as did her memoir, Negroland, which explored how her own experience intersected with politics, from the civil-rights movement to feminism, and was shortlisted for the Baillie Gifford prize I had various levels of hopes for the Biden presidency – and in retrospect those hopes were mixed with fears. Like millions of people, I hoped that a halt would be put to the vehement processes of tyranny [that flourished under Trump], and that we might return to some kind of decent normality. After which, we wanted voting rights secured, and Build Back Better. We were terrified about the supreme court, and we had a right to be. We were hoping for an end to the avalanche of action and reaction, of propaganda, that in its own way is as violent as the literal attacks on 6 January were. The other day, someone was talking about the DW Winnicott idea of the good enough mother: she’s not a saint, she has her own problems, but she’s good enough for the child to grow up reasonably well. With Joe Biden, it’s a case of the good enough president, meaning: he has some good ideas and, as he’s shown over the years, he’s willing to work hard. But it would appear that, unless you are a tyrant, there aren’t enough powers to really work your will when an entire party, flanked by these strange supporters, are actively working against you and prepared to do anything to get their way. When the election was confirmed on 7 November 2020, I heard screams and cheers right outside my window in Greenwich Village. I peeked through and asked, “What’s going on?”, and people started yelling, “Biden won!” I ran outside and people were weeping, from happiness and sheer relief. Everybody was just giddy. There was an extra intensity to it, because of our terror. In the early days of Biden’s presidency, when he was outlining the policies and laying out the bills, and also responding to Covid, he was good, and I was encouraged. With Biden, he always has this ability to make a statement, at a certain point, that’s decent, honourable, even impressive. But then one has to see where it goes. I’m not blaming him for [the setbacks to] the Build Back Better plan, though a part of me wishes that he were more like Lyndon Johnson, who for the passage of the civil rights bill would take these recalcitrant guys aside and say, “I’ve got this dirt on you.” How has Biden done in his first year? I am still trying to decide. I can of course give you the predictable list of things that I’m beside myself about. Yes, I wanted him to work immediately and insistently to get the John Lewis Voting Rights Act passed. I don’t know what he could do about the supreme court, but I do want clean statements. I want to feel that Biden and the other Democrats are working all the time to strategise how to fight back, practically, but also rhetorically. The denunciation of the support of 6 January is all well and good, but please: a pattern, strategies, and resourcefulness. There’s also a lack of inventiveness. The great political movements – the labour movement in its early days, civil rights, feminism, LGBTQ – were imaginative. They find ways to work with, or against, bills. I see grassroots organisations figuring this out, but I don’t yet see the party doing it. Yes, Stacey Abrams is terrific, but she can’t do it all by herself. Biden has tried to do well, and he has done some decent things, but there’s a limit to what can be done within this institutional structure, the American body politic, when outlaw forces are not only fighting it strategically, but creating a kind of atmosphere of hysteria. There’s this spilling out of hatred, with a kind of glee as well as fury, that is terrifying. I see it in the attacks on voting rights, on critical race theory, on anti-immigrant legislation, I also see it in the language in the supreme court rulings on abortion. We were back to, implicitly and well-nigh explicitly: how dare you women think you have primary rights to your body? I’ve heard many black and brown people, and women, say, “My god they hate us so much.” It’s a kind of venom linked with a desire for vengeance on all of us for not just wanting these rights, but thinking we deserve them. It’s unfair to imagine that one man, even if he’s the president, could rein in all these forces. A friend of mine said during the Obama election, that if the structures aren’t in place and functioning properly, it almost doesn’t matter who’s president – although when Trump came in, it turned out that it mattered a whole lot. But Biden is, as Obama was, hemmed in by all kinds of systems and structures and power dynamics that make him more of a decoration. I think Elizabeth Warren or Bernie Sanders would have presented a much more active, combative style, and that might have helped. I don’t know how the rest of Biden’s term will play out, but I am in a state of terror. If the Republicans snatch back power in the House and the Senate, which is highly possible, then all bets are off. It’s legitimate to be terrified, and angry, too. We sometimes don’t take account of the sheer shock value of the past year or two and all that that does to your senses, your responses. It’s like we’re multitasking emotionally and intellectually. We’ve got compromised nervous systems. Joyce Carol Oates: ‘Like battered spouses we’ve been grateful, simply, to have survived’ Joyce Carol Oates published her first book in 1963 and has since published 58 novels, numerous volumes of short stories, poetry and nonfiction plus a number of plays and novellas. Her novels Black Water, What I Lived For and Blonde were finalists for the Pulitzer prize as were two of her short story collections. She taught creative writing at Princeton University for 36 years until 2014, where her students included the novelist Jonathan Safran Foer For a majority of Americans, Biden’s First Year has been most precious for what it wasn’t: Trump’s Fifth Year. Any discontent or disappointment with Joe Biden is immediately qualified by a gesture of resignation, a roll of the eyes – but at least he isn’t Trump! Like battered spouses in a combat zone of a household we’ve been grateful – simply – to have survived the traumatic Trump years. Any Democrat, indeed virtually anyone who was not Trump, including Senator Mitt Romney, even that scion of a largely discredited political family, Jeb Bush, would have been welcome as president. Never have I witnessed such desperation among friends, university colleagues, students and random strangers as in the weeks leading to the 2020 election – the feeling that, if Trump were re-elected, the United States would become uninhabitable, a white-nationalist state resembling South Africa with a corrupt rightwing ruling class tyrannising a large, diverse, but politically fragmented population. (Talk of leaving the country if Trump had been re-elected for – where, exactly? Ireland is most frequently cited, followed by New Zealand, Canada. So far as I know, no one has made even preliminary plans.) Unfortunately for Joe Biden, as for us all, Biden’s first year has overlapped with the second, protracted year of the Covid-19 pandemic, which stretches before us like a nightmare Sahara without a horizon, all shimmering mirage of fear if not outright terror. It has been the devious Republican strategy – cynical, malicious, in some quarters highly successful – to resist public health measures such as vaccine and masking mandates, in order to “make Biden look bad”, with the result that the pandemic prevails, like a rolling toxic mist over the country. Political energies that might be directed elsewhere are continually deflected toward Covid-19, an immense black hole sucking up the patience and good will of the electorate. Younger Americans, those who identify themselves as progressive, are increasingly critical of Biden for his bipartisanship and willingness to compromise with the opposition; their hearts lie still with Bernie Sanders, and they will not easily forget. (The young daughter of a friend of mine, a Bernie Sanders supporter, pressed her hands over her ears when I asked for opinions on Joe Biden’s first year as president – “If you keep talking about Biden, I’m going to run out of the room.”) Supporters of Trump are fierce in their belief in Trump’s “big lie” – that he’d won the 2020 election, not Biden – so determined to thwart Biden they are willing to risk death by refusing to be vaccinated or to take Covid precautions prescribed by public health officials. Indeed, resisting Biden even when it’s in the interests of their constituents has been a sort of loyalty oath for conservatives: far more Republicans are dying of Covid than Democrats, a testimony to the bizarre nature of rabidly polarised politics in the US. Many of us who’d voted for Biden had in fact preferred other Democrats – Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren, to name just two – but were happy, indeed impassioned, to vote for the Democrat who’d seemed most likely to prevail against Trump: “beggars can’t be choosers” is an adage uniquely suited for the politics of expediency. Despite the passage of the bipartisan infrastructure law (his chief achievement), as well as his handling of the Covid crisis and a rebooting of much-needed American involvement in global climate change reform, Joe Biden has been disadvantaged by being, in contrast to his predecessor, a low-key, non-self-dramatising personality. He has been hampered by his very nature: hoping to unify, not divide; hoping to “reach out” to all Americans with policies of generosity and inclusiveness; unexciting to the media, which crave agitation and unrest, and find mere competency, honesty, and empathy boring. On social media it’s outrage and misinformation that capture the attention of the crowd, not so much diligence, hard work, integrity. US journalism is guided by the cynical adage: “If it bleeds, it leads.” Consequently, mainstream media has been unkind to Biden virtually since the start of his presidency; cable news has been pitiless. However, Joe Biden will likely prevail, in his stubbornly idealistic if unsensational way, and come to be valued, like Jimmy Carter, Dwight Eisenhower, and Harry Truman, as presidents underestimated and undervalued in their time; taken for granted, even scorned, most appreciated and honoured in retrospect. This article was amended on 10 January 2022. An earlier version had stated that Richard Ford won the Pulitzer for The Lay of the Land rather than Independence DayAs 2022 begins, after nearly two years of isolation and restrictions of various kinds, people are desperate to reach out and connect. Giving time, energy and attention to something that makes the world a better place is rewarding for ourselves and the “recipients” – but it also comes loaded with ethical pitfalls and muddy motivations. If we’re all to begin 2022 with a full plate of activities and a clean conscience, I want to consider the best way of approaching volunteering. I began doing outreach work in prisons, arts charities, detention centres and asylum seekers’ resource centres in 2012 and my fifth book, Asylum and Exile: Hidden Voices, was an account of some of that work. It bothers me that in the seven years since it came out, the trials and privations of the many people I worked with have only grown worse. The debate has become more toxic and provisions are ever more meagre. Recently I contributed to Refugee Tales: Volume IV, a collection of refugee testimonies included in The Walk festival, when Little Amal walked across Europe. In a caring society that supports everyone who needs it, there should never have to be a need for a “third sector” that is constantly working to fundraise and consciousness-raise, reach out to the needy, provide vital services and rely on the kindness and motivation of strangers to improve conditions and provide essential help. The last couple of years have exacerbated injustices and equalities that were already there, while political messaging around refugees and forced migration has grown ever more bitter over the last decade. I’m constantly contacted by people who are appalled by the hostility and divisiveness – or even the plain ignorance – they see parroted in so many public debates. They tell me they just want to help, however they can. First, let me say that this type of work is truly rewarding. I work with people on acting, performing, visual documenting and journalism skills, but these disciplines are really just a way into the human experience of meeting experienced and fascinating strangers from all over the world and all walks of life, of being in a room together, working together, communicating and usually laughing and joking the hours away. The reward comes not from witnessing results but from being in the moment, forming a group and feeling the liveliness move from one person to another; noticing people really listen to each other, support each other, respectfully critique each other and work together. You don’t need to produce something to achieve something, you can all just be concentrating, doing an activity, once or twice a week. However, potential volunteers don’t always arrive with clear hearts and in the last decade I’ve seen plenty of fakers come and go. Those who are scintillated by being inside a prison and gain some kind of frisson from telling everyone else about it; those who inveigle their way into the trust of traumatised and desperate people to “get their story” and produce artworks inspired by them to help their own careers; those who appear as meek and mild helpers but grow petulant when they don’t become stars or power-holders within the enterprise they’re volunteering at; those who patronise and stereotype; the entitled ones who say they want to help others, but only on a Tuesday between 3.10pm and 4.30pm, and who then cancel or change their availability (or don’t show up) according to how they feel. For people who want to start 2022 by matching their good intentions with genuinely beneficial actions, I’ve come up with some general principles of volunteering that will make a tangible difference. It’s not useful to think of oneself simply as a socially aware person who’s willing to just do anything for anyone – any charity, any cause, it doesn’t matter, as long as it helps. It’s much more constructive to research and approach some initiatives, large or small, whose work you have learned about and are interested in, whose services are clearly streamlined and whose locations are convenient for you. Once you’ve chosen some, contact them and offer specific skills that you yourself have developed to excellence. Don’t give the person answering the phone or email the extra work of coming up with stuff for you to do or suggesting solutions by saying you’ll do “whatever you need”. It’s arrogant, not humble, to suggest that. Charities and social equality initiatives of all kinds tend to have similar needs and similar weak points. Be led by your education, training, natural proficiency and professional experience, rather than any romantic notions or saintly visions of yourself randomly doing good for grateful recipients. Charities are desperate for committed, quality people who can provide reliable legal advice, medical or general health advice, physical therapy of any kind, admin and secretarial work, accountancy and financial advice, form-filling assistance and bureaucratic knowledge. If you are not qualified or experienced at working with young at-risk children, don’t. If you aren’t qualified or experienced as a professional trauma therapist or grief counsellor, don’t. Volunteering is not an opportunity for you to try out fantasy versions of yourself. Instead of thinking of yourself as a volunteer who drops in for a couple of hours a week to help out, think of it more as pro bono work with surgery hours and a set timescale of six months or a year. In your own head you are donating time for free away from your real life, but everyone you deal with within the project will regard you as a professional who works there. Be as professional as you would be in your “real job” in terms of timekeeping, consistency, behaviour and responsibility. Finally … if you are an excellent cook of nutritious, savoury food, then local community services will love you forever. You may be giving people their one proper meal of the day, you’ll be able to train others and there’s no better place than a kitchen to foster cooperation, conviviality and community. How to do it To find the best match for your skill set, schedule and interests, there are a few national organisations with long histories of matching volunteers to local groups and charities. Do It is an online platform that can verify your identity and introduce you to volunteering opportunities nearby. Volunteering Matters has branches in Scotland and Wales and links with Europe, and the Royal Voluntary Service started as the Women’s Voluntary Services during the second world war. The RVS has strong links to volunteering to support the NHS. We Are NCS is an organisation aimed at teenage volunteers. If you don’t have any unique skills, you can still benefit your local community. The Coram Beanstalk Charity can match you with a local school to help children with their reading. Independent Age can introduce you to older people struggling with isolation and loneliness to provide friendship services such as phone calls and visits. The Refugee Council also has a befriending programme.Boris Johnson’s former Brexit minister who quit last month has warned him to commit to low taxes and the free market or risk losing the next election, as the prime minister comes under continuing pressure from the Conservative right. David Frost, a former lobbyist whom Johnson made his chief Brexit negotiator and later gave a peerage, said in his first major interview since quitting as a cabinet minister that the Tories needed to “focus on rebuilding the nation and be proud of our history”. Lord Frost resigned before Christmas, citing concerns about the direction of travel of the government, particularly over Covid rules. However, it also came at a difficult time for the UK’s negotiations with the EU, as it emerged that Britain was prepared to drop demands for EU judges to be stripped of their role in overseeing Northern Ireland. Since then, Frost has signalled his intention to join with others on the right of the Tory party, becoming a member of the so-called Covid Recovery Group, which is sceptical of restrictions and focused on getting the economy moving. The Tory peer told the Mail on Sunday: “We need to get the country going economically again and that means free markets, free debate and low taxes. “People need to look at this country and think: yes, something is changing here. You’ve got to set the direction of travel. If we’re going to get out of this little trough and win the election in a couple of years’ time, then we’ve got to develop that.” His demand for tax cuts comes amid growing unease among Thatcherite Tories about the government’s plans for a rise in national insurance contributions this April, which Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, pressed Johnson to scrap at cabinet this week. Frost also criticised the advisers around Johnson and joined the many Tory backbenchers calling for a shake-up of the No 10 team, while insisting he is still the right leader. “I think he probably needs better support around him in the team to deliver on that. The PM has a right, when he wants something to happen, for the levers that he pulls to actually produce something,” he said. “And he has the right to the best possible advice around him. So I think there needs to be machinery changes and there probably need to be some different voices around him to make sure that he gets the best possible advice.” Frost’s successor as chief negotiator with the EU is Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, who warned in an interview with the Sunday Telegraph that she was just as prepared as him to trigger article 16 of the post-Brexit agreement on Northern Ireland if necessary. Truss said she would suggest “constructive proposals” to her EU counterpart, Maroš Šefčovič, this week during their first face-to-face talks. However, she said she was “willing” to trigger article 16 of the Northern Ireland protocol – a move that would suspend parts of the treaty designed to prevent a hard border with the Republic – if a deal could not be struck. In response, the EU ambassador to the UK, João Vale de Almeida, said it was “not very helpful that we keep agitating the issue of article 16” and insisted that the EU was “eager to reconnect with the British government”. Vale de Almeida told Sky News: “We’ve heard this before from the government, so we’re not surprised. We are not too impressed. We still believe it’s not very helpful that we keep agitating the issue of article 16. I think what we should focus on – at least that’s where we are focused on – is trying to find solutions for difficulties in the implementation of the protocol.”Plush offices, candlelit speakeasies and tasteful walled gardens; such cosy confines feel built for lovers. In Christian Schwochow’s handsome spy thriller, they are the clandestine meeting points for undercover agents. Set in 1938, in the run-up to the second world war, and based on Robert Harris’s 2017 historical novel, it stars a quietly dignified Jeremy Irons as prime minister Neville Chamberlain as he prepares to meet with Adolf Hitler (Ulrich Matthes) to discuss what would become the ill-fated Munich agreement. Advising, or rather, advising against, is George MacKay’s sombre political aide Hugh Legat, who in turn is fed information by former university pal Paul von Hartman (Jannis Niewöhner), now a German diplomat. MacKay is muted; his character is teased for his reserve, a quality he shares with the film. Niewöhner gives the sparkier performance, as a passionate German nationalist whose loyalty has flipped. In cinemas now and on Netflix from 21 JanuaryPhoto-reportage is said to have begun with a fire – specifically the great fire of Hamburg in 1842. German photographers Hermann Biow and Carl Ferdinand Stelzner hauled their cameras up to the top of a high building to capture the devastation below. The equipment weighed as much they did and the daguerreotype process was too slow to catch the flames in action. But their images of burnt-out buildings were seen around the world: epochal news photography. Fire is easy to start but historically hard to depict. Painting hardly manages it at all without freezing the flames, as it were. Of course there are exceptions – Turner’s wild watercolours of the Houses of Parliament burning down, dashed off in the scorching heat of the moment from a boat on the Thames – but even the two-dimensional medium of photography has some trouble recording fire’s spectacular speed, spread and volatility. Moving images generally hold the main advantage. So it is fascinating to see how the 13 photographers shortlisted for the 2021 Prix Pictet handle its theme. The top international prize for photography and sustainability has chosen the fourth element, fire, after running through the previous three. This could hardly seem more timely, given the past year’s chain of devastating blazes, from the Amazonian rainforest to the Dixie fire in California, which torched almost a million acres, and the Australian bushfires growing wilder than ever last month. There is some documentary reportage here, of the California fires and of a burns hospital in Varanasi, its poverty-stricken patients generally the victims of domestic accidents involving paraffin lamps in India’s rural households. The South African photographer Brent Stirton, who works mainly for Getty, brings a tender eye to these portraits of teenagers whose brown skin flames white with flickering wounds, and of the plastic surgeon who serves the poor there singlehandedly. More than six million Indians are burned every year. The series is titled Burns Capital of the World. But his colleague Mak Remissa, of the European Pressphoto Agency, turns reportage upside down with his celebrated Left 3 Days series. These nearly monochrome photographs show the aftermath of the Khmer Rouge’s assault on Phnom Penh on 17 April 1975. Everyone was ordered to leave the city, including Remissa’s own family. His photographs show Cambodians desperately trying to find water, first aid or food in the smoking violence. Or so it seems. Close-up, these turn out to be tiny dioramas, the silhouetted figures scissored out of black paper and surrounded with the smoke of burning coconuts. The restaging amounts to a double commemoration, each poignant scene a photographic image but also an act of homage to the dead – who numbered his relatives. The memory of these atrocities is now fading away, Remissa has said, “like smoke being blown away by the wind”. Memory is also integral to the Wonder Beirut series by Lebanese artist duo Joana Hadjithomas and Khalil Joreige. Picture-perfect postcards of Beirut – glamorous hotels, innocent pleasure-seekers – are strategically blistered and burned. Buildings melt, seafront bars go up in pockmarked explosions, as if destroyed by real flames. Which they were, of course, during the Lebanese civil war; though such postcards are still on sale in Beirut, as if nothing ever happened. The artists collected, adapted and re-photographed them for this series. But history has intervened again. Many of their prints were destroyed in the colossal Beirut explosion in 2020. The more conceptual the work, the further it seems to depart from fire per se. The American artist Lisa Oppenheim doesn’t show flames at all. Her photographs look like magnificent cloudscapes out of Constable or Turner, until you consult the titles and realise these are found photographs newly cropped and solarised. Man holding large camera photographing a cataclysmic event, possibly a volcano erupting, 1908/2012 shows glorious sun-edged clouds. But the man is gone and so is the eruption. Time and amnesia have intervened. The solarisation is achieved with a simple lit match, diminutive counterpart of the original flames. The judges, led by Sir David King of the Centre for Climate Repair at Cambridge University, have chosen their shortlist from 300 portfolios. Some, like Oppenheim, are conceptual artists who use photography as material more than medium. Indeed, the most famous artist here is the Swiss-American Christian Marclay, best known for his enthralling 24-hour video The Clock, constructed out of cinematic fragments of characters interacting with clocks and time. His shortlisted collages are properly alarming, worked up from photographs of burning leaves and fiery outbreaks, plus screaming faces from graphic cartoons – a contrast so abrupt it is as if the collage itself was bursting into flames. But the winner of 2021’s prize is a photographer of such renown, it hardly needs further enlargement – the American Sally Mann, known for her disquieting monochrome scenes of civil war battlefields, decaying landscapes and her own intimate family life. Mann has won for lowering, old-fashioned tintypes – positive images made on metal plates – of the Great Dismal Swamp on the border of Virginia and North Carolina, where escaped slaves used to take refuge in the antebellum era. Wildfires have left this place even more desolate, a nightmare of black water, charred trees and bracken. Never averse to melodrama, Mann has shot branches that look like graveyard crosses and added deliberate sears and blemishes to her pictures so that they look even more apocalyptic. Yet they do not have the vision of upcoming Austrian-Nigerian artist David Uzochukwu’s picture of a young black woman, her hair seeming to smoulder with drifting smoke. The human head as a sign of the future: this is irreducibly subtle – no smoke without fire. Prix Pictet 2021: Fire is at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, ends today; virtual tour onlineHigh Performance Jake Humphrey and Prof Damian Hughes Cornerstone, £20, pp304 Humphrey and Hughes’s popular podcast High Performance works so well because it makes successful people’s methods seem relatable and attainable. The book of the show is more than just excerpts from their best episodes. Instead, it’s one of those confidence-building self-help guides – using insight from guests such as Ant Middleton, Chris Hoy and Kelly Holmes – which focuses the mind on how to be your best, rather than the best. Pop psychology at its most obvious, but Humphrey and Hughes lay out some thought-provoking signposts to a more fruitful 2022. Luster Raven Leilani Pan Macmillan, £9.99, pp240 (paperback) The concept is intriguing: Edie, a young, black, New York artist, moves into her white fortysomething lover’s marital home in the suburbs, with all the tensions an open marriage brings. Meanwhile, Leilani makes piercing observations on race, sex and 21st-century city life. Yet for all the fresh and vital writing, Luster adopts a more elegant tone when exploring Edie’s relationship with her art and her lover’s wife. An HBO television adaptation will start later this year; definitely one to watch. A Time Outside This Time Amitava Kumar Pan Macmillan, £14.99, pp272 Early in Indian-American author Kumar’s achingly au courant third novel, his writer-narrator muses from an artists’ retreat that “with the rise of ‘alternative facts’, what did ‘fiction’ even mean?” It’s a question this book grapples with as it navigates Trump, the pandemic and India-Pakistan tensions through the prism of an author battling against fake news. Perhaps deliberately, this makes A Time Outside This Time less successful as a traditional novel with compelling characters and more an involving, long-form literary opinion piece. Kumar’s gamble just about pays off. • To order High Performance, Luster or A Time Outside This Time go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyMorrisons will remove “use-by” dates from milk packaging at the end of the month in an attempt to save millions of pints from being thrown away unnecessarily every year. The British supermarket is asking customers to use a simple and time-honoured test to work out if cow’s milk is usable: sniff it. Bottles sold by the retailer will still carry “best before” dates that will give an indication of when the milk will have the best taste, but it can often still be used safely for several days after that point. The UK wastes about 330,000 tonnes of milk every year, about 7% of total UK production, according to figures from 2018 from food waste charity Wrap. Most of the wasted milk – 490m pints – is thrown away in the home, making it the third most-wasted food in the UK, behind potatoes and bread. Milk is also associated with high carbon emissions because of the large resources needed to feed cows. Increasing awareness of its carbon footprint has been one factor behind the rapid growth in plant-based alternatives such as oat, soy and almond “milks”. Morrisons said customers should check milk by holding the bottle to their nose. If it smells sour then it may have spoiled. If it has curdled and lumps have formed that is also a sign it should not be used. Milk’s life can be extended by keeping it cool, and keeping bottles closed as much as possible. Morrisons is the UK’s fourth-largest supermarket behind Tesco, Sainsbury’s and Asda with a 10.4% market share, according to data company Kantar. The move will initially cover 90% of the supermarket’s own-brand milks, including own-brand British and Scottish milks, Morrisons For Farmers milks, and Morrisons organic milks. The supermarket had already scrapped “use-by” dates on some of its own-brand yoghurt and hard cheese ranges in 2020. Marcus Gover, Wrap’s chief executive, said: “I am delighted that Morrisons is the first UK supermarket to take this important step to help reduce household food waste – it shows real leadership and we look forward to more retailers reviewing date labels on their products and taking action.” Best practice guidelines drawn up by Wrap with the Food Standards Agency and the government say a “use-by” date is only required for food safety reasons, which don’t apply for milk. Ian Goode, Morrisons’ senior milk buyer, said: “Wasted milk means wasted effort by our farmers and unnecessary carbon being released into the atmosphere. “Generations before us have always used the sniff test – and I believe we can too.”A trust founded by the Sacklers, the billionaire family accused of contributing to the US opioid crisis, gave more than £14m in its latest year of publicly recorded funding to British public bodies. One of Britain’s leading orchestras, a regional theatre and a London academy were among the beneficiaries of the family trust – which temporarily halted all donations in 2019. The largest donation, £500,000, was received by Newbury’s Watermill theatre, followed by £280,000 given to the Oxford Philharmonic Orchestra Trust. The Sackler Trust announced in March 2019 that it was pausing all new giving as members of the family stood accused of helping to fuel the US opioid drug crisis. But its latest filings to Companies House on 23 December record that “new commitments” totalling £3.5m were part of £14,543,399 worth of grants in 2020. The trust has committed more than £60m since 2010 in the UK to charitable activities in medical science, the arts and other fields but has been caught up in the storm surrounding the family, members of which own Purdue Pharma. The company, which was behind the prescription painkiller OxyContin, has been facing hundreds of lawsuits in the US over its alleged role in the country’s opioid crisis, which has been killing more than 100 people a day. Major British arts institutions including the National Portrait Gallery and the Tate group of galleries are among those who said in recent years that they would return or no longer accept gift donations from the Sacklers. Members of the Sackler family who are directors of the trust include Dame Theresa Sackler. Relatives of those who have suffered in the OxyContin scandal called last month for her to be stripped of her title. As well as the Watermill theatre and the Oxford Philharmonic Orchestra Trust, other recipients were Edmonton Academy Trust, King’s College London and St Marylebone parish church in west London, all of which received £250,000. Edmonton Academy Trust said it was pleased to receive a “generous” grant from the Sackler Trust, adding: “This donation, together with others received by the trust, will be used to enhance arts facilities for children and the local community. Without this generosity, the additional facilities we will offer would not be possible.” Edelman, a public relations company representing some members of the UK-based Sackler family, declined to comment or confirm whether the latest accounts indicated a change in the trust’s policy of “pausing” new funding. A spokesperson for the Watermill theatre said it was a registered charity generating more than 80% of its own income in a normal year and support from a range of trusts, foundations, corporate partners and individuals was vital. The Sackler Trust’s support represented a continuing commitment to the theatre which equated to £125,000 a year over a four-year period, the spokesperson added, and the decision to accept the funding was considered by trustees, in line with the Watermill’s ethical policy and Charity Commission guidance. “Funding from the Sackler Trust enables the Watermill to engage children and young people through schools projects and the youth ensemble, as well as reaching people living in isolation through an annual rural tour.” A King’s College London spokesperson said that the £250,000 it received from the Sackler Trust in 2020 was a continuation of funding to support the work of Prof Declan Murphy and did not constitute a new donation. “The continuation of funds will allow for crucial work into understanding how a healthy brain develops across the lifespan to progress, transforming understanding of common disorders like ASD, ADHD, epilepsy and Down’s syndrome,” said a spokesperson. All donations accepted by King’s College London were approved by the university’s fundraising ethics review group (FERG) and had to adhere to the college’s policy for the acceptance of donations, they added. The Sackler family declined to comment.Joe Root hailed a “small step forward” for his injury-hit England team after they clung on for a heart-stopping draw in Sydney, nine wickets down, and avoided the ignominy of an Ashes whitewash in Australia. The rescue mission was not without casualties. Jos Buttler is set to fly home with a fractured finger while Jonny Bairstow and Ben Stokes are both doubts for Friday’s pink-ball fifth Test in Hobart due to respective thumb and side injuries picked up over the course of five gruelling days. But on seeing Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad block out the final 12 balls in fading light, capping a 102-over rearguard that also featured a 77-minute vigil from Jack Leach at No 9 and kept the series scoreline to 3-0, Root’s previous sombre mood lifted slightly. “It’s a small step forward,” said the visibly drained England captain. “Coming into the game I spoke a lot about putting pride back into English cricket and into our Test performances. “I think the fight and the desire and the character shown here in these five days has done that in a small way. We never make it easy for ourselves, do we? But we found a way to get it done today and it was very much a team effort.” The result is unlikely to ease much of the pressure on Root, Ashley Giles – the director of cricket – and Chris Silverwood, the head coach who will rejoin the squad in Tasmania after contracting Covid-19 at the end of the Boxing Day Test. Nevertheless, a performance that included scores of 113 and 41 from Bairstow, a 19th five-wicket haul for Broad and a promising 77 from Zak Crawley on the fifth day still represented progress after the 68 all out in Melbourne that saw Australia claim the series win within 12 days. Root said: “It’s hugely important, especially on the back of the previous Test which was a really dark day for English Test cricket. It would have been easy to roll over and feel sorry for ourselves. “[But] the guys were trying to put some pride back in the badge and show how much they care about playing for England. We didn’t win the Test match and were a very long way behind the game but we found a way to get a draw and that shows the character, the pride and the desire the guys feel when they put on an England shirt.” On the injuries to Buttler, Bairstow and Stokes, the first of which could pave the way for Sam Billings’s Test debut at Bellerive Oval, Root added: “Jos won’t take any further part in the tour. It’s quite a serious injury. For him to front up as he did from the moment he took that knock shows how much it means for him to play in this Test team. “The guys could all see a number of the players hurting physically and still putting in a huge amount. In many ways it lifted the rest of the group and I’m really proud of the way they stood at times while clearly in a lot of pain, to produce for England.” Pat Cummins, meanwhile, defended a declaration 24 hours earlier that set England an improbable 388 to win or, more realistically, 109 overs to survive. Seven overs were then lost to rain on the final day, with Shane Warne saying Cummins “probably won’t sleep” stewing over the missed opportunities to go 4-0 up. Cummins said: “I’ve learned the weather forecasts are hopeless. The wicket was still not playing too many tricks and I thought if they batted really well 350 was pretty achievable out there. I thought 110 overs was enough time. They fought hard and that’s why we love the game.” On the prospect of Usman Khawaja keeping his spot in the team after making a century in both innings as a stand-in while Travis Head sat out with Covid-19, Cummins added: “I’m not a selector, but when someone comes out and hits twin hundreds, it’s pretty hard to go past them for the week after.”The most Washington website of all was forced to issue a diplomatic correction on Saturday, in a second recent iteration of perhaps the most Washington story of all: mistaken reporting about diners at Le Diplomate, a restaurant popular with DC politicos. The website in question was Politico, the capital and Capitol-covering tipsheet which with characteristic capitals informed readers of its Playbook email: “SPOTTED: Speaker NANCY PELOSI, Senate Majority Leader CHUCK SCHUMER, Sen[ators] AMY KLOBUCHAR (D-Minn) and DICK DURBIN (D-Ill) and Justice SONIA SOTOMAYOR dining together at Le Diplomate on Friday night.” The email also offered readers a “pic from our intrepid tipster”. Alas, it did not show Sotomayor. The “pic” showed French café tables, waiters, diners and a woman turning from her dessert to talk to Klobuchar, who was maskless and sitting opposite a masked-up Durbin. Schumer’s distinctive hairline could be seen next to Durbin and Pelosi could be seen, also maskless, to the right of a dark-haired woman with her back turned: supposedly the supreme court justice. Politico might have paused before pressing send. Not only could the supposed Sotomayor’s face not be seen but only last month another supposed scandal at “Le Dip” proved to be a “le flop”. Then, a former Republican aide tweeted that Pete Buttigieg, the transportation secretary, and his husband, Chasten Buttigieg, had been turned away. In fact, they were being seated outside. Politico covered the slip, reporting: “Within minutes we at Playbook were looped into this seemingly momentous news and were pretty excited ourselves to write about it today. Alas, our enthusiasm was dashed when we heard back from a Buttigieg spox who said there was nothing to it.” On Friday, a Sotomayor sighting would have been news. One of three liberal justices on the supreme court, she had not appeared in person for oral arguments earlier, over Joe Biden’s Covid vaccine mandate for private employers. Furthermore, in that hearing she had made an inaccurate claim about the Omicron-fuelled Covid-19 surge, saying: “We have over 100,000 children, which we’ve never had before, in serious condition and many on ventilators.” As the Washington Post fact-checker put it, that was “wildly incorrect”, as “according to HHS data, as of 8 January there are about 5,000 children hospitalised … either with suspected Covid or a confirmed laboratory test”. The Politico photo also came amid continuing speculation about when or if another liberal, Stephen Breyer, might retire, thereby giving Joe Biden a pick for the court before possible loss of the Senate. Schumer would shepherd any nominee into place. Alas for Politico, it soon became clear its tipster was wrong. The woman in the picture was Iris Weinshall, the chief operating officer of the New York Public Library, who is married to Schumer. A correction ensued but to make matters worse, Weinshall was initially identified only by her husband’s name. To make matters worse still, Schumer’s office told other outlets that unlike in le grande affaire de Buttigieg, Politico had not called to check on the tip from “Le Dip”. Politico acknowledged the slip and said standards had not been met. “We deeply regret the error,” it said.Britain’s unfolding cost of living crisis is dominating the headlines. The soaring cost of a weekly shop, a record increase looming for utility bills, and the price of petrol through the roof. Households have never had it so tough. Yet the squeeze has been in place for longer than the current crisis might suggest. Far from the year of the squeeze, the opening months of 2022 reflect the problems of the past decade, compounded by Covid-19. Even before the pandemic struck, British workers had suffered the worst decade for real wage growth since the Napoleonic wars. While 2022 will stand out for a particularly sharp hit to living standards, the Institute for Fiscal Studies reckons incomes will barely budge up until 2026. This means an unprecedented hit to earnings spanning two decades, and will leave household incomes 42% lower than would have been the case if wages had risen at pre-2008 financial crisis rates. In the 10 years leading up to the pandemic, median income for the poorest fifth of households in Britain collapsed by 4.8% thanks to a mix of weak pay growth and benefit cuts while living costs marched higher. In contrast, the incomes of the richest steadily rose. In the opening months of this year, the squeeze from soaring inflation and rising energy bills will add to these strains for the millions who were already in poverty before the pandemic. Ofgem, the energy regulator, will soon decide how much its consumer energy price cap will rise from April. With record gas prices on the wholesale market, an increase of 50% or more is expected, pushing up household bills by £700 a year, worth a combined £18bn to families. Ministers have so far shown little appetite for tackling the cost of living crisis head on. Rishi Sunak argues mitigations have already been put in place to help with higher bills, including through changes to the universal credit taper and a £500m household support fund. The chancellor also believes removing 5% of VAT on energy bills – a plan called for by Labour – is unappealing as it would permanently deprive the exchequer of revenue. However, there are hopes the government will make an announcement soon, with the smart money on ministers announcing a time-limited and targeted intervention to deal with the sharp rise. The warm homes discount (WHD) is mooted for an overhaul. However, as the Resolution Foundation has suggested, it will need to be taxpayer funded – a point that might pain the Treasury. At present, the WHD scheme works by increasing everyone’s bills to fund discounts for the neediest. Yet further pushing up gas and electricity costs is clearly an undesirable solution given the expected dramatic increase. All of this concern over cost highlights a pattern with Boris Johnson’s government: shirking big problems until they become unavoidable. With the prime minister’s authority tarnished by scandal and the Tories dipping in the polls, this tendency has the added consequence of opening up space for debate among his rivals over the best way forward. Questions are now openly raised through via newspaper leaks over a plethora of policy areas. Calls to scrap the planned 1.25 percentage point increase in national insurance are debated by cabinet members as an option to ease the cost of living squeeze, less than six months after they signed off on the plan. But as ministers jostle for contention as potential future Tory party leaders, there is a worryingly nostalgic feel to the Conservative debate; harking back to legacy ideas tried and tested over four decades. The invocation of tax cuts, deregulation, “private-good public-bad” comes as rote. The phantom of a bloated public sector squeezing the life out of the British economy is raised, while ignoring the fact that state intervention prevented a far worse reckoning during the pandemic and has grown popular after a decade of austerity. Public sector employment has risen by more than 200,000 since the start of the Covid-19 pandemic, a fact leapt upon by the right wing as inherently negative. Yet the health emergency requires a small army in response, while years of cuts mean thousands more teachers, nurses, police, and civil servants are demanded. Rather than ramping up taxation to the highest levels in 70 years, backbenchers want to push for growth as an alternative, with the mood summed up by the Brexit true believer Marcus Fysh urging “radical supply-side reform” – a phrase empty of substance but popular on the free market right for its invocation of the 1980s. But the shape of the state is very different to four decades ago when Margaret Thatcher came to power. Despite recent growth, the public sector remains smaller as a percentage of total employment than even two decades ago, at 17.5% compared with a peak of 22.2% in 2009 and 20% at the turn of the millennium. The main rate of corporation tax has been slashed from 52% upon Thatcher’s election in 1979 to just 19% today. The old playbook has been next to exhausted. There are clear reasons why it would do the Tories more good than harm to move on from these old debates. The party that emerged from the 2019 election is markedly different from the one before, spanning true blue shires and post-industrial towns. As Will Tanner, a former deputy head of Theresa May’s policy unit, has warned: those wanting a rerun of the 1980s forget this at their peril. Faced with the fallout from Covid-19 and a deep-rooted cost of living crisis, the solutions require a more robust state response bringing the public and private sectors together. For the model to reboot Britain from Covid-19, the Confederation of British Industry invokes not Thatcher but the 1945 Labour government. In the midst of the current pandemic turbulence and unsustainable pressure on living costs, reaching for the comfort blanket of a tried, tested, and failed rolling back of the state is the wrong response. It is time the government grasped that.A photographer who received critical acclaim in his 90s for his work documenting the lives of south Asian immigrants over more than half a century is the subject of a new exhibition opening in February. Maganbhai Patel, known as Masterji, died 15 months after his first solo show of portraits of people living in the West Midlands from the 1950s until the 2000s. The recognition of his work at the end of his life brought him “quiet happiness”, said his daughter, Tarla Patel. The new exhibition, at Compton Verney in Warwickshire, includes many photographs that have not been displayed before. His early works were predominantly black-and-white portraits of young men who had come to find work in postwar Coventry. Later photographs reflected a more established community, with an increasing number of family portraits commissioned to mark events such as weddings. Masterji, who was the headmaster of a village school in India, arrived in the UK in 1951. Many immigrants found that only manual work was available to them, and he took a job in the General Electrical Company factory in Coventry. He joined the company’s photographic society and began taking pictures in his spare time. “I spent my first years in hostels and shared housing, mixing with the other migrants who were offered the promise of work and a better life – people from Poland, Italy, Jamaica and the West Indies,” he told the Guardian at the time of his first exhibition in 2016. “I think of this time with fondness. My wife remembers the terrible state of housing conditions and the cold, but I remember the shared friendships, the dancing and going to the pubs, playing on the piano and singing.” His reputation as a photographer spread, and eventually he gave up the factory work to open a studio. “The majority of my customers were from the Asian community, but there were people from many nationalities and backgrounds coming to have their photographs taken,” he said. Some of his clients wanted portraits to send home to their families in India, demonstrating their success in their new lives. One, a bus conductor known only as Kelly, was photographed in a pinstripe suit and highly polished shoes. Another, Gordonbhai Bhakta, is pictured reclining on a table with a vase of flowers in the style of a film star. Masterji often enhanced his images. Oli McCall, a curator at Compton Verney, said: “He often touched up the negatives to manipulate the colours, so there’s a painterly aspect to his work. Like many great portrait artists, he too kept a store of props and objects in the studio to add certain details into his photos, from pens and books to flowers and toys. It’s a tradition that dates back to the Renaissance, and by using common or garden objects, Masterji brought it up to date, in his own, inimitable style.” The family’s photographic studio was always busy, said Tarla Patel. “We lived on top of the studio, and there were always customers downstairs. Dad was very talkative and personable, and his work gave him interaction with people.” His wife, Ramaben Patel, ran the business side of the enterprise, developed photographs and took pictures herself. Her contribution to Masterji’s success is highlighted in the exhibition. “My mother had to contend with the community around her. That may be why she didn’t pursue photography in her own right. She still doesn’t fully acknowledge her role, but I’m glad it’s recognised in this exhibition,” said Tarla. Her parents were reluctant to speak about the challenges facing immigrants, especially racism. They were of a generation that was grateful for the opportunity to live and work in Britain, she said. “We did get our shop window broken a lot of times, and when the police came, they were unhelpful. I remember having this worry at night over whether the windows would still be intact in the morning. It happened; you just swept it up and got on with ordering new glass.” The exhibition is accompanied by oral history recordings of people from the south Asian community in Coventry talking about the challenges many migrants faced after arriving in the UK, including racism and economic hardship. Shortly before he died, Masterji received an honorary doctor of arts degree from Coventry University, in recognition of his outstanding contribution to photography and the city’s heritage. Through the Lens of Masterji is at Compton Verney, Warwickshire, from 12 February to 22 May.He has become a staple of EastEnders as Queen Vic landlord Mick Carter, but after nine years Danny Dyer will finally be leaving Walford, the BBC soap has confirmed. An exact date for Dyer’s departure has not been given, but EastEnders said the actor is not leaving imminently, with “plenty of explosive drama” for his character to come. Reports indicated the departure of the soap’s biggest star had plunged the show into a crisis, after plummeting viewing figures and alleged low morale among staff. According to the Sunday Mirror, Dyer is leaving to appear in a Sky drama after they “gave him an offer he couldn’t refuse” – reported by the paper to be worth six figures. A source told the Mirror: “To say they [EastEnders] were upset to see him go is an understatement. But in the end they couldn’t convince him.” But a spokesperson for BBC show denied the show was in a crisis. “Danny will be leaving EastEnders when his contract comes to an end later this year,” they said. “Danny has made Mick Carter an iconic character, which we shall always be grateful for, however we won’t be saying goodbye just yet as there’s still quite some time – and plenty of explosive drama for Mick – to come before he departs Walford.” Dyer, 44, made his name in British films including Human Traffic, The Football Factory and Mean Machine, which celebrated his “hard-man” persona and trademark cockney accent. He’s also worked in theatre, appearing in three Pinter plays. The character of Mick Carter has long been a fan favourite and earned Dyer a string of National Television Awards – in 2015, 2016 and 2019. Portrayed as a lovable rogue, Mick’s storyline has often involved heartbreak and betrayal, including an affair with his daughter-in-law and the rape of his wife, Linda Carter, by his brother. In recent episodes he’s been fighting off the advances of Albert Square’s arch villain, Janine. A friend of Dyer said he was “incredibly grateful” to EastEnders and the opportunities it has given him … It wasn’t a decision he took lightly, but after playing Mick for nearly nine years he feels it’s time to give the character a rest.” In 2018, it was reported the actor had signed a £1m “golden handcuff” deal with the BBC that banned him from rival channels, fuelling speculation that his departure will help open the door to lucrative new opportunities elsewhere. Dyer’s exit also follows time off from the soap in 2017 because he had been working non-stop since he joined the cast in 2013. The actor was later caught on camera telling fans EastEnders “takes up my life”. At the time, his representatives said he was considering leaving the show, but he ultimately signed a new deal. An EastEnders source said Dyer made the decision “some time ago” that he would leave this year, giving bosses “plenty of time to plan a huge storyline for him”. The source added that Dyer’s character would be “at the heart of some big drama” with the return of Linda Carter, played by Kellie Bright, this year.This was the payoff. There can be times watching Test cricket when you wonder about the sense of investing the equivalent of a full‑time working week into a single sporting match. There can be times when a non‑contest is over in half that time and you still wonder if it was worth the expense. But then there are these times, the 15th session, the final hour of a fifth day, when the result is still on the line. The less good makes the great greater. This, too, is the glory of the draw, when one team can be miles away from the chance of a win but can still stop the other from achieving one. In the frantic final moments at Sydney, as fielders clustered around the bat as closely as the dark clouds overhead, with Australia’s spinners having to bowl in light too bad for the quicks, England’s final pair of bowlers had to do the job with the bat while Australia’s best batter did the job with the ball. It produced a thrill that transcended the series. It would not have felt so great for the Australians afterwards, no matter the smiles and handshakes they shared with England after a noticeably good-tempered contest. For two years running, Australia has had a visiting team on the rack at the SCG, only to let them hold out for a draw. Last year it was an injured Hanuma Vihari and an injured Ravichandran Ashwin batting through the final session. This year it was an injured Ben Stokes and an injured Jonny Bairstow doing most of the work through the middle, only to fall and create an even more dramatic finish. This was the first blemish for Pat Cummins as captain, after everything had gone Australia’s way during the first three Tests of these Ashes. His declaration left England 11 overs to survive late on the fourth day before a supposed 98 on the fifth. At that point Australia’s lead of 388 runs seemed vastly surplus to requirements, and so it turned out to be. Usman Khawaja’s second‑innings century was a wonderful moment, and it would have been sad to have denied it. But even if Cummins had declared as soon as that landmark was raised, he would have saved two more precious overs. Instead he batted on after a drinks break. The reasoning may have been to let Cameron Green, then on 67, have a dash at a century of his own, which would be understandable as an investment in a young player to get him going in his Test batting career. But in the same way that there are only two kinds of leaves – good or bad – there are only two kinds of declarations. Rain was always forecast for the final day and in the end it shaved off seven more overs that could have been decisive. Another backfire was sending the wicketkeeper Alex Carey out to bat in that final over before the declaration. During a poor run with the bat in his first series, Carey was on a hiding to nothing. There was no value to him slogging another 10 or 20 runs, and in the end he was out first ball instead. Carey ended up having a poor match with the gloves, missing catches and most crucially fumbling a fourth-innings run-out. Bairstow would have been gone from the fifth ball he faced. Instead he batted out another 100 balls and got into the last hour, taking his lower order teammates just close enough to survival. Then there was a late bowling choice. Scott Boland had been devastating again, knocking over Haseeb Hameed, Joe Root and finally Bairstow. He was making balls leap from the surface and deck both ways off the seam. Cummins had produced a savage burst that took care of Jos Buttler and Mark Wood in three balls. Those two working together in the final overs presented the greatest threat. Instead, with six overs to go Cummins paired with the spinner Nathan Lyon, whom England handled comfortably. Three overs later the umpires made their ruling about the light. By then Boland could have got two more overs in, and Lyon could have bowled two of the last three. In the end, bringing on Steve Smith nearly worked, as he took his first wicket in five years to dismiss Jack Leach. But he couldn’t budge Anderson in the final over. These points may seem finicky, but in a series where everything has gone perfectly, the standards are higher. Australia’s main quicks had patches of tiredness, with Mitchell Starc and Cummins both slower on average in this innings than at any time in the series. The chance of a whitewash slipped – they are rare for a reason – and at least for a few days, England can hope to use this foothold to push back further in the fifth Test. The magic of a final-over finish is powerful, after all.It was Omicron that did it. Up until early December, office workers in England seemed to be steadily returning to their desks. But once the new variant had arrived, a change that had been taking shape since the Covid crisis started suddenly felt irresistible. Back-to-the-office schedules were binned, more companies announced long-term plans for so-called hybrid employment split between homes and workplaces, and there it was: a quiet revolution, whose consequences will unfold over the next year and beyond. Home and hybrid working has been embraced by a long list of tech companies that includes Facebook, Google, Microsoft, Spotify and dozens more. Something similar seems to be happening in the financial sector. In the UK, 18m sq ft of office space has been vacated since the start of the pandemic. In the past year, in such places as Derby, Southampton and the London borough of Brent around 20% of offices have been taken out of use, and there are projections that between now and 2027, one in 10 British offices will no longer be needed. For all the government’s wishful thinking about a looming return to pre-Covid normality, this looks like deep, era-defining change. Talk to people in trade unions, and you get a sense of a new frontier that demands urgent and careful attention. At the union Unite, for example, they are working on a detailed template for home working agreements, designed to minimise the risk of isolation, “stress and depression” and “health and safety risks from working in an unsuitable environment”. So far, though, any political debate about what is happening has reduced everything to yet another instalment of the culture wars. The right seems to see any move away from the traditional workplace as a mortal threat to both the economy and our moral wellbeing, while more liberal voices glimpse something almost utopian: liberation from the daily commute, increased productivity, more family time. What both sides tend to ignore are massive issues about inequality, what work actually involves, and the way that big companies too often try to offload responsibility and risk on to fragile individuals. For a start, only a minority of us are actually able to work from home (WFH). In April 2020, the Office for National Statistics put the figure at 46%, although the number varied wildly across the UK: 57% of Londoners said they were able to do at least some work at home, whereas the figure in the West Midlands was 35%. In that context, even if home working ushers some of those who do it into an idyll of autonomy and holistic living, it threatens to make the class divisions that the pandemic widened both permanent and huge. Other questions centre on the people who now do at least some of their work not far from where they sleep. If you live alone, WFH may well represent both a degree of freedom and a snatching-away of human interaction. For young people at the start of their working lives, not being in an office will probably entail two kinds of disadvantage: being cut adrift from the collective workplace experiences that allow people to find their professional feet, and not having the domestic space to do your job effectively. There is, needless to say, clear evidence of how traditional gender roles affect home working: in American research done by the management consultants McKinsey, 79% of men said they experienced “positive work effectiveness” at home, compared with only 37% of women. Whoever you are, moreover, there is a good chance that WFH will have increased your hours: research during the first global lockdown found that for 3 million remote workers around the world, the average working day had increased by 8.2%, or nearly 50 minutes. The American writers Charlie Warzel and Anne Helen Petersen recently published Out of Office, an exhaustive but very readable book about the upsides and drawbacks of working from home. Its central contention, partly based on their experience of leaving behind office jobs in New York and attempting a new life in Montana, is that working remotely can “remove you from the wheel of constant productivity”, as well as turning you into “a better friend and partner”. The big problem, as they see it, is that far too many employers have quickly built a model of home working on workplace cultures that emphasise long hours, the kind of camaraderie that quickly turns painful, and close monitoring of what people do. They cite the comedian Kevin Farzad’s observation that “if an employer ever says, ‘we’re like family here’ what they mean is they’re going to ruin you psychologically”. Allow those attitudes into people’s domestic environment, and you risk “the total collapse of work-life balance”. To understand that point, forget any visions of high-powered people flitting between the city and country and hosting Zoom meetings in their summerhouses. Instead, think about call-centre work, which was being pushed into people’s homes long before the pandemic. Here, you see not just the connections to be drawn between home working and bogus self-employment, but a new world of remote worker surveillance. In March last year, the Guardian reported on the multinational call centre company Teleperformance, and software built around webcams in home-workers’ laptops. “If the system detects no keyboard stroke and mouse click, it will show you as idle for that particular duration, and it will be reported to your supervisor,” said one set of instructions. “If you don’t talk about power in the workplace, you’re not going to get this right,” says Andrew Pakes, a deputy general secretary of the white-collar union Prospect. From this basic point, everything follows. We fixate on home working, when we really should begin with flexibility: irrespective of where they work, the chance for people to start and finish at times of their choosing, carve out free time and ensure holidays complement the other aspects of their lives. Companies ought to pay much more attention to the needs of new recruits – pairing them with dedicated mentors, ensuring they have the option of spending all or most of their working hours in a workplace, allowing them to join a trade union. For all employees, there ought to be both an entitlement to collective representation, and the kind of right to disconnect – to not have to deal with emails, calls and messages outside working hours – that has been adopted in France, Italy and Spain, and is now tentatively supported – for public sector staff at least – by the SNP-led government in Edinburgh. Somewhere in all that might be the beginnings of home and hybrid working that could actually improve people’s lives. The danger of the weary, punch-drunk mood of early 2022 is that indifference and fatalism will set in, and we will end up sleepwalking into a post-pandemic reality that no one wants. Amid grief, disruption and huge changes to our everyday experiences, the future has arrived: not just of work, but all the other aspects of life that it touches. When do we start doing something about it? John Harris is a Guardian columnistEight children born with a “devastating” genetic disease in England have become the first in the world to receive a pioneering treatment aimed at stopping them from going blind. Doctors at Great Ormond Street hospital in London are trialling a drug they believe may save the eyesight of the children who have CLN2-type Batten disease. Brineura, already successful in animals, is being administered to four boys and four girls on a compassionate use basis. The groundbreaking treatment works by restoring a “missing” enzyme that nerves in the back of the eyes need to function. Clinicians and families hope a body of evidence built up over the next year will allow the drug to be offered more widely to children affected around the world. CLN2 disease is caused by a change in a gene responsible for producing a vital enzyme in the nervous system. The enzyme recycles waste materials, and without it, waste builds up. CLN2, which affects 50 children in the UK and hundreds worldwide, initially causes seizures, then a gradual decline in their ability to walk, speak and see, as well as progressive dementia. Life expectancy is 10 to 12 years. The Carroll family have been struck twice by CLN2: eight-year-old Amelia and her 10-year-old brother, Ollie, both have it. It is too late to save Ollie’s sight but Amelia has been selected for the trial. Their mother, Lucy, from Cheshire, said: “We have watched our son Ollie go blind, and now the same is starting to happen to Amelia. But we have been given this chance, this hope. To save a child’s sight would be incredible, and make such a big difference to Amelia’s quality of life.” Carroll said “any vision” saved for Amelia would be “better than nothing”, adding: “We’re just hoping that she can prove this treatment does work so that children in the future can get it in both eyes and it will save their sight.” With Ollie turning 11 in January, Carroll is conscious he may now not have long to live. “We’ve learned to live every day as the last,” she said. “And create as many memories as we can – just spend as much time as we can with the children together as a family.” The drug being trialled is already used to help prevent neurological deterioration in children with Batten disease. Brineura was first approved for use on the NHS in 2019 and is administered directly into the brain by a regular infusion. It has been shown to restore enzyme activity and slow the onset of disability. But although it is effective in preventing movement and speech loss, the brain infusion does not prevent children losing their sight because it cannot reach the nerves in the eye. In the programme at Great Ormond Street hospital, clinicians are using the tiny amount of the drug left over from the brain infusion and injecting it directly into the back of the eyes of the children. The eight patients – aged between four and 10 – have been chosen by doctors to trial the treatment provided under general anaesthetic after it proved safe and effective in animals. Doctors are treating one eye in each child every two months, and after a year they will compare the difference in vision between the two eyes. The trial has been made possible only after a huge fundraising campaign led by the families of children affected by the disease and the Batten Disease Family Association (BDFA). Together, they have raised more than £200,000, with the hope the trial can change the lives of others. A second child undergoing the new treatment is eight-year-old Londoner Kavyansh. His father, Dr Rahul Dubey, said: “Kavy was diagnosed with CLN2 when he was just four years old and nothing could have been more devastating. The brain infusions helped to stabilise Kavy but watching his vision deteriorate over these years and him lose confidence, has been most painful. “Like so many other families of children with this awful disease, we knew we had to do everything we could and we worked closely with the clinical team at GOSH and help get this programme under way. We feel extremely lucky that Kavy has some chance to keep the little sight he has left; it means everything for us.” Dr Paul Gissen, an honorary consultant in paediatric metabolic diseases at Great Ormond Street hospital, said: “The enzyme replacement therapy given into the brain has completely changed the lives of children with CLN2-type Batten disease for the better, but it has been difficult to watch their sight deteriorate even as their other physical symptoms are more controlled. The multi-disciplinary team at GOSH has been working hard to find a way to try to treat this and it’s only been possible thanks to the fundraising and tireless work of the patients’ families.”A London hospital leader has said he may lose 1,000 staff to the Covid vaccination mandate, but hopes admissions from the Omicron wave have peaked in in the capital. The chief executive of King’s College hospital NHS trust, Prof Clive Kay, told the BBC’s Sunday Morning programme that his organisation was working urgently to encourage staff to come forward for vaccination to avoid redeploying or losing them. About 10% of the 14,000 staff at King’s College hospital are yet to be fully vaccinated ahead of a mandate for all NHS staff who work directly with patients that comes into force on 1 April. Losing more than 1,000 staff would be the most extreme outcome and there had been an increase in the number of people who still required vaccination coming forward, Kay said. “I don’t want, at this stage, to predict or give any numbers. We’re having conversations with staff, line managers are having conversations with staff, we have a helpline,” he said. “Ultimately if individuals choose not to, it’s their choice, their personal choice. The impact would depend on which areas the unvaccinated staff worked in, he said. “We’ll have to address that as we pass through the coming weeks. We will re-organise as we need to.” He said respiratory wards were busy but less so than during previous waves, and that he hoped the case numbers in his hospital from the latest Omicron wave had peaked. “I hope we can see the finishing line … but I’m not certain,” he said. A critical care consultant at King’s College hospital told the health secretary, Sajid Javid, during a visit to the facility that he refused to be vaccinated because he believed he had immunity from a previous infection with the virus. Steve James said he faced dismissal if he did not come forward for vaccination. Kay did not comment on the case, but said the hospital was doing all it could to encourage staff. “We we must treat them with kindness, with compassion,” he said. “We must give them every single opportunity to talk through if they don’t want the vaccine, if they’d like to talk, if they need any help or clarification but ultimately, it is their choice.” He also predicted that some doctors would leave the profession as a result of the unprecedented strain of working through the pandemic. “Some of the things they have seen and experienced and the things they’ve had to go through, I think will last a very, very long time, if not forever,” he said. “I do fear that some of them will decide that, actually, they don’t want to stay.” His comments came as the statistician Prof David Spiegelhalter said it was hard to envisage another big rise in Covid intensive care admissions and deaths. “The cases are not going up as fast as they were and may have stabilised over the whole country, but [they are] at very high levels and they’re not going to come down rapidly,” he told Times Radio. Spiegelhalter, from the University of Cambridge, said daily infection rates could still hit 500,000, which would have had a devastating effect without the protection afforded by vaccines.Congratulations to Manchester City on what became a very productive day at the office. They had to work hard to break the hosts down, but they kept banging away on middle and off stump, and one nick into the slips sparked a spectacular Brighton collapse. A warning shot fired to the sides at the top of the WSL by Gareth Taylor’s players. Taylor speaks to the BBC: “Happy New Year! I thought it was a good performance from us ... we just lacked that final pass [in the first half] ... we just needed to take a little bit more care ... the first good pass we made in the first half, we scored. The problem playing Brighton is they’re so determined, they never give up ... you don’t have that comfortable afternoon that you’d expect ... [At half-time] we spoke about the back four squeezing up a bit more ... but it was more about that final pass ... In the second half, we played with confidence ... a couple of goals ahead, you start to play your game. One of the messages at half-time was: ‘Get the ball to Lauren [Hemp]’. She brings such energy and directness ... Ellen [White] will be disappointed she didn’t score but she had a hand in a lot of the goals. “We’re aiming for the very top ... we need to back this performance up with another one ... one game at a time.” Thanks for reading today and see you next time. And there you have it. Brighton were excellent before the break, repelling countless attacks from the visitors, but they cracked after half-time and Manchester City capitalised in spectacular fashion. Gareth Taylor’s City side, who endured a difficult time of it before Christmas for the most part, are well and truly back – with competitive returns for Lucy Bronze and Steph Houghton coming today to boost their hopes for 2022. That’s three wins in a row for City. 90 min: Three minutes added on. 88 min: Lauren Hemp, who is pictured smiling on the sidelines after coming off, is named the player of the match. A sensible decision: Hemp was her usual industrious, skilful self and was a catalyst in the goal rush that arrived soon after half-time, scoring the second herself, and causing constant headaches for the Brighton backline. 86 min: Losada, scorer of the most recent City goal, does a snazzy turn on the edge of the box, then tries to scoop a ball towards Coombs, but the pass is slightly overhit. City may appear to be too far behind the leaders in the WSL title race – this puts them nine points behind Arsenal – but if they can maintain this kind of form, who knows? 83 min: A slip at the back from City almost allows Brighton in for a consolation. But the visitors clear the danger. Simpkins and Robinson come on, Connolly and Carter off for Brighton. Carter was a big threat before the break, but a good afternoon’s work has come to nothing. 80 min: Angeldahl fires a shot from distance, looking for No 7, but it skews off the side of her right boot and out for a goal kick. The City substitute tries a chip from the edge of the box. It flicks off a defender, loops towards the far corner, and nestles in the net. Things could hardly have gone worse for Brighton in this second half. Again it’s a direct ball over the Brighton defence, this time on the left side of the pitch. City’s Raso runs on to it, controls it, and belts it ruthlessly into the net for 5-0. Emma Kullberg comes on for Brighton, for her debut, with Williams coming off. A baptism of fire for Kullberg and no mistake. City are rampant! Brighton are at sixes and sevens! Insert football cliche here! 71 min: An injury to Carter of Brighton leads to a break in play. Don’t forget, you can email me or tweet with any thoughts on the game. What’s your reaction to City running riot after the break? 68 min: Big news for City fans: The Engand captain, Steph Houghton, has just come off the bench for her first action in several months. Walsh, Bronze and Greenwood are withdrawn by Gareth Taylor, with Angeldahl and Mace the other replacements along with Houghton. 65 min: Shadows are falling over the pitch in Crawley, but the sun has already set on Brighton’s hopes of getting anything from this one. The Brighton manager Powell will be shocked at the speed at which things unravelled after half time. Manchester City will definitely be moving to fifth in the WSL this evening. 60 min: There have just been a couple of changes for City: Hemp and Stanway off, for Beckie and Losada. 59 min: City stream forward again. Stanway has a sight of goal from the right of the penalty area but gets underneath her shot and it flies over the goal. The floodgates are open, it appears to be just a question of how many goals City want at this stage. Brighton cough up their own possession meekly, after the goalie rolls a ball to the half-time substitute Bowman who immediately gives it away. Coombs takes aim and smacks a fine finish into the top corner from the edge of the box. Brighton have fallen apart and now it’s a question of how many for City, rather than if Brighton could grab a goal and even win the match themselves, as we were wondering before half-time. 52 min: Almost four for City, and two for Hemp. A stunning opening to this second half by the visitors ... Brighton and Hope Powell seemed to be aiming to play a higher line after the break, pressing higher up the pitch, but were swiftly picked off. And two leads to three! There is a bit of a scramble in the goalmouth, as City attack again. Brighton miss a couple of chances to clear, and Stanway eventually finds the net with a powerful finish from close range. All that determined defending before the break for Brighton, and they’ve collapsed in short order in this second half. One leads to two ... Hemp is released by a ball over the top on the left, in what we like to call acres of space – she has plenty of work to do, and calmly clips a beautiful lobbed finish up and over the goalkeeper and into the far corner of the net. White threatens early on, but Brighton repel the danger initially ... Hemp storms down the left, cracks a low cross towards the penalty spot. Williams, back-pedalling, gets a touch on it trying to intercept, but can only divert it low into the far corner of her own net. Here we go. One change for Brighton at half time: The defender Danielle Bowman on for Danique Kerkdijk. A very decent contest, in which Manchester City have been in the ascendancy, but Brighton have defended with determination and shown flashes in attack themselves. Can Brighton snatch something after the break? See you in a few minutes for more. 45 min + 4: The Manchester City captain and centre-forward White tries to get on the end of a pass out of midfield but it’s overhit and Walsh, the Brighton goalkeeper, gathers safely. 45 min + 2: Hemp meets a City corner from the right at the near post and glances it into a forest of bodies in the Brighton six-yard box. Another corner results. Brighton stand firm again. Still goalless, with a couple more minutes of first-half stoppage time to play. 45 min: Brighton enjoy a spell of possession in the City half, passing the ball around nicely, but they cannot find a way past the visitors’ defence. We’ll have a minimum of six added minutes following those injuries to Green and Kaagman of Brighton. 42 min: Following that corner, the Dutch international Kaagman is bleeding from the nose, and requires treatment. She leaves the field and play continues with Brighton down to 10 players for now. 40 min: Inside the final five minutes of the first half and this has been an excellent contest that is only lacking a goal. City win a corner – the ball drops to Stanway on the volley – but she can’t control her first-time effort and it balloons over the bar. 39 min: Hemp roars infield on another surging run for City, showing superb pace and control and leaving several defenders trailing ... the ball is worked across the field and out to the right wing, where Raso is tackled while trying to cross from the byline. 36 min: Brighton are inches away from scoring! Kaagman flicks a first-time volleyed shot towards the far post, meeting a clipped cross from the right, and it looks like it might be nestling in the net with the goalie nowhere to be seen ... but the ball spins away from the post and out. A big warning for City. 35 min: City stroke the ball around nicely on the fringes of the Brighton penalty area. Raso loops a ball over into the danger zone, from the right, but it bounces harmlessly on top of the net and out for a goal kick. 33 min: City’s Bronze has the ball again on the right, but Whelan effects a perfect sliding challenge on the England international, emerges with the ball, and brings a big cheer from the home fans. Seconds later, Hemp drives in from the City left, and passes to Stanway, who powers a shot high and wide from distance. 31 min: A break in play due to an injury to Brighton’s Green. She’s back on her feet now though, thankfully. Over on Twitter, Manchester City make good use of the ‘key’ emoji. 28 min: Danielle Carter, always in the action, goes in the referee’s book for a physical challenge on Greenwood on the Brighton right. 27 min: Bronze gets her foot on it on the right wing, and ghosts away from her marker with a classy feint. Man City attack but Brighton’s rearguard holds firm once again. 25 min: Yet again it’s Carter causing a problem, finding space on the left and hitting a cross to the near post which is gathered by Taieb. 23 min: Carter, increasingly a threat for Brighton, buys a yard on the edge of the penalty area and curls a shot goalwards which deflects out for a corner. Brighton’s defenders will be enjoying this release of pressure, that is stemming from the skills of Carter and her forward colleagues. 22 min: Carter makes a run for Brighton, popping up on the left wing now having previously been on the right. A couple of strong challenges fly in from both sides in the midfield area, crunching into 50-50s. No goals yet but this is a good contest, with the energy levels as high as you’d expect following the Christmas break. 20 min: Greenwood lofts a fine ball forwards for Hemp, who does brilliantly to nod the ball beyond the covering defence, control it on the edge of the area, and then shoot for goal. Her effort is straight at the goalie, but it was a bright move. 18 min: City’s Coombs cracks a shot wide from outside the penalty area. Defensively, Brighton are looking surer-footed than they did in the opening minutes, when they looked a little overwhelmed by City’s multiple threats. They have sorted themselves out impressively. 14 min: Whelan wins a header well for Brighton after a cross is floated over from the right wing. It’s a clever knock-down looking for her colleague Kaagman, who appears to be fouled by Taieb, but the offside flag is up so it wouldn’t have mattered. At the other end, White makes a nuisance of herself again, before Brighton attack once more, and a lovely first touch by Carter allows her to smash a powerful shot which flies just over the crossbar from the edge of the area. 13 min: City have had by far the best of this so far, and here they come again – Stanway surges down the right, to the byline, and cracks a low cross-shot to the far post. Le Tissier manages to hoist it clear, a brilliant bit of defending – that could easily have been an own-goal. 10 min: Ellen White runs down one of the Brighton defenders, partially blocking the attempted clearance, showing plenty of energy and appetite to get stuck in. 9 min: Bronze makes her presence felt for City on the right, finding space to curl a cultured cross across the six-yard box, but it narrowly evades the two teammates that are making runs to try and get on the end of it. 7 min: There are half-hearted appeals from City for a penalty after a clumsy challenge on White in the penalty area. But nothing doing. 5 min: Under pressure from Brighton’s Brazil, Demi Stokes nearly gets in a spot of bother as she brings the ball out of the City defence on the left flank. She wriggles out of it, though, and Man City can reset. That was a good bit of pressing, but Hope Powell’s side haven’t been close to the City goal just yet. 3 min: City win a second early corner. Hemp meets it, a much better delivery this time, with a thumping goalbound header at the near post – Walsh saves well for Brighton and then grabs the loose ball after parrying it. It’s all City so far. 2 min: Stanway pulls off a lovely turn in midfield, and from the resulting move, City win a corner. Stanway takes it, but it’s a poor one, and doesn’t clear the first Brighton defender at the near post. Players and officials take the knee, uniting against racism and discrimination, before Manchester City kick off in the winter sunshine. Here we go. It’s a bright, sunny day in Crawley and the teams are out on the pitch. Kick off is seconds away. Those lineups, via Twitter: The Brighton manager Hope Powell says she has a fully fit squad to choose from following the Christmas break. Danielle Carter, Kayleigh Green and Inessa Kaagman are the players to come into the lineup for their first match of the year. There are three changes for Manchester City: Demi Stokes, Lucy Bronze and Keira Walsh come in for Ruby Mace, Filippa Angeldahl and Caroline Weir. This is Bronze’s first WSL appearance of the season following knee surgery after the Tokyo Olympics. Ellen White, who broke the scoring record for England before Christmas, captains the side. Brighton &amp; Hove Albion: Walsh, Koivisto, Williams, Kerkdijk, Le Tissier, Whelan, Connolly, Kaagman, Brazil, Green, Carter. Substitutes: Zigiotti Olme, Kullberg, Gibbons, Bowman, Bance, Simpkins, Robinson, Symonds, Startup. Manchester City: Benameur, Bronze, Kennedy, Greenwood, Stokes, Walsh, Stanway, Coombs, Raso, White (capt.), Hemp. Substitutes: Houghton, Scott, Beckie, Angeldal, Park, Losada, Mace, Keating. The Women’s Super League emerges from its Christmas break today – presumably refreshed and recharged, rather than aiming to run off the festive mince pies – and this meeting between Brighton &amp; Hove Albion and Manchester City (fifth and sixth in the table respectively) is the first match on the 2022 calendar after a couple of postponements due to Covid-19. Arsenal, Chelsea, Tottenham and Manchester United make up the current top four in the WSL: Gareth Taylor’s City would leapfrog Brighton and go fifth with a win. Brighton, meanwhile, would draw level on points with Man Utd should they depart Broadfield Stadium in Crawley with all three points. For the visitors, the England internationals Steph Houghton and Lucy Bronze are available again after long-term injury problems, so Hope Powell’s will expect to have their work cut out against some high-calibre opposition. Team news and more coming right up. Kick-off: 12pmMore than 13,000 people have joined a campaign to support one of Greater Manchester’s first female bus drivers who was dismissed for being “too short”. When Tracey Scholes, 57, walked into Manchester’s Queen’s Road depot in 1987 as the first, and only, woman, she said, “You could have heard a pin drop.” Thirty-four years later, Scholes, who stands at 1.52m (five feet) tall, has lost her job because she lacks the “capability” to drive the new model of bus used on her route. The combination of a change in position of wing mirrors and the pillar on an assault screen installed to protect drivers means Scholes would have to lean back to use the mirror, leaving her unable to reach the pedals. The decision has taken its toll on Scholes, who said she is struggling emotionally and has “put everything on hold financially” as she feels unable to plan for the future. She did not buy any Christmas presents as she worried about the end of her notice period approaching in early February amid a cost of living crisis. From her initial interview, when she was told there were no toilets she could use and questioned as to how she would handle “the bad language”, Scholes has faced challenges in an industry that remains male-dominated – about 84% of bus drivers in 2021 were men. She was forced to find solutions to the physical challenges of the job while pregnant – including climbing on the dashboard to change the bus route number, as well as dealing with sexual harassment because she wanted to “pave the way for women to come and drive”. “I’ve had comments, sexual remarks, a lot of things. And I’ve dealt with that. I’ve not gone to management – I’ve gone and solved it and hit it head on,” Scholes said. “When I started that job 34 years ago, I could drive everything in that depot. And since they’ve done this, I can’t drive that bus now. If a bicycle or pedestrian was to walk up the near side of the vehicle … I can’t see that, it blocks my vision, and that’s not safe,” she added. After raising concerns with her employer, Go North West, she was initially suspended and later dismissed with 12 weeks’ notice. Scholes said that support from her union, Unite, had helped get the company to offer her different routes with buses that she is able to drive, but the hours – and pay – are less than in her previous contract. She faces a final appeal against the decision on Tuesday. “I’ve got three children, I’m a widow, and I’ve got a mortgage to pay. I can’t take a pay cut,” said Scholes. Although she said the company’s decision “broke her heart”, the support from colleagues, celebrities including actors Maxine Peake, Julie Hesmondhalgh and James Quinn and others “has been absolutely overwhelming”. More than 13,000 people have signed a petition to reinstate Scholes to a job she said she “just loves”. Caroline Criado-Perez, author of Invisible Women, which uses data to explore products that are designed for men by default, wrote that while Scholes is slightly shorter than the UK average for women (161.6cm), she is still taller than the 5th percentile female crash test dummy that is mandated in one of the five EU car crash regulations. “So how is it that a bus could be built in such a way that someone who is taller than the 5th percentile female crash test dummy is designed out of being able to drive it?” Unite’s general secretary, Sharon Graham, called for Scholes to be reinstated on full pay and full hours. “She has given 34 years of unblemished service. It seems inconceivable that due to the blind intransigence of its local management in Manchester, Go Ahead is now ready to watch unlimited damage to its international reputation as a result of the tawdry treatment of Tracey.” A Go North West spokesperson said Scholes was a valued member of the team and they had made “numerous proposals to accommodate” Scholes, but the suggestions were rejected. “The design of the mirrors on our buses was agreed after consultation with Unite some time ago. All our other drivers of similar height to Tracey are able to view them safely. Dedicated, experienced, hardworking bus drivers are difficult to find and so we would never act lightly in a situation like this. We are sorry that we were left with no choice but to bring this driver’s employment to an end.” The company also said it is working to improve female representation at all levels, with a particular focus on attracting female bus drivers. The Go-Ahead Group have a target of raising the number of female bus drivers from 11% to 20% by 2025.Westminster is failing to take MPs’ safety seriously enough despite public anger over the coronavirus pandemic, lockdowns and Brexit, according to Kim Leadbeater, the sister of Jo Cox. The Labour MP for Batley and Spen believes not enough has changed to protect parliamentarians since Cox was murdered while representing the West Yorkshire constituency in 2016. In October, Sir David Amess, the MP for Southend West, was stabbed to death while he held a constituency surgery. Leadbeater, whose lengthiest Commons speeches since she was elected in July have been tributes to her sister and Amess, said that while new measures had come in since Cox’s death, safety had not remained a priority despite the polarising issues of Brexit and Covid lockdowns having “facilitated a lot of anger” in society. “Not enough has changed. And I don’t think we take the issue of safety and security quite seriously enough, and I include some MPs in that,” she said. While acknowledging that some “particular people [who] have done this job for a long time and haven’t been directly impacted by any issues around safety and security” wish to remain accessible to constituents, she believes politicians now face “a different climate”. “For whatever reason … there are people who would wish us harm and we have to be realistic about that. We’ve seen the evidence of that. I think things have changed a little bit [since Cox was killed], but ultimately we’ve still got another [killed] MP and we need to look at why that is the case.” Since her election, Leadbeater, 45, carries three panic alarms with her wherever she goes and said that support from police and enhanced security for her office helped staff feel safe. “I do feel safe, but to be fair I am very cautious. And I am extremely well looked after by West Yorkshire police,” she said. “But I am still carrying around three alarms. That’s not the best situation.” Leadbeater said that after the investigation into Amess’s killing was concluded, parliamentary authorities needed to have “serious conversations” about what needs to change, while maintaining “the very important balance between protecting MPs and protecting democracy”. “The main thing for me is that his family are given as much support as they possibly can, to help them get through it, because there are horrific months and years to come for them. And it’ll never end - that’s the reality,” she said. The MP called for online anonymity to become “the exception, rather than the rule” to combat a culture where abuse, particularly towards female MPs, has “become normalised”. In the short period since her election she had had “lots of conversations” with colleagues who regularly received “vile abuse online” and threatening emails. “We need to change that culture so that is not acceptable,” she said. Echoing recommendations of the Intimidation in Public Life report published in 2017 as a result of Cox’s murder, many of which have not been implemented, Leadbeater said MPs should “make sure that we are conducting ourselves to a high standard”. She believes the confrontational exchanges at prime minister’s questions fuel aggressive attitudes towards politicians, and would prefer the media showcased more cross-party work rather than focusing on “subjects that fuel anger”. “Sometimes [PMQs] gets very heated. And I think the danger is then that people will say, ‘Look at how you behave, why should we behave any differently?’” Leadbeater, who trained as a wellbeing coach and personal trainer, said she was fascinated by the level of anger in society. “I always think, I’ve got as much right as anybody to be angry about what’s happened to us, and now my life has been totally ripped apart. But I’ve never given in to that. “Two big factors which have facilitated a lot of anger are Brexit, and the pandemic and lockdown. You’ve got two very divisive subjects, which really do polarise people, which everyone’s got an opinion on and that doesn’t happen that often in life,” she said. Leadbeater believes the “more in common” approach that she promoted through the Jo Cox Foundation after her sister’s death is key to tackling divisive topics, and can be more successful in changing people’s minds or behaviour than an anti-racism framing. “There’s a great quote that says ‘you’ve never made anyone be less racist by calling him a racist’,” she said. Citing a woman who she said had greeted her and a colleague with: “Oh, I never liked that Jo Cox anyway, she let them all in, didn’t she?” Leadbeater asked why she thought that. “Actually, I’d rather speak to her than somebody who agrees with me on everything. Because perhaps then we can have a really powerful conversation.” She also hopes to find common ground in polarised debates on sex and gender. “It’s about human rights,” she said. “We’ve got to have those conversations, but ultimately, for me, it’s very, very feasible to be an advocate for trans rights and to be a really strong, powerful feminist. They’re not mutually exclusive.” This approach has not always been successful, however. Leadbeater reveals she “naively” suggested approaching George Galloway, the independent candidate, to ask him not to stand in the Batley and Spen byelection to help avoid what became a contest mired in accusations of intimidatory tactics. A spokesperson for Galloway has previously said he condemns all forms of physical intimidation. “I said, do you think it’s worth us reaching out to him and asking him if he would mind not standing because it’s probably not what our constituents or our community needs? We need someone who brings people together, not pulls them apart. And everybody just went: ‘no,’” she laughed.The UK’s data watchdog is seeking clarification from Mark Zuckerberg’s Meta about parental controls on its popular virtual reality headset, as campaigners warned that it could breach an online children’s safety code. The Information Commissioner’s Office said it was planning “further discussions” with the Facebook and Instagram owner about its £300 Oculus Quest 2 device, which was a sought-after gift over Christmas. However, child safety experts have warned that the headset’s lack of parental controls – which would allow parents to block content that could be harmful to children – expose young users to the threat of abuse on the platform. Research by the Center for Countering Digital Hate (CCDH), a campaign group, has flagged multiple instances of abuse on VRChat, a top-selling social app for Oculus users. Examples of under-18s being harassed on VRChat included a young person’s avatar – the digital representation used by people on virtual reality platforms – being followed by two heavily breathing men and another male joking in front of an under-18 that they were a “convicted sex offender”. The ICO said it would contact Meta about the device’s compliance with the age-appropriate design code, also known as the children’s code, which states that the “best interests of the child should be a primary consideration” for online services likely to be accessed by a person under 18. “Online services and products that use personal data and are likely to be accessed by children are required to comply with the standards of our children’s code,” said an ICO spokesperson. “We are planning further discussions with Meta on its children’s privacy and data protection by design approaches to Oculus products and virtual reality services. Parents and children who have concerns about how their data is being handled can complain to us at the ICO.” The code focuses on preventing websites and apps from misusing children’s data and also applies to “connected devices”, but it does not regulate content. A breach of the code could be punished by a fine of up to £17.5m or 4% of a company’s global turnover, which in the case of Meta would be £2.5bn, although formal warnings and reprimands are also possible. The architect of the children’s code, the crossbench peer Beeban Kidron, said Meta could be challenged under several aspects of the code. For instance, users need to be over 13 to use the Oculus headset – a Facebook account, which has a minimum age of 13, is required to operate it – which could put Meta in breach of the code’s provisions requiring companies to check a user’s age. VRChat, which also has a minimum age requirement of 13, faces similar questions. “The worries about the Oculus VR Headset demonstrate why we need to see ‘safety by design’ as a new norm in tech,” said Kidron. “Kids using VR headsets like Oculus can access chatrooms and other features known to carry risk, by simply ticking a box declaring they meet the minimum age requirements. This is an insufficient barrier to underage use of services known to harbour child abuse, harassment, racism and pornography.” Andy Burrows, the head of child safety online policy at the NSPCC, said there were “substantive” questions about whether Meta was complying with the children’s code. “Immersive virtual environments present an increased risk to children being exposed to harm in different and intensified ways, and it’s clear Meta hasn’t developed the Oculus headset in a way that’s at all consistent with a safety-by-design approach.” Burrows added that the CCDH research raised concerns about Zuckerberg’s plans for the “Metaverse”, a catch-all term for an immersive VR world in which people interact socially and professionally. “If this is the start of Mark Zuckerberg’s Metaverse it suggests he isn’t committed to building it safely from the outset, and that much-needed lessons still haven’t been learnt,” said Burrows. The CCDH, which said it had found more than 100 potential violations of Meta’s policies over a 12-hour period on VRChat, said Meta was “ignoring the need to embed even minimum protection” for its metaverse plans. “The public has a right to ask how anyone in good conscience could invite people on to a new platform without real confidence it is safe for them,” said Imran Ahmed, the CCDH chief executive. A Meta spokesperson said the company was “confident” that the Oculus headset met the conditions of the children’s code. “We’re committed to meeting the obligations under the code, and to providing young people with age-appropriate experiences,” said the spokesperson, adding that the Oculus terms of service did not permit under-13s to create accounts or use the device. The spokesperson said Meta was also committed to building the Metaverse responsibly and had already announced a $50m (£37m) investment programme to ensure the concept met regulatory and legal concerns, distributing the money among organisations and academic institutions such as Seoul National University and Women in Immersive Tech. VRChat has been approached for comment.At least 200 people are believed to have been killed in villages in the north-western Nigerian state of Zamfara, in some of the deadliest attacks by armed bandits at large in the region. Gunmen, themselves fleeing from airstrikes by the Nigerian army, attacked villages for days, opening fire and burning homes between Tuesday and Thursday. Some residents who fled returned to the villages on Saturday after the military organised mass burials. The state government said 58 people had been killed during the attacks, yet distraught residents reported far higher death tolls. Ummaru Makeri, who lost his wife and three children during the attack, said about 154 people had been buried, including several armed vigilantes, who engaged the gunmen. Residents said the total death toll was at least 200. Balarabe Alhaji, a community leader in one of the affected villages, said: “We buried a total of 143 people killed by the bandits in the attacks.” Babandi Hamidu, a resident of Kurfa Danya village, said the militants were shooting “anyone on sight”. “More than 140 people were buried across the 10 villages and the search for more bodies is ongoing because many people are unaccounted for,” Hamidu said. On Friday it was reported that more than 100 people had been killed by suspected “bandit” militants in Zamfara, the state most in the grip of a security crisis in north-west and central Nigeria. There have been relentless attacks and mass killings inflicted of villages and rural towns – amid a severe lack of rural security. In the attacks in Zamfara – like many that occur across the region – gunmen on motorbikes arrived in large numbers in as many as nine communities between Tuesday and Thursday night, opening fire on residents and burning homes and harvested produce. The military said it had conducted airstrikes in the early hours of Monday on targets in the Gusami forest and west Tsamre village in the east of Zamfara state, killing more than 100 militants, including two of their leaders. Several bandit groups, each with hundreds of gunmen, have waged attacks from hideouts in forests that span central and north-west Nigeria and parts of Niger. The heavily armed groups – many made up of ethnic Fulanis – have carried out thousands of abductions, killings, thefts and acts of sexual violence. The groups emerged from a historical conflict that has worsened dramatically, between largely Fulani pastoralists and farmers of varying ethnic groups, over access to water and land and the boundaries between private farmland and grazing areas. In recent weeks, the Nigerian military has increased airstrikes on their forest hideouts in the east of Zamfara, according to Yusuf Anka, a security analyst based in the state. Yet airstrikes often prompted fear in local communities wary of reprisal attacks, he said. “History shows that the bandits will likely move against these [communities] after ops. That’s why people are losing hope because military operations actually lead to attacks. The military come in and leave within a few weeks and the people pay the price, so there needs to be proper protections, rather than simply coming, doing operations for some weeks, and then going,” Anka said. The airstrikes are often too narrow to be effective, as bandits often flee attacks and move into other parts of the region. “What the military needs to do is launch operations across the entirety of these forest areas so that bandits don’t simply move from one place to another,” Anka said. The president, Muhammadu Buhari, said in a statement on Saturday that the military had acquired more equipment to track down and eliminate criminal gangs who had been subjecting people to a reign of terror, including through the illegal imposition of taxes on communities under siege. “The latest attacks on innocent people by the bandits is an act of desperation by mass murderers, now under relentless pressure from our military forces,” Buhari said, calling for communities to be patient. On Wednesday, the Nigerian government officially labelled bandits as terrorists, to bring tougher sanctions against convicted gunmen, their informants and supporters. Yet many in Zamfara and the wider region are in despair after years of continuous attacks by armed groups, exploiting a lack of rural security. In addition to the despair at the killings, the destruction of property and displacement of more than 10,000 people, many of whom are reliant on their farmland to make ends meet will exacerbate poverty, Anka said. “The only means of livelihood for people in this area is through farming. Now we are just coming out of the rainy season. Whatever they have cultivated has just burned to ashes.” Agencies contributed to this report.More than 800,000 non-citizens and “Dreamers” could vote in New York City municipal elections as early as next year, after Mayor Eric Adams allowed legislation to become law on Sunday. Opponents have vowed to challenge the law, which the city council approved a month ago. Unless a judge halts its implementation, New York will be the first major US city to grant widespread municipal voting rights to non-citizens. More than a dozen communities across the US allow non-citizens to vote in local elections, including 11 towns in Maryland and two in Vermont. Non-citizens cannot vote for president or Congress, or in state elections. The New York board of elections must begin an implementation plan by July, including registration rules and provisions to create separate ballots for municipal races. It’s a watershed moment for the most populous US city, where legally documented non-citizens comprise nearly one in nine of 7 million voting-age inhabitants. The movement to win voting rights for non-citizens prevailed after numerous setbacks. The measure would allow non-citizens who have been lawful permanent residents of the city for at least 30 days, as well as those authorized to work in the US, including Dreamers, to help select the mayor, council members, borough presidents, comptroller and public advocate. Dreamers are young migrants brought to the US illegally as children who would benefit from the never-passed Dream Act, or the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, which allows them to remain in the US if they meet certain criteria. The first elections in which non-citizens would be allowed to vote are in 2023. “We build a stronger democracy when we include the voices of immigrants,” said former council member Ydanis Rodriguez, who led the charge for the legislation. Rodriguez, who Adams appointed transportation commissioner, thanked the mayor for his support and expects a vigorous defense against any legal challenges. Adams raised concern about the month-long residency standard, but later said those concerns did not mean he would veto the bill. While there was some question whether Adams could stop the bill, a 30-day time limit to take action expired at the stroke of midnight. Speaking to CNN’s State of the Union on Sunday, Adams said: “I did not change my mind. I supported the concept of the bill. The one aspect of that I had a problem with and I thought was problematic was the 30-day part. “… I’m a big believer in conversation, we have to start talking to each other and not at each other. And after hearing [colleagues’] rationale and their theories behind it, I thought it was more important to not veto the bill.” Adams added: “In New York City, 47% of Brooklyn speak a language other than English at home. And so I think it’s imperative that people who are in a local municipality have the right to decide who’s going to govern them, and I support the overall concept of that bill.” Former mayor Bill de Blasio had similar concerns to Adams but did not move to veto the measure before vacating City Hall at the end of the year. Opponents say the council lacks the authority on its own to grant voting rights to non-citizens and should have first sought action by state lawmakers. Some states, including Alabama, Arizona, Colorado and Florida, have adopted rules that would pre-empt any attempts to pass laws like the one in New York City. Asked what he would say to people who say the bill “makes a mockery of the idea of American citizenship”, Adams told CNN: “You know, membership has its privileges. “Being a member of what we call United States of America is a great privilege and I would tell them to keep doing it … don’t let anything take you away from that mission. This legislation is not going to do that. Keep becoming a citizen of this country.”The 6-0 scoreline and the sheer ruthlessness of Manchester City’s defeat of Brighton has kicked the troubled club’s 2022 off in style, but it is the return to action of Lucy Bronze and Steph Houghton that will matter more. They were forced to sit out the majority of the first half of the season but the return of the England duo is a sign that the end of a catastrophic injury crisis, during which Gareth Taylor’s job as manager has appeared to be in danger, is in sight. “We’re making steady progress now,” Taylor said. “We need to back this performance up with another one. One game at a time.” City have five wins in their opening 10 games but, crucially, four wins from their past five and are building some momentum. Brighton played their part in the emphatic City win, though, and were very much the architects of their own downfall after a solid first half was undone in the space of seven second-half minutes. Despite Brighton’s dismal record against Manchester City – they have lost four and drawn one against the visiting team – it says a lot about the development of the south-coast side that the opening Women’s Super League game of 2022 was the pick of the matches on offer. Under the former England manager Hope Powell, Brighton’s steady rise up the WSL table has, to some extent, flown under the radar. In fifth and two points above City – last year’s runners-up – before this match, Brighton are becoming harder to ignore. The winter break “came at a really good time for us, for players and staff”, Powell said before kick-off. They endured back-to-back defeats before Christmas and their slide was halted by the break. Rejuvenated and strengthened by the arrival from BK Häcken of the Swedish duo Emma Kullberg and Julia Zigiotti Olme, who were both on the bench, the home side coped well in the first half despite City dominating possession. They also were not without chances, with Danielle Carter, who joined in the summer from Arsenal, firing just over the crossbar and a volley from Inessa Kaagman both hinting at the threat. Powell had said she wanted her team to play on the front foot and, using a higher line, in the second half they went on the hunt. That change, though, left them exposed, and City were ready to take advantage thanks to the blistering pace of Bronze and the wide forwards Lauren Hemp and Hayley Raso. Three minutes after the restart Hemp raced into the box from the left and sent a low cross into the middle that the defender Victoria Williams turned into her own net with Ellen White lurking nearby. Two minutes later City doubled their lead, a ball over the top from Alex Greenwood finding the run of Hemp, who chipped the ball neatly over the goalkeeper Megan Walsh. In another two minutes it was three. Bronze’s pulled-back ball ricocheted around the area, Brighton failed to clear, and Stanway passed it into the net. The fourth goal was perhaps the most bruising: Walsh’s rolled ball was nicked off the feet of the intended recipient, Danielle Bowman, by Coombs, who powered it into a top corner from the edge of the penalty area. Buoyed by the goals and the return of Bronze and the club captain, Houghton, the latter entering the fray with the game all but over, City ruthlessly toyed with Brighton and looked every inch the team that vied for the title with Chelsea last season. The fifth came when another ball over the top put Raso in and she powered it home, and the substitute Vicky Losada added the sixth with a chipped effort that flicked off a defender and in. City go above Brighton and into fifth with the win. They are four points off third, and suddenly Champions League football does not look impossible.The Home Office has told a Syrian asylum seeker he can return to the country he fled during the war because it is safe to do so, in what is thought to be the first case of its kind. The 25-year-old asylum seeker sought sanctuary in the UK in May 2020. He fled forcible conscription into Bashar al-Assad’s army in 2017, saying that he would have been forced to kill other Syrians. He said that if he is forced back to Syria he will be targeted as a draft evader, arrested, detained and killed. Until now, the UK has not returned refugees who opposed President Assad’s regime because of the dangers still present in a nation torn asunder by the continuing civil war. But the Guardian has seen a refusal letter sent to the man by the Home Office in December, in which officials said: “I am not satisfied to a reasonable degree of likelihood that you have a well-founded fear of persecution.” While the Home Office has accepted he did flee forced conscription, the refusal letter adds: “It is not accepted that you will face a risk of persecution or real risk of serious harm on return to the Syrian Arab Republic due to your imputed political opinion as a draft evader.” The asylum seeker, who is not named for his own protection, said: “I escaped from Syria in 2017 and I am looking for safety. “My solicitor is appealing against the Home Office decision and says this is the first Syrian asylum refusal case she has seen. I hope I will not be forced back to Syria. I am so tired of trying to find somewhere that I can be safe.” The charity Refugee Action expressed alarm at the Home Office’s decision. Mariam Kemple Hardy, its head of campaigns, said the decision “beggars belief”, and “implored” the home secretary, Priti Patel, to overturn the decision. She added: “Frankly, if this government is no longer granting sanctuary to Syrian refugees, who will it grant sanctuary to? This decision pulls up the drawbridge to those fleeing war and persecution. It fails to meet even the bare minimum anyone would expect of a government claiming to uphold its obligations on the world stage.” No other European country is forcibly returning refugees to Syria because it is a conflict zone. However, to the dismay of human rights organisations worldwide, Denmark has been detaining some Syrian refugees who refuse to return to their home country voluntarily. According to a report in the Mail on Sunday, about 1,200 Syrian refugees out of 35,000 living in Denmark are affected by a tough new policy from the government to return them to their home country, as of November last year. The scheme is being challenged by the refugees’ lawyers. A report from Human Rights Watch in October 2021 said that refugees should not be returned to Syria. By examining the fate of those who returned voluntarily, it found that they faced grave human rights abuses and persecution at the hands of the Syrian government and affiliated militias – including torture, extra-judicial killings and kidnappings. A Home Office spokesperson said: “All asylum applications are considered on their individual merits on a case-by-case basis and in line with current published policy.”Eric Adams has promised to restore “swagger” to New York, the city he has run as mayor for barely a week. But even in that brief time he has attracted fierce criticism and flirted with scandal. On Sunday, the new mayor said a former police chief brought back into the administration despite having resigned seven years ago amid a corruption investigation had not done “anything that was criminal”. He also said his brother, appointed as a deputy police commissioner, would help keep him safe from “white supremacy and hate crimes”. In further controversy, Adams’s pick for New York police commissioner, Keechant Sewell, the first woman to fill the post, has clashed with the Manhattan district attorney over proposed criminal justice reform. Adams picked Philip Banks for a top public safety post. In 2014, he resigned as chief of the NYPD after being named as an unindicted co-conspirator in an FBI corruption investigation. On Friday, Banks sought to dispel questions about that scandal, which included questions about deposits totaling $300,000 in accounts belonging to him and his wife. “I never broke the law, nor did I ever betray the public trust by abusing my authority as an NYPD official,” Banks wrote in the New York Daily News. “From here on, I promise all New Yorkers that I will let my hard work be the evidence of my commitment.” On Sunday, Adams spoke to CNN’s State of the Union. He said Banks “acknowledges there was some real mistakes, errors that were made. He was not accused of a crime. “I think that when you look at what happened yesterday, in this city, a young person was shot in a robbery in the store. It really personifies why I need the best person for the job. I can’t leave … good people on the bench when I have a talented person that just made some bad decisions, he didn’t do anything that was criminal. “Phil is a great person … he’s the right person for this time to really bring together all of my law enforcement agencies and entities and he’s going to show New York every day he is a right person for this job.” Adams is a retired NYD officer. So is his brother, Bernard Adams, who most recently worked as assistant director of operations for parking and transportation at the medical campus of Virginia Commonwealth University but has now been appointed as deputy police commissioner with a $240,000-a-year salary. The move has exposed the mayor to accusations of nepotism. Susan Lerner, executive director of Common Cause New York, a good governance group, told City &amp; State: “New Yorkers expect that public servants are hired based on their unique qualifications and not because they are the mayor’s brother.” On CNN, Adams said the board would “make the determination and we have a great system here in the city”. “But let me be clear on this. My brother is qualified for the position. He will be in charge of my security, which is extremely important to me in a time when we see an increase in white supremacy and hate crimes. I have to take my security in a very serious way. “I need someone that I trust around me … and I trust my brother deeply.” Adams has also vowed to keep New York public schools open for in-person teaching during the Omicron Covid wave and is pushing companies to abandon “remote working” and return workers to office jobs, for the sake of small businesses. On Wednesday, Adams said “low-skill workers, my cooks, my dishwashers, my messengers, my shoe-shine people, those who work at Dunkin’ Donuts” did not possess “academic skills to sit in a corner office”. That provoked a backlash from Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, the Bronx congresswoman and leading national progressive. “The suggestion that any job is ‘low skill’,” Ocasio-Cortez said, “is a myth perpetuated by wealthy interests to justify inhumane working conditions, little [or] no healthcare, and low wages.” In a statement to the Guardian on Saturday, Ravi Mangla, spokesman for the New York Working Families party, said: “Adams ran as a working-class candidate. And after weeks of cozying up to corporate executives, we’re waiting for him to turn his attention to the everyday people who keep the city running.”With just a week to go, the Guardian and Observer charity appeal in support of causes tackling the impact of the climate crisis and extreme weather has raised more than £760,000. More than 7,000 people have so far donated to the appeal, which will be shared between four charities: Practical Action, Global Greengrants Fund UK, Royal Botanic Gardens Kew, and Environmental Justice Foundation. The theme this year is climate justice, inspired by stories of people and communities uprooted by climate volatility, whether flooding, wildfire, melting ice or drought, and raising money for charities working with those most affected by environmental loss. The appeal has struck a chord with many readers, who in hundreds of messages left via the appeal donation website told us they believe tackling the climate emergency is one of the most urgent – if not the most urgent – issues facing the planet. Many said social justice must be at the heart of measures to address global heating – with the world’s wealthiest countries (also the biggest polluters) having a moral responsibility to pay for measures to protect the environment in the world’s poorest areas, which are worst-hit by climate-induced extreme weather. One donor, Rebecca McCutcheon, said: “Supporting vulnerable people to adapt and protect themselves from the devastating changes happening now is a positive act in the face of shameful inaction on the parts of businesses and governments. In truth it is not a charitable donation but an attempt to invest in our global, shared future.” Steve Trent, the chief executive of the Environmental Justice Foundation, said: “I would like to express our heartfelt thanks to the Guardian and Observer readers, their generous donations will enable us to continue our work using high-level advocacy, field investigations and powerful films to drive forward climate justice.” He added: “Climate action has never been more crucial, and time is running out. Yet we do not need to lose hope: we have the solutions and the wherewithal to implement them. If our governments act now, with greater urgency and ambition, we can achieve a true transformation to an equitable, fairer, sustainable world.” Introducing the appeal in December, the Guardian’s editor-in-chief, Katharine Viner, wrote: “The stark truth is that the world’s developing countries have seen the vast majority of the death and destruction caused by climate-induced disasters, and yet they are responsible for a tiny fraction of global emissions.” The appeal closes at midnight on Sunday 16 January.So high have the stakes been set by Russia over the future security architecture of Europe, and so imminent is the threat of war in Ukraine, that the three separate meetings arranged between Russia and the west this week are drawing comparison with some of the great western-Russian exchanges of the past, from Yalta in 1945 to Paris in 1960, over the future of Berlin, and Reykjavík in 1986. Vladimir Putin, with his keen sense of his place in Russian history, would probably revel in these comparisons. Indeed, the very scheduling of the three meetings – a bilateral security meeting with the US on Monday, a rare meeting of the Nato-Russian Council on Wednesday and an Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) meeting on Ukraine on Thursday – is seen by some as a mistake. Françoise Thom, a historian of Russia based at the Sorbonne, said: “There is nothing more dangerous than these summit exchanges, which, whatever one may say, inevitably feed into Russian ruling elites’ either paranoia or delusions of grandeur and intoxication with power. If the west is firm, the Kremlin concludes that it wants to destroy Russia; if the west offers concessions, the Kremlin concludes that it is weak and pressure should be increased. “Very often the best policy with Russia is that of silence and distance: do nothing, say nothing and stand your ground. Clinging to dialogue at all costs, especially when Moscow keeps us at gunpoint like a madman holding a hostage, only shows our weakness and encourages the Kremlin to escalate.” But Joe Biden has clearly taken the view that with allied self-discipline and unity, the risks of being seen to be rewarding Putin are outweighed by the need for dialogue, and diplomatic reconnaissance. Not to talk would be to feed the Russian narrative that the west is not prepared even to listen. Besides, it is billed as a dialogue, not a negotiation, officials say. The specific agenda of each meeting next week is subtly different, and while the west will want the discussion to focus on the sovereignty of Ukraine, and missile placement, Russia will want a response to its threefold formal demands set out last month in draft treaties: the withdrawal of US nuclear weapons from Europe, the removal of Nato forces close to Russian borders, and the legal permanent renunciation of Nato membership for Ukraine and Georgia, as part of a commitment to end Nato’s enlargement. One way or another, these have been the permanent demands of the Russian political elite for the past 20 years. Putin’s demands bear comparison with Dmitry Medvedev’s largely ignored European security treaty proposal in 2009, but this time the demands are being presented in a more peremptory fashion. Indeed, some western officials fear they have been packaged to be rejected. In Ukraine there is concern that dialogue with Russia on the future security architecture of Europe, under threat of blackmail and without a formal presence of the EU bloc, will be taken as vindication by Putin. From Putin’s perspective, he has already made progress, and can make more. Russian thinktanks such as IMEMO are claiming, for instance, that the meeting shows “the ice has already broken”. It is the bread and butter of diplomacy to judge whether to “parley” – as Churchill put it – with an adversary either in the open or through a back channel, or instead to sit tight and wait. Never is that judgment more acute than in the case of Russia. The cold war US diplomat George Kennan’s contention was that “Moscow is a special case”. It saw security “only in [a] patient but deadly struggle for total destruction of [the] rival power, never in compacts and compromises with it”. He said the Soviet Union under Stalin was a master at distorting bromide American offers of dialogue, for example over the future of Berlin in April 1949, into a full-scale offer to redraw the map of Europe. The solution was patience and containment. Henry Kissinger for a period was to argue that the state department was populated by naive men who believed well-constructed argument could persuade Russia. The whole idea of signing treaties with Russia was to misunderstand the mentality. Russia, it was said, operated by probing for weaknesses, “by kicking all the doors and seeing which fell off their hinges”. Alexander Cadogan, the UK Foreign Office’s wartime permanent secretary, made a similar point in his diaries about asymmetry in talking to Russia: “Everything favours the evildoer. Any honest government fights (in peacetime) with two hands tied behind its back. The brilliant blatancy of the Russians is something that we can admire but cannot emulate. It gives them a great advantage.” By contrast, most politicians’ instinct is often to parley, or seek a reset or trust personal charm. Churchill once said all the world’s problems could be solved if only he could meet Joseph Stalin once a week. John F Kennedy argued it was better to “meet at the summit than at the brink”, something the US attempted more regularly after the shock of the Cuban missile crisis. Famously at the 1986 Reykjavík conference a personal rapport between Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev led them to the brink of abandoning nuclear weapons. George Shultz, the US secretary of state, recalled that in advance “there was a unique sense of uncertainty in the air … Nothing seemed predictable”. Gorbachev’s surprise plan, nearly taken up by Reagan, showed the value of dialogue, even if Margaret Thatcher later confided her despair with Reagan to Robin Butler, her cabinet secretary: “He knows nothing, Robin.” Reagan’s successor, George HW Bush, promised no more chaotic Reykjavíks, but at a summit in Malta in 1989, the first meeting since the fall of the Berlin Wall, he too was captured by Gorbachev’s sense of history unfolding (“the United States and the USSR are doomed to cooperate for a long time”) and by his plea that “we have to abandon the images of an enemy”. In reality, Gorbachev was betrayed at a dinner the next evening in Brussels where Bush gave Chancellor Kohl the green light for Germany’s unification, opening the long argument about the terms of Nato’s expansion eastwards, starting with East Germany. With Gorbachev crushed by events, the Bill and Boris show ensued. Bill Clinton and Boris Yeltsin, tasked with integrating Russia into the international system, met face to face 18 times, often clashing about Nato expansion, leading Yeltsin to describe a cold peace. The apogee may have been the summit in Birmingham in 1998, when relations were so intimate they exchanged their respective confidential briefing cards. That relationship probably collapsed in a phone call of uncontrolled fury over the Nato bombing of Serbia a year later. It showed that when fundamental interests conflict, as they did over Nato, personal relations take you only so far. Thereafter the era of two men sitting alone to solve the world was over. Barack Obama signed a new strategic arms control treaty, Start, in April 2010 with Medvedev, but the return of Putin to the presidency in 2012 saw the reset fizzle out. In essence the dispute about the wisdom of dialogue comes down to whether Russia is seen to be driven by insecurity or imperial expansionism. In policy terms that meant choosing between an emphasis on arms control or Nato expansion. But there is also a professional diplomat’s aversion to unstructured large-scale gatherings, whether they involve Russia or not. Harold Nicolson, after a long diplomatic career, argued in the Commons in 1935: “It is a terrible mistake to conduct negotiations between foreign ministers … international negotiations were best left to the professionals. Diplomacy is not the art of conversation. It is the art of the exchange of documents in a carefully considered and precise form and in such a way that they cannot be repudiated later … Diplomacy by conference is a mistake.” The worry for the professional diplomat is that in the emotion of the moment, resolve dissipates and pre-set red lines are rubbed out, and allies betrayed. With the Biden administration, the expectation is this week’s discussions will be far more structured, predictable and scripted. In theory, since neither of the principals – Biden and Putin – will be present in Geneva, there should be no rush of blood to the head by men of goodwill, but instead a staking out of familiar positions. The US messaging, bolstered by the UK, has been carefully framed, and seems well coordinated with Europe. Expansion of Nato was inherent in the Nato-Russia Founding Act signed by Boris Yeltsin in 1997. No country can determine another country’s foreign alliances, as Russia agreed in the Helsinki Final Act 1975, and again in the Budapest memorandum in 1994. In the words of Sauli Niinistö, the Finnish president, in his striking new year address: “Spheres of interest do not belong to the 2020s. The sovereign equality of all states is the basic principle that everyone should respect.” But the test, according to Evelyn Farkas, a former US deputy assistant secretary of defence for Russia, will be whether Putin sees this week’s talks as a piece of political theatre, a moment to issue an ultimatum, or whether he sanctions Russia getting into the weeds, and starts to negotiate. Few hold out much hope for the latter.An investigation is under way after the famed white limestone Scala dei Turchi cliff in Sicily was “shamefully defaced” with red powder. The Scala dei Turchi, or Turkish Steps, is one of Italy’s most visited tourist sites and features prominently in the Inspector Montalbano books by the late author Andrea Camilleri. The cliff, which is shaped like a huge staircase jutting into the Mediterranean from the coast of Realmonte in southern Sicily, was vandalised on Friday night. Initial inspections established that the culprits defaced the cliff with red iron oxide powder, a material which is fairly easy to eliminate, as proved by the fact that marks on the lower part of the cliff have been partially removed by the sea. Volunteers in Realmonte began cleaning the remaining marks on Saturday. “The splendid white marl cliff of the Scala dei Turchi, an attraction of the Agrigento area for visitors from all over the world, has been shamefully defaced,” said Nello Musumeci, Sicily’s president. “We condemn the perpetrators of this cowardly gesture. It constitutes an outrage not only to an asset of rare beauty, but also to the image of our island. I hope the judiciary quickly identify those responsible.” Luigi Patronaggio, the chief prosecutor of Agrigento, has started an investigation and ordered tests on the material used in order to trace recent sales of red powder in the area and, ultimately, the buyers. Police are also looking for clues via video surveillance images. The Scala dei Turchi was submitted as a candidate for Unesco world heritage status in 2019. However, the landmark was temporarily closed and seized by prosecutors in early 2020 after years of complaints about its poor preservation. The cliff has suffered natural erosion but also from the huge number of tourists, some of whom have stolen pieces of rock, which consists of soft white limestone. The investigation also probed the ownership of the Scala dei Turchi, which for years has been contested between local authorities in Realmonte and Ferdinando Sciabbarà, who staked his claim of ownership of part of the coastline based on documents dating back to the 19th century. Sciabbarà was investigated for the occupation of state-owned land and other crimes connected with the preservation of the site. He was ordered to pay a €9,100 (£7,600) fine last summer and the land was returned to him. According to reports in the Italian press, Sciabbarrà is ready to sell his portion of the land to the local authority, on condition that a nature reserve be established.It used to be that the early bird would get the worm, but households, schools and even prisons can now have the invertebrates delivered free to their door – if they get a wriggle on. A Nottingham-based initiative, the Urban Worm Community Interest Company (UWC), is on a mission to “worm up” the UK by kickstarting an urban worm farming movement that can create high-grade fertiliser from banana skins and old socks. The social enterprise has received a £50,000 grant from the national lottery to send out 1,000 packs of composting worms – known as tiger worms because of their red skin – to anybody with a DIY worm farm ready to house a population of 100. “Using worms to manage organic household waste is happening at scale all over the world, except in the UK,” said Anna de la Vega, UWC’s managing director. “The reality of climate change, natural resource depletion and mass urbanisation presents unprecedented threats to global food security and the survival of humanity.” As far as natural waste managers and fertiliser-producers go, worms are unmatchable: they can eat up to half their body weight in organic waste a day and reduce the volume of that waste by 90% in two to six months. “The process particularly lends itself to the urban environment with small-scale indoor, low-tech and low-cost systems,” De la Vega said. “With 83% of the UK living in cities, an urban worm farming movement is essential for future food security and provides easy solutions for our kitchen waste.” The worm castings – or worm manure – they produce is grade-A soil, rich in the 14 nutrients that plants need to thrive: just one tablespoon of worm manure per plant is enough for each growing season. For those who are still squeamish, De la Vega is quick to assure them that worms don’t smell – although the “wee” they produce, drained out of the bottom of the worm farm, is so powerful that it needs to be diluted before being used to fertilise the garden. A DIY worm farm can be made in anything that keeps the light out: the UWC website has videos showing how to dig deep and transform a plastic box, a chest of drawers and even a bag for life into a new, earthy home. Worms don’t even need your waste food: find a box, fill it with some damp, shredded paper, some cotton socks, an old wool jumper and you’re off. “Worms just want to eat and mate. If you give them enough food and space, they won’t try to escape,” said De la Vega. “If you don’t want them multiplying, don’t give them loads of food. They’re really clever: they’re hermaphrodites, so they can all lay eggs. But they don’t lay unless there’s enough food and space to sustain an increase in their population.” De la Vega has already sent worms to 26 schools across the country, and one prison. She is particularly pleased about the prison. “Worms clear toxins out of the earth and leave it completely clean and richer – helping plants to grow,” she said. “That’s a message of rebirth, regeneration and forgiveness that I think it is nice to take into a prison setting.” De la Vega will help 1,000 lucky worm farmers to nurture their new pets: alongside videos on the UWC website, they will be sent another video a few months after starting their worm farm to instruct them on harvesting their fresh fertiliser. If the two-year scheme is a success, the national lottery has said it will plough another tranche of funding into the programme. “Of course they are keen to keep funding the project,” said De la Vega. “It’s because it’s worms; they’re interesting. They’re niche.” The benefits of worm farming Tackles climate change: rotting food waste releases the greenhouse gases methane and nitrous oxide, which are 13 and 310 times stronger than carbon dioxide. Worms for all: low-cost, low-tech and perfect for the city. You don’t need a garden to keep a few worms. They will be very happy under your kitchen sink. Sustainable waste management: worms love organic waste. Solutions for domestic and industrial waste management – from food to animal waste – that are efficient, ecological and economical.The departure from the women and equalities committee of a Tory MP who faced accusations of sexism has been welcomed by some of its members. The Ashfield MP, Lee Anderson, who boycotted watching England’s men in the European Championship over players taking the knee, was criticised for telling a female district councillor in his constituency to “stay out of big boy politics” in November. Samantha Deakin said she was a victim of “blatant misogyny and sexism”. Anderson was appointed to the committee in May last year but stood down after six months, and was replaced in mid-December by the former equalities minister Caroline Dinenage. Anderson faced an internal party complaint for posting a sexist comment on Facebook in 2018, with the party asked to examine a post by Anderson in July 2018. It showed a photo of Anderson looking at the chest of a female canvasser in a vest top. He captioned the photo: “Out with some great knockers tonight in Skegby.” Anna Soubry, who was then the Conservative MP in the neighbouring constituency of Broxtowe, was made aware of the post and complained to the then party chairman, Brandon Lewis, and other senior officials. “Lee is an odious sexist,” said Soubry at the time. Anderson said he had left the committee “due to the time commitment required”, adding: “The meetings are always on a Wednesday, which is my busiest day. I felt I could not give the role the time and effort it deserved.” But other members of the committee said Anderson had not attended the majority of meetings during his time on the committee. Alex Davies-Jones, who is herself leaving the committee because she has been appointed to the shadow frontbench, said it wasn’t “going to be a big loss to the committee”. She said that when Anderson took up the position on the committee there was consternation among other members who feared he would be counterproductive to its work, but Davies-Jones said it “was a shame” he had not heard more from a wide range of evidence from people facing discrimination, including those with protected characteristics. “It would have made really good viewing to see him confronted by data, facts and experts in the field would have given him a greater understanding of the arguments put forward and maybe dispelled some myths.” Another member of the committee said: “He clearly put himself forward to disrupt the committee, but he failed entirely and has been replaced by a former minister who will be diligent. His departure will not be missed.” • This article was amended on 9 January 2022 to clarify a quote.The Wisconsin senator Ron Johnson, a hardline Trump supporter once described as “what you get when QAnon and the Tea Party have a baby”, has confirmed he will seek a third term, a step he once promised not to take. Johnson announced his decision in an editorial on Sunday. “Much as I’d like to ease into a quiet retirement, I don’t feel I should,” he said, adding that the response to the coronavirus pandemic played a part in his decision. “In 2010, I promised I would always tell people the truth and that I would never vote with re-election in mind,” he wrote. “An extension of that promise is that I don’t conduct myself worrying about re-election.” Both parties are likely to welcome the news, given Johnson’s emergence as a leading promoter of both Donald Trump’s lies about election fraud and Covid-19 misinformation. In a Republican party dominated by Trump, who has endorsed Johnson, his run will avoid a chaotic primary. Among Democrats, Johnson is seen as beatable in a November contest which will help decide control of a Senate split 50-50 and controlled via Vice-President Kamala Harris. With Republicans favoured to take the House, Democrats are desperate to hold the Senate, not least to protect Joe Biden’s chances of naming at least one justice to a supreme court skewed 6-3 in conservatives’ favour. Earlier this month, Brandon Scholz, a Republican operative, told the Hill: “I think you will find almost every Republican in Wisconsin and outside of Wisconsin wanting Ron Johnson to run because of what’s at stake, and that’s the majority of the Senate for Republicans. If he doesn’t run, that makes it more difficult.” A Wisconsin Democrat, Ben Nuckels, said: “Ron Johnson is what you get when QAnon and the Tea Party have a baby. And I hope that he does run. His candidacy makes the race far more competitive for Democrats. If Republicans want to see him run, I’ll agree with them on that.” In 2016, Johnson pledged not to run a third time. He changed his mind when Democrats took Congress and the White House. Wisconsin is a battleground state. Joe Biden won it by fewer than 21,000 votes in 2020, after Trump won a similarly thin victory in 2016. In midterms, the party that does not hold the White House generally makes gains. For example, in 2010, under Barack Obama, Republicans picked up 63 House seats and six in the Senate. Johnson rose out of the Tea Party movement stoked that year by opposition to Obama’s healthcare reform and by rightwing donors. He defeated an incumbent Democrat, Russ Feingold, then beat him again in 2016. Johnson is now one of Trump’s loudest defenders, standing by him after the attack on the US Capitol last year. The senator has espoused conspiracy theories about electoral fraud and the Capitol attack. On the legalistic side of Trump’s attempt to remain in power, Johnson planned to object to results in Arizona but changed his mind after the attack on Congress. In a statement, however, he said he refused “to dismiss the legitimate concerns of tens of millions of Americans who have lost faith in our institutions and the fairness of our electoral process”. Newspapers called for him to resign. The Wisconsin State Journal said: “Johnson’s last-minute change of heart may be viewed by some as proof of his conscience. Yet it is more accurate to view his flip-flopping … as a hit-and-run driver fleeing the scene of an accident because the driver hears sirens in the distance – only to come back to the scene and flick an insurance card out the window and keep on driving.” Referring to Johnson and Republicans who went through with objections, the paper said: “These men are cowards.” Johnson has also been a loud voice for unproven Covid treatments, accusing federal agencies of failing to promote drugs approved early in the pandemic, and an opponent of public health measures including vaccine mandates. Earlier this week, Dr Rob Davidson, leader of the Committee to Protect Healthcare, an advocacy group, “begged” Twitter to “look at the last two weeks” of Johnson’s feed “and shut him down like you did Marjorie [Taylor] Greene”. Greene, an extremist congresswoman from Georgia, was removed from Twitter last week, for spreading Covid misinformation. Johnson “has at least five strikes of Covid mis/dis-information”, Davidson said, adding: “Feeds like his undermine our ability to save lives and end the pandemic.” Johnson has protested Twitter decisions concerning tweets about Covid. Democrats running to face Johnson include the lieutenant governor, Mandela Barnes; Alex Lasry, an executive with the Milwaukee Bucks NBA team; and the state treasurer, Sarah Godlewski. On Friday, Barnes said: “Ron Johnson has been a failure and Wisconsin voters know it. The only people cheering Johnson’s decision are the wealthy special interests and big donors who have made a killing during his time in Washington.” Also on Saturday, John Thune, a member of Senate Republican leadership, said he would run for a fourth term. His state, South Dakota, is not remotely as competitive as Wisconsin.An Italian newspaper, a book of finely drawn sketches, a half-remembered photograph glimpsed on social media: these are the fragmented details of lost lives that Scotland’s only student-led cold case unit must make sense of. The group of criminology students at Glasgow Caledonian University (GCU) are investigating seven long-term unidentified bodies in partnership with Locate International, a community interest company dedicated to helping the families of missing persons to find their loved ones. One case concerns the body of a woman that was found washed up on a beach in Port Logan on the south-west coast in 2006. As with all these cold cases, there is no suspected criminality, but many possible explanations remain for how she ended up there: did she enter the water inland and float downriver, or from Ireland or the Isle of Man? Students have been gathering information about boat, shipping and plane accidents, and also learning about drift trajectories while consulting an expert on the Dumfries and Galloway coastline. The unit has also undertaken an updated facial reconstruction, in consultation with Police Scotland, technology having changed significantly since the last one was created 15 years ago. A new appeal has already garnered a lot of positive responses, and students will now go through them to check every lead. The unit already has a fruitful relationship with the police, says Lesley McMillan, a professor of criminology at GCU and co-director of the unit. “We’re not trying to do somebody else’s job, but try to bring some added value.” She describes the unit’s role in terms of a big puzzle: “When we inherit a case, we have some pieces of the jigsaw, so it’s our job to confirm that those are correct, and see what other pieces can we add. We have time to go down lots of different lines of inquiry, some of which may end up being rabbit holes. And even if we don’t complete the jigsaw, we can still pass our reports back to the police, and it might be that five years later they find some other piece that only makes sense because of what we’ve added to the picture.” Dave Grimstead, a senior investigating officer at Locate, explains: “The police face such a significant challenge. If you look at 2019-20, data shows 154,000 individuals who go missing. There’s a real challenge to meet that demand, and then they’ve got a cohort of about 5,373 unsolved cases that are more than 12 months old, and over 1,000 unidentified bodies.” This is where Locate has attempted to fill the gap, Grimstead adds, “to advocate with the police and support families to find an answer”. As well as GCU, Locate works with 10 other UK universities and about 150 volunteers. While the focus is always on finding the missing loved one, Grimstead says that the investigations can bring some comfort to families by “reducing the ambiguity”. “It does make a huge difference for families knowing that [the investigation] was pursued the best it could be, even if they’re not able to get that final answer.” The unit serves as a talent development programme for students and offers fantastic training in investigation, intelligence and analysis, explains Maureen Taylor, the unit’s co-director, who is a lecturer in criminology and a former forensic investigator. But it also brings fresh energy and inspiration to sometimes decades-old cases, with students drawing on a range of specialisms and experts, from forensic odontologists to oceanographers, who offer their services pro bono. Another investigation concerns a man who was found dead in woodland near the village of Canonbie in Dumfriesshire, southern Scotland, along with a four-month-old copy of La Repubblica. “So one of the things we’re looking into is why might he have had that newspaper,” says McMillan. “We’ve arranged for the newspaper to be translated and to get an original copy so we can actually see how the stories appeared within the printed copy and if a particular story is prominent … Or is this a rabbit hole, and he’s carrying a newspaper because he wants to stuff his boots when they get wet?” A third case involves another man found dead in private gardens in Edinburgh carrying a plain paper sketchbook of scenes from Aberdeen, Ullapool and Inverness. These cases raise broader philosophical questions around what it means to be missing, says McMillan. “To be missing, you have to be missed,” says Taylor. “Someone has to report you missing. And unfortunately, even that doesn’t happen in many, many cases. Conversely, there are cases where a person does not want to be found: people have a right to disappear for whatever reason, for example, a person escaping domestic abuse. Family estrangement happens all the time.”Philip Green and his family are poised to receive up to £2.5m more in payouts from their former Topshop retail empire on top of £50m paid out last year. The Greens, who owned Arcadia Group until it fell into administration in 2020, are in line for the payment based on an £11m loan secured by their Aldsworth Equity group against a former Topshop store in Norwich. The collapse of the group resulted in the loss of thousands of jobs as 162 sites closed down, and in a £500m-plus pension scheme deficit. The Norwich loan arrangement, which is buried in administrators’ documents, prioritises the Greens’ debt above most other creditors. The payout comes on top of the repayment of a £50m loan issued by Aldsworth against Topshop’s Daventry warehouse which was settled in May after the building was sold by administrators. In a new report sent to creditors of Topshop, seen by the Guardian, administrators say the 39,000 sq ft Norwich store, which Arcadia bought for £12m in 2016, has been sold for £2.5m, and the Aldsworth fund will receive the proceeds, after costs. The latest administrators’ report on the Greens’ retail empire showed that unsecured creditors to Topshop alone are owed almost £140m. At least £36m of that money is expected to be repaid after the sale of the group’s assets including the Topshop brand and stock to online specialist Asos, but most creditors will not be paid in full. It previously emerged that more than 1,000 suppliers to the group are likely to get less than 1% of the money owed to them. In all, Arcadia Group Ltd, the parent company of Topshop, Dorothy Perkins, Burton and Miss Selfridge, owed creditors £800m when it called in administrators, according to a statement of the group’s financial affairs prepared by Arcadia’s board in 2021. The Guardian revealed last year that Arcadia Group had a pension deficit of £510m when it collapsed. Trustees of the scheme have so far received £185m from the sale of Arcadia assets as part of £210m in secured funds agreed under a 2019 deal between the pensions regulator and the Green family. The family, who benefited from a £1.2bn dividend from Arcadia in 2005, as well as more than £300m in interest payments on loans and rents on properties that they owned, put in £100m of extra funding into the group’s pension under the deal. The pension scheme is expected to receive more funds following the completion of the sale of Topshop’s long leasehold of its former flagship store on London’s Oxford Street to the parent group of furniture retailer Ikea. The scheme is on course to remain independent of the industry-backed pensions lifeboat, which caps future payouts to savers. The Arcadia trustees believe that despite the £510m deficit, there will be sufficient funds to pay more than the pensions lifeboat can offer. The Green family declined to comment.Jack Dromey, who has died suddenly aged 73, was one of the leading trade unionists of his generation and a Labour politician. He was elected MP for Birmingham Erdington in 2010 and sat on his party’s frontbench for all but a few months of his parliamentary career. His working life was devoted to the interests of union members and later to those of the people he represented in the House of Commons. A dynamic and energetic man, he constantly sought a way forward in pursuit of whichever cause he was seeking to advance, yet he always tried to build a coalition of opinion in order to do so. In consequence, he was both immensely successful in his trade union and political campaigns and simultaneously won widespread respect, even from those who did not share his political opinions. He spent 25 years as an official in the Transport and General Workers’ Union (later Unite) and a further seven years in the elected post of deputy general secretary. Twice he stood for the top post in the union, in 1995 and 2003. He was the elected Labour party treasurer from 2004, a post he held until he entered parliament. This brought him into conflict with Tony Blair in 2006, when it was disclosed that, without informing Dromey, the prime minister had accepted £3.5m in commercial loans on behalf of the party from three individuals who were subsequently nominated for peerages. Dromey was married to Harriet Harman, the longest serving female MP – and mother of the house – and took immense personal pride in her political career as a former cabinet minister and deputy leader of the Labour party, never hesitating to acknowledge the strength he drew from their marriage. It was his domestic support that enabled her career – he called her “the outstanding parliamentary feminist of her generation” – and he would dismiss any suggestion of conflicting loyalties between their personal and professional lives as “sexist claptrap”. Dromey first came to national public attention in 1976, then a bearded, young radical secretary of the Brent Trades Council, who represented the workforce, mostly Asian women, employed by the Grunwick print works in Dollis Hill, north-west London, who engaged in a two-year strike for union recognition. Born in Brent, Jack was the son of Irish parents who came to London from Cork and Tipperary in search of work. His father, Jimmy, was a labourer who had become a train driver, and his mother was a cleaner; their experience helped radicalise their bright son, who passed the 11-plus and travelled through London to attend what was then the Cardinal Vaughan grammar school in Holland Park. After leaving school and studying law for two years, he worked in a print shop. In the early 1970s he helped found the Brent Law Centre, where he first met Harman, when she worked there as a solicitor; she would become the legal adviser to the Grunwick strikers. For 10 years he was a member of the executive committee of the National Council for Civil Liberties (now Liberty), where Harman was the legal officer from 1978 to 1982, the year the couple married and she entered parliament in the Peckham byelection. Despite the gulf between their social backgrounds – Harman’s parents were a doctor and a lawyer and she a former pupil of St Paul’s girls’ school – their marriage was “blissfully happy” according to friends’ accounts. They were dubbed “Mr and Mrs Moderniser” when Blair took office and Harman was first appointed to the cabinet. Dromey, always a funny man with a sharp sense of humour, would sometimes dub himself “Mr Harriet Harman, nee Dromey”. As a young activist he was a Marxist – although “more of the Groucho tendency” he would later joke – was a member of the now defunct socialist group Solidarity, and had been involved in the occupation of the Centre Point tower block in a 1973 protest against homelessness in central London. He learned the importance of pragmatism but was true to his personal beliefs. “I was born on the left and I will die on the left,” he said. He became a district officer for the TGWU in 1978 and the national officer for public service workers in 1984. He first ran for the post of deputy general secretary in 1991, and although then unsuccessful he had by this time established himself as a highly effective organiser and someone with both vision and drive. “He was head and shoulders above any other union officer I had ever come across in terms of his strategic approach,” said his former Unite colleague Chris Kaufman. He represented defence industry workers for a decade, which gave him an understanding of the patriotism that exists in the British workforce and which, in turn, informed his skilful political campaigning. In 2003, he secured national publicity by offering honorary union membership to Prince Charles. Dromey first tried for a seat at Westminster in advance of the 1997 general election, but failed to make the shortlist for Pontefract and Castleford. He had also hoped to contest a seat had there been a general election in 2007, as was anticipated when Gordon Brown took over as Labour leader and prime minister. It was claimed two years later, however, that a £1m TGWU donation to Labour party funds had been part of a deal to secure a safe seat for Dromey in the event of an election. He won selection for Birmingham Erdington in February 2010, when the sitting Labour MP Siôn Simon stood down shortly before the general election in May. The first of the new intake of MPs to make a maiden speech in the 2010 parliament, he spoke of the importance of industrial activism, which he called “that necessary partnership between industry and good government”. He was always heard with respect by the Commons because of his industrial experience and because he spoke with an understanding of what he called “the real world and the real economy”. When Ed Miliband became Labour leader in September 2010, he appointed Dromey shadow minister for housing. In 2013 Dromey was switched to the home affairs team with responsibility for the police, a post he retained under the leadership of Jeremy Corbyn until 2016. He resigned from the frontbench that year, having supported Owen Smith’s challenge to the leader, but was subsequently reappointed by Corbyn as spokesman on labour until 2018 and on pensions until 2021. He was a member of the select committee on business, innovation and skills in 2010 and on regulatory reform from 2010 to 2015. Keir Starmer made him shadow paymaster general in the Cabinet Office team early last year and only in December gave him additional responsibility to speak on immigration issues, which he did for the first time on the day before his death, in a parliamentary debate on the problems of the Afghan immigrants to the UK. He is survived by Harriet and by their children, Harry, Joe and Amy. • Jack (John Eugene Joseph) Dromey, trade unionist and politician, born 29 September 1948; died 7 January 2022 • This article was amended on 10 January 2022. Jack Dromey was shadow paymaster general, rather than postmaster general.Jamila Wignot’s documentary is a tribute to the work of the African American dancer and choreographer Alvin Ailey, a man who grew up in Texas during the Great Depression and Jim Crow years – and embraced his destiny in dance in California, where his mother had taken him as a child while she was looking for work. This film focuses a good deal on Ailey’s most renowned and arguably greatest creation, Revelations (1960), a dance piece inspired by the church and spirituals which had a transcendent passion, a surmounting of the rage and pain of slavery. The generosity and urgency in this work allowed Ailey’s vision to cross boundaries, using dancers’ bodies almost as a kind of folk history of black American experience. There are some absorbing testimonies from the dancers who worked with him, particularly about the ecstatic ovations his company would get on tour. About a Frankfurt show, one says wonderingly: “I’ve never seen people take their shoes off and hit the wall like that!” Ailey’s own private life as a gay man was opaque, because he was not someone given to joining political movements. The nearest this film comes to criticising him is when his younger dance contemporary, Bill T Jones, says that, despite the Aids crisis, Ailey did not speak out and his sexual identity was covered up “and he participated in the cover-up”. What emerges very touchingly here is Ailey’s relationship with his mother, whom he described as “extraordinarily beautiful, like Lena Horne”. This was the woman who moved in with him in his last illness, elderly as she was, to nurse him. What emerges is Ailey’s lifelong seriousness and his vocational purpose in dance. • Ailey is released on 7 January in cinemas.A manifesto pledge to hire 26,000 extra health professionals to work in GP surgeries is set to be broken by the government, health leaders have warned, leaving family doctors straining under a heavier workload. About 9,500 of the promised physiotherapists, pharmacists, mental health therapists and other clinical staff so far have been recruited to help GPs and practice nurses. Senior doctors have warned that patients will pay the price for the slow delivery of extra personnel by facing persistently long waits for an appointment. In one of a raft of NHS pledges in the Conservatives’ 2019 general election manifesto, Boris Johnson promised to employ 6,000 more primary care professionals by 2024 to work in GP practices in England. This was on top of the 20,000 that NHS England had already promised in its Additional Roles Reimbursement Scheme (ARRS). The plan was to free up family doctors’ time by having physiotherapists see patients with sore backs, pharmacists undertaking medication reviews, counsellors supporting people with mental health problems and dieticians advising those with food-related problems. Those 26,000 staff, alongside the arrival of “6,000 more doctors in general practice” in a separate pledge, would help GPs and their teams offer 50m more consultations, the Conservatives said. But in November the health secretary, Sajid Javid, admitted that Johnson’s often-repeated 6,000 extra GPs pledge would be missed. Official NHS workforce statistics highlighted by the Royal College of GPs (RCGP) show that by September only an estimated 9,464 extra clinical staff had been recruited – far short of the 13,000 that should have been in post by then at a rate of 5,200 a year for five years, given the ARRS scheme had begun in March 2019. “Whilst progress in meeting this target is better than the GP [recruitment] target, it’s still slow and very concerning that this could be another promise that won’t be met,” said Prof Matin Marshall, the chair of the RCGP. “The impact of not having enough staff in general practice is being felt acutely both by GPs and our team members who are working to their limits, and our patients, who are facing longer waits for the care they need. Meeting this [extra staff] target – and the GP target – will be vital to addressing this.” NHS workforce statistics show that in September there were still only 14 podiatrists, 38 dieticians and 79 mental health therapists working across the 6,600 GP surgeries in England. There were also just 47 health support workers and 252 health and wellbeing coaches, who advise on lifestyle. There has been much more progress in recruiting pharmacists, whose numbers soared from 153 in March 2020 to 2,626 last September. Similarly, the numbers of paramedics rose over the same period from just two to 256 and of social prescribing link workers – who direct people to non-medical activities, especially to tackle loneliness and depression – from 112 to 1,427. The number of physiotherapists in post at GP practices has also risen considerably, from six to 652. It is vital to recruit enough of all these kinds of personnel, Marshall added, because “these professionals, alongside GPs and our established nursing colleagues, can provide both excellent and appropriate care for patients but also free up GPs’ time for patients with complex health needs, who are most likely to benefit from our medical expertise.” Labour seized on the slow progress towards meeting the 26,000 target. “The Conservatives are on course to break another promise,” said Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary. “Their failure to invest in the GP workforce and the primary care staff that support them means that people are struggling to see their GP and end up turning up at A&amp;E, which inconveniences patients, puts hospitals under greater pressure, and costs the NHS more money. The Tories’ incompetence is costing people dearly.” The Department of Health and Social Care insisted that recruitment of the 26,000 staff was on track. “The new recruits will be a core part of local primary care teams, reducing pressure on general practice and ensure patients can see or speak to the right clinician,” a spokesperson said. “We have invested £530m to expand GP capacity during the pandemic, on top of £1.5bn until 2024 and we have a record number of GPs in training this year, with 4,000 accepting places.”After sailing a little too close to the wind during their 3-2 league victory against Crystal Palace, West Ham happily accepted an afternoon free of drama. Manuel Lanzini gave them a deserved lead at the end of a drab first half and David Moyes’s side cruised from there, comfortably keeping Leeds at arm’s length and sealing their place in the fourth round of the FA Cup thanks to a professional and mature display. For Moyes, satisfaction came from seeing his side keep a first clean sheet since 12 December. Leeds kept plugging away, Jack Harrison and Dan James spurning chances to force extra time, but West Ham were rarely under siege once Lanzini’s opener had survived a VAR check for offside. Declan Rice was always in charge in midfield and Marcelo Bielsa’s defenders spent most of the contest bouncing off Michail Antonio, a barnstorming presence who was still going deep into added time, racing clear down the right to set up Jarrod Bowen’s clincher. “I want to try and go far in the Cup,” Moyes said. “We tried to go close in the Carabao Cup. We had a lot of opportunities today. On another day we might have scored more. But I’m really pleased we kept a clean sheet. Leeds cause you problems because of how they play. This is one of the toughest ties drawn out in this round.” It would have been harder had Leeds not turned up with eight key players missing. West Ham picked their strongest available side and threatened from the start, Bowen seeing a shot cleared off the line by Luke Ayling and a deflected shot from Antonio flying narrowly over. Nothing was happening at the other end. With Tyler Roberts, Patrick Bamford, Joe Gelhardt and Rodrigo unavailable in attack, Leeds were woefully short of ideas during the opening period. Sam Greenwood, a 19-year-old forward, struggled to assert himself against Craig Dawson and Issa Diop after being handed his first start by Bielsa and there was rarely any threat from Leeds before the interval, a tame curling effort from Lewis Bate summing up their toothlessness. There was no zest to Leeds, with Bate looking lightweight on his first appearance since joining from Chelsea last summer. Rice and Tomas Soucek were too strong for the 19-year-old midfielder and although West Ham rather spluttered as an attacking force at first, with Lanzini’s passing range slightly off and Antonio forced to play with his back to goal too much, there was always a sense that everything would come together sooner rather than later. So it proved when Antonio finally grabbed a chance to turn and run down the left flank after another timid Leeds attack had broken down in the 34th minute. Claret and blue shirts stormed forward in support and Antonio had time to check back before jabbing a pass towards Nikola Vlasic, who shielded the ball from Leo Hjelde before showing good upper body strength to roll away from the Leeds centre-back and advance on Illan Meslier’s goal. It was naive defending from Hjelde, who was making his debut alongside Diego Llorente. The 18-year-old was too tight to Vlasic, who was keen to make a positive impression with Saïd Benrahma away with Algeria at the Africa Cup of Nations, and he went close to conceding a penalty as he tried to slow the Croatian’s momentum. As it was, Hjelde’s challenge on Vlasic merely led to a mess, Bowen and Meslier both going for the loose ball before Junior Firpo’s desperate lunge gave Lanzini the opportunity to sweep into the empty net. The goal stood despite the officials checking whether the offside Bowen had put Meslier off – Bielsa offered no comment on the decision – and West Ham should have extended their lead before the break. Antonio blasted wide from Ben Johnson’s low cross and Ryan Fredericks finished diffidently after a lovely one-two with Bowen, who was a constant thorn in Firpo’s side. Aware that something had to change, Bielsa replaced Bate and Greenwood with Raphinha and Stuart Dallas at half-time. Yet West Ham, who visit Kidderminster in the fourth round, were still in charge. Antonio remained a menace, rumbling away from Llorente and sending Bowen through to test Meslier, and it felt like there were possibilities every time Vlasic cut in from the left. Leeds, who had moved James up front, struggled to create anything. Adam Forshaw came on for Ayling, but Bielsa’s problems increased when Firpo went down injured and had to make way for Cody Drameh. With time running out, Bielsa’s mood hardly improved when Harrison wasted a chance to equalise, somehow turning Mateusz Klich’s cross wide from close range. Leeds were toothless. James missed another inviting opening and the contest was over when Antonio, combining with Pablo Fornals, released Bowen to slide a cool finish past Meslier.The reaction of Harry Winks said it all. The Tottenham midfielder had bent a free-kick from wide on the left towards the far post, more in the hope that a teammate could touch it home, only for it to drift over the Morecambe goalkeeper, Trevor Carson, and fly in. Winks looked to the heavens in relief and was barely able to muster a smile. It was the 74th minute and he and Spurs knew they would be spared an FA Cup upset at the hands of the League One strugglers Morecambe. The victors’ reward is a home tie against Brighton. It was not a day for celebrations because, until Antonio Conte had called for the cavalry and introduced Harry Kane, Lucas Moura and Oliver Skipp as 69th-minute substitutes, it had been a grind. Worse, the fringe players to whom the Spurs manager had turned at the outset were laboured, particularly during a dismal first-half performance as Morecambe deservedly led through their captain, Anthony O’Connor, who was excellent. Conte could be disappointed with the understudies, particularly Tanguy Ndombele, Dele Alli and Bryan Gil – all of whom he took off in that first set of changes – and only then did his team break Morecambe’s resistance. Ndombele bore the brunt of the home crowd’s frustration when he sauntered off at low speed, having had a day when nothing went his way. Alli worked Carson with a clever flick from a corner on 55 minutes but, that apart, he could get little going and it has already been widely reported that Spurs would be open to moving him on this month. Whither the one-time Spurs golden boy? Morecambe ran on fumes in the closing stages and only the hardest of hearts would have felt no sympathy for Ryan McLaughlin, who was guilty of a terrible lapse that allowed Moura away to make the score 2-1. The Morecambe defender dwelt in possession on halfway and, once Moura had robbed him, there was an inevitability about the run and finish. A distraught McLaughlin was barely able to chase back. Like everybody in red, he had nothing left to give. Kane put a gloss on the scoreline at the end, taking a pass from Giovani Lo Celso, spinning and guiding expertly into the far corner, and Morecambe had to be content with having done themselves and the club proud. Their commitment and organisation were a feature of the tie, O’Connor setting the tone when he went through Gil in the eighth minute; the centre-back was fortunate to escape a yellow card. McLaughlin had wobbled in the first minute, miscontrolling to allow Ndombele in – the Spurs midfielder would be successfully closed down – and, from the corner, Ben Davies flashed a header just over. But Spurs lacked tempo and incision during the first half; their passing sloppy and predictable. Morecambe grew in belief, measuring their progress in tackles, blocks, a nutmeg on Gil and flickers in the final third. They could feel that there was nothing to be frightened about. Conte’s changes were playing to impress him and show that they have a future under him at the club and it has to be said that is debatable. Joe Rodon was also poor although to single him out in a defence that lacked assurance is perhaps unfair. It was no surprise when Morecambe went ahead. Rodon had left a back-pass a little short in the 12th minute only for Pierluigi Gollini to get out and clear ahead of Cole Stockton. Now Rodon waited for the goalkeeper as he tried to deal with a long ball ahead of Stockton and, when Gollini did not come, he was forced to concede the corner. Alfie McCalmont, the Leeds loanee, took it and O’Connor ran around the unconvincing Japhet Tanganga to sidefoot home on the volley. Conte had started in the 3-5-2 system that many fans want to see but, with Kane on the bench and Son Heung-min injured, it shone a light on one of the imbalances in the squad that the manager played two false 9s – Alli and Gil. Spurs offered little as an attacking force before the interval. Matt Doherty hit the outside of a post from a tight angle following a corner and Lo Celso had a shot blocked after a good run by Ryan Sessegnon but that was about it. Apart from Winks, who tried to inject urgency in front of the back three, Spurs lacked spark. Alli had his moment early in the second half, Sessegnon dragged wide when he should have done better, Lo Celso saw a shot blocked by O’Connor and Conte knew he had to act. Spurs belatedly had a bit of conviction, even if the equaliser was soft from a Morecambe perspective. At that point, the shock felt off and it became more about when Spurs would find the winner as they took up residence in the Morecambe half. Kane blew an easy header and Lo Celso was denied by Carson before Moura punished McLaughlin and Kane profited after another substitute, Emerson Royal, had robbed Greg Leigh close to the byline.That’s all from me. Here’s the match report again, and keep an eye out for blogs on the fourth round draw and on Nottingham Forest v Arsenal. Bye! Jacob Steinberg was at the London Stadium to witness West Ham’s victory, and here’s his match report: After sailing a little too close to the wind during their 3-2 victory over Crystal Palace, West Ham happily accepted an afternoon free of drama. Manuel Lanzini gave them the lead at the end of a drab first half and David Moyes’s side cruised from there, comfortably keeping Leeds United at arm’s length and sealing their place in the fourth round of the FA Cup thanks to a professional and mature display. For Moyes, satisfaction came from seeing his side keep a first clean sheet since 12 December. Leeds kept plugging away in the second half, Jack Harrison and Dan James both spurning chances to force extra-time, but West Ham rarely looked uneasy. Declan Rice was typically outstanding in central midfield, Lanzini coolly scored his third goal in his last two games and Michail Antonio was a barnstorming presence in attack, racing clear during stoppage time to set up Jarrod Bowen’s clincher. Much more here: Jarrod Bowen is asked about the first goal, but hasn’t seen it back and seems to have absolutely no idea about why anyone’s discussing it: I think we dominated a lot of the game. We stuck in there at 1-0 and then at the end got the goal to put the game to bed. I think I’m being more consistent this season. I want to push myself to the very top and the sky’s the limit. I’ve just got to keep working hard and keep putting in performances week in, week out. This afternoon’s FA Cup scores, with the weekend’s final fixture, between Nottingham Forest and Arsenal, due to get under way in just over an hour: Cardiff 1-1 Preston (extra time being played) Charlton 0-1 Norwich Liverpool 4-1 Shrewsbury Luton 4-0 Harrogate Stoke 2-0 Leyton Orient Tottenham 3-1 Morecambe West Ham 2-0 Leeds Wolves 3-0 Sheffield United 90+5 mins: It’s all over! West Ham were just that bit better than Leeds and whether their first goal should have stood or not, they deserve a place in round four. Marcelo Bielsa still hasn’t won an FA Cup game. 90+5 mins: Andriy Yarmolenko is going to get three seconds of action after replacing Antonio. That finishes it! West Ham break through Antonio, who runs down the right, draws the only two defenders and slides a pass to Bowen that looks a bit overhit but Meslier still hasn’t got back to his line, looks horribly exposed, and is helpless as Bowen sidefoots past him! 90+3 mins: Areola reaches the corner first, and punches clear. 90+3 mins: Leeds have a corner. Meslier comes up for it. 90+1 mins: There will be four bonus additional stoppage-related minutes. 90 mins: Antonio and Bowen have a two-on-two in attack, but Antonio runs the ball into Koch and that’s the end of that. 88 mins: What a chance for Leeds! They work the ball across the edge of the area to Harrison, whose low cross seems to be heading straight to Dawson, is somehow completely missed by Dawson, and poor Dan James behind him is completely astonished by this development and has no chance to react in time to do anything other than deflect the ball wide. 86 mins: West Ham win a free kick, wide on the left. Declan Rice has a shot, which had to be absolutely perfect if it was to go in and was very much not. 83 mins: And now Harry Kane’s scored another. Johnson blocks a cross in the West Ham area with the top of his shirt sleeve. It could have been interpreted as a handball, that. 82 mins: Spurs take the lead against Morecambe, and having equalised thanks to a fluke free kick the (apparent) winner comes from a defensive error as Lucas Moura steals the ball off a defender, runs through on goal, rounds the keeper and strokes into an empty net. 81 mins: Chance! Drameh hits a ludicrous pass across the Leeds defence which is intercepted by Fredericks, who runs into the area, looks up, sees two teammates standing unmarked on the edge of the area, ignores them both and slams a low shot across goal and wide. 78 mins: The game’s second booking goes to Drameh, who was late to challenge Ben Johnson (though didn’t actually appear to touch him). 78 mins: Leo Fuhr Hjelde is replaced by Crysencio Summerville. 76 mins: A first change for the home side sees Pablo Fornals come on for Lanzini. 73 mins: Chance for Leeds! The ball is swung into the area towards Forshaw, comes off a defender and drops to Klich, whose volleyed effort doesn’t go in but does head towards James, who sticks out a foot and prods wide! 72 mins: Lanzini pulls back Klich and earns himself a booking. 68 mins: Cody Drameh has come on for Firpo. Tottenham have equalised against Morecambe, Harry Winks’ free-kick from wide on the left going over everyone and dipping in at the far post. 66 mins: Junior Firpo is back on the floor and shaking his head in a manner that suggests a fourth Leeds substitution might be imminent. 63 mins: West Ham attack down the left flank this time, from where Johnson hits a rubbish cross. Goal kick. 62 mins: A nice run from Fredericks, but a less nice cross. Despite Leeds’ changes, West Ham are looking the more likely scorers at the moment. 60 mins: Another change for Leeds: Luke Ayling comes off, and Adam Forshaw comes on. 58 mins: Vlasic is having a good game, diving excepted, and he drives into the area, sucks the defence towards him, then checks back and tees up Rice for a free shot from 20 yards. Rice gets a little overexcited, though. Goal kick. 57 mins: From the free kick Lanzini’s shot hits the wall and loops into Meslier’s arms. 55 mins: Vlasic runs towards the Leeds area, cuts back onto his left foot and throws himself to ground. There wasn’t even the vaguest sense of a foul there as he fell over in the vague vicinity of Leo Hjelde, but the referee buys it and West Ham have a shooting chance. 52 mins: And West Ham run up the other end, Antonio outmuscles Llorente and feeds Bowen, whose low right-footer hits Meslier! 51 mins: Raphinha dances into the area before sidefooting the ball to a defender ... 48 mins: Antonio gets down the left before sending in a low cross that bursts through the area without anyone getting anything on it, despite Bowen’s slide. 46 mins: Peeeeeep! West Ham get the game restarted. Bate and Greenwood have gone off for Leeds. The players are back out ahead of the second half, and Raphina and Stuart Dallas are both among them. Here you too can witness ITV’s Jermaine-heavy punditry panel agreeing that the West Ham goal should have been disallowed: 45+6 mins: Not much between the teams, but West Ham lead by one contentious goal to no goals at all. 45+4 mins: Save! Bowen slides the ball infield to Fredericks, whose first-time shot is too weak to beat Meslier. 45+3 mins: Play is back under way. Here’s a picture taken just before the goal was scored. The VAR’s position, as I understand it, is that Jarrod Bowen is not influencing play here. 45+1 mins: Three minutes of stoppage time start with a stoppage, as Meslier clatters into Firpo as he claims a cross and both stay down. 44 mins: Antonio is up, and fit to continue. Liverpool have taken the lead at Anfield, Fabinho stylishly converting the penalty after a handball. 42 mins: Antonio is still down, receiving treatment to his right ankle. 41 mins: Johnson’s low cross runs to Antonio, who shoots wide on the slide from beyond the far post - and then stays down! 40 mins: In other news, Liverpool have now equalised against Shrewsbury. 38 mins: Very nice move from West Ham, after Firpo gives the ball to Bowen on the edge of the home penalty area, but it ends with a Fredericks pull-back to a white shirt. 36 mins: VAR is having to examine replays from every angle, and it turns out that though Bowen was running right in front of Meslier when it happened, he actually never took a shot or even touched the ball - it was Vlasic having another go. The idea that he wasn’t influencing play seems pretty outlandish, but the goal stands! Vlasic turns Hjelde and runs into the area. Hjelde blocks his shot but the ball breaks to Bowen, whose shot is blocked but the ball breaks to Lanzini, who thumps it in! But was Bowen offside when Vlasic last touched the ball? 32 mins: Cup shock update: 31 mins: A chance for Leeds! They attack down the right, Greenwood crosses to James and it comes off a defender and drops to Lewis Bate, who swings his left foot and completely mishits! 27 mins: The home crowd, who might have expected an easy afternoon after seeing the team sheets, briefly falls quiet, prompting inevitable “is this a library?” songs from the away end. 24 mins: The ball definitely hit Hjelde’s left arm, which was already slightly raised. Is it OK because the arm was already raised, or not OK because the reason it was raised was so Hjelde could grab Dawson’s shirt? 23 mins: West Ham toss a free kick into the penalty area, where Craig Dawson battles for it and then abruptly stops, in favour of asking the referee for a handball-related penalty. The referee doesn’t spy anything awry, and neither does the VAR. 20 mins: Now Greenwood tries his luck. He doesn’t have any, and the ball balloons off his left foot and into the stands from 25 yards. 18 mins: Bate curls a left-footer straight at Areola, who catches. Still, it’s a shot on target. 15 mins: Leeds push forwards now, but after James takes the ball to the byline only Greenwood is in the area, nobody else is offering a passing option, and nothing comes of the cross. 13 mins: Close! West Ham push again, and from the edge of the area Antonio’s shot flicks off Llorente’s shin and loops onto the roof of the net. 10 mins: Off the line! Declan Rice goes rampaging down the left wing, just keeps the ball in play and crosses towards Antonio. Koch wins the ball but knocks it down to Bowen, whose first-time shot beats Meslier but is booted away by Ayling! 7 mins: Quite a low-paced opening as the two teams test each other out. Leeds, for all their changes, their debutants and understudies, have started well enough. 5 mins: The day’s first shot comes from Bowen, who flashes a left-footer wide from 30 yards or so. 2 mins: Two crossfield balls to Firpo so far. One from Llorente as Leeds tried to play out of defence was excellent, the second from Harrison as they tried to create a shooting chance was not. 1 min: Peeeeep! Leeds have kicked off! The players are out, and Leeds are about to kick off! Daniel James is excited: In the FA Cup anything can happen. I think it’s going to be a great game today, great atmosphere. I think the injuries give a great opportunity for all of us, especially the young boys to play and kick on. Anyone coming in obviously knows our structure. Whatever team both teams put out it’s going to be a good game. Here’s a first sighting of the Leeds debutant Lewis Bate. On his phone, obviously. Bah, the youth of today, etc and so forth. David Moyes has a chat with ITV. He’s still miffed about the rescheduled Norwich game - “I don’t think it’s right that our game’s been put midweek but it has been, and we have to get on with it” - but otherwise seems pretty chipper: It shows how important I think it is to play well against Leeds, because they’re a good team. We want to get through in the Cup but we want to try to do well in the Premier League as well. Everybody would [want to make the final], but I’m guessing all the reporters are asking managers the same question. It’s a long journey, hard games. Today we’ve got a tough game and we have to concentrate on that before we start thinking about finals. West Ham’s starting XI is perhaps surprisingly strong, while Leeds pick Sam Greenwood, Leo Hjelde and Lewis Bate, three teenagers who have not started a single league game this season between them, as well as Robin Koch, who has made three league appearances, but have strength on the bench. Team sheets have been handed in, and here they are: West Ham: Areola, Fredericks, Dawson, Diop, Johnson, Rice, Soucek, Bowen, Lanzini, Vlasic, Antonio. Subs: Yarmolenko, Fornals, Noble, Masuaku, Kral, Randolph, Okoflex, Alese, Baptiste. Leeds: Meslier, Ayling, Llorente, Hjelde, Firpo, Bate, Koch, James, Klich, Harrison, Greenwood. Subs: Forshaw, Raphinha, Klaesson, Dallas, Drameh, Summerville, McCarron, Jenkins, Moore. Referee: Stuart Attwell. Hello world! It’s FA Cup third round weekend, a time to revel in fixtures we don’t usually get to see will be able to see again very soon! West Ham v Leeds is on TV twice in a week, with the Hammers’ home Premier League clash against these very same opponents due to kick off precisely seven days after this cup-themed version. Of the two matches, this is the one they’ll be taking a bit less seriously. It’s hard not to conclude that the TV cameras could have been better deployed elsewhere, but these are two well-supported clubs who will guarantee decent viewing figures, so this is where we are. Marcelo Bielsa goes into his fourth tilt at the FA Cup having never won a single match in the competition, which is a bit bobbins. And with a lengthy injury list to deal with, his chances of improving on that record don’t seem very good. “We always try to win in every official game we have,” Bielsa promised. “There is never a need for added motivation. Every time that the group plays, the desire is always the maximum to win. Every competition is a possibility and we take it in that way. Every game we focus on it with the intention to win it. We’re going to try that the characteristics of our play are expressed and that will allow us to beat them.” I’ve read the last sentence a dozen times and still have no idea what’s going on. West Ham will also rejig their line-up, what with having to squeeze a rearranged league game against Norwich between the two Leeds matches and everything. “I’m not really sure yet exactly which way we want to go,” David Moyes said of his team selection for this game. “I think because the Premier League have put the game on Wednesday night, that’s changed the whole dynamics of this FA Cup tie.” Anyway, we hope for the best, eh? Welcome!Shrewsbury Town had their moment, a precious lead at Anfield that lasted all of seven minutes, but an inexperienced Liverpool found a mature response. Jürgen Klopp’s team ruined any fleeting hopes Steve Cotterill had of an upset as young Kaide Gordon, and the not-so-young Brazilian duo of Fabinho and Roberto Firmino, eased the Premier League hosts into round four, where they will host Cardiff. “I don’t think it was a 4-1 game, more of a 2-1,” the Shrewsbury manager said. “I am very proud of our lads and very thankful for how Liverpool and Jürgen Klopp have been with us all day. Virgil van Dijk brought his shirt into our dressing room after the game, congratulated our players and shook hands with every one of them. He is top drawer and an absolute gentleman. “We would have liked to have had more of a go at them but it was very difficult to get the ball off that triangle of [Ibrahima] Konaté, Van Dijk and Fabinho. We had them worried for six or seven minutes but that was it.” A testing week ended with another complicated assignment for Liverpool, although it was one they ultimately navigated comfortably. Klopp was free to lead the team again having been in isolation with Covid since before the draw at Chelsea. The Liverpool manager rejoined the group at their hotel on the morning of the game and with positive tests continuing to affect the squad, along with injuries and the Africa Cup of Nations, he was required to improvise with his team selection. Four teenagers – the full debutant Max Woltman, Gordon, Conor Bradley and Tyler Morton – started in a side that included the experience of Van Dijk, Andy Robertson and Fabinho. That insurance policy was seriously examined in the first half by Shrewsbury’s disciplined and supremely well-organised game plan. The Liverpool manager admitted: “It’s been very difficult for different reasons. This was the team we could line-up today and the boys did really well. They had to put in a proper shift. We had a proper outbreak last week and it showed up that we had a lot of false positives but the rules are there and some players couldn’t play today. The only extra positive was Trent Alexander-Arnold. All the rest were false positives but we had to close down the training ground until you have two extra testing rounds.” Liverpool dominated possession against the League One side but struggled initially to break through a five-man visiting rearguard protected by a compact three-man midfield. Gordon forced Shrewsbury’s goalkeeper, Marko Marosi, into a low save from the edge of the area and Van Dijk headed over from a Robertson free-kick. Otherwise it was a laboured opening until the visitors stunned Anfield by scoring from their first attempt on Caoimhin Kelleher’s goal. Nathanael Ogbeta, Shrewsbury’s left wing-back, served notice of the threat he posed a minute before the breakthrough when skirting round Bradley and sweeping an inviting cross through the Liverpool area. No teammate was on hand to capitalise. Seconds later, having controlled a crossfield ball from Ethan Ebanks-Landell expertly on his chest, Ogbeta again attacked Bradley before curling another delightful cross behind Konaté. This time Daniel Udoh was alert to the wing-back’s intentions and, arriving unmarked in the six-yard box, steered the ball beyond Kelleher to the wild delight of a 6,000-strong away crowd. Klopp looked stunned at the ease with which Shrewsbury sliced through his team. Liverpool responded sharply, however, and quickly drew level with a goal made in their academy. Morton and Elijah Dixon-Bonner combined to release Bradley in space on the right. The Northern Ireland international picked out Gordon inside a crowded penalty area and the gifted forward’s quick feet enabled him to open up space for a cool finish beyond Marosi. At 17 years and 96 days Gordon overtook Michael Owen to become the second youngest goalscorer in Liverpool’s history behind Ben Woodburn. The hosts overturned the deficit to lead at half-time through a Fabinho penalty. Given how well their team had defended for 44 minutes, it was a galling way for Shrewsbury to concede. Ebanks-Landell had Van Dijk on his back as the pair challenged for Robertson’s free-kick inside the area but no convincing reason to meet the ball with a raised arm. David Coote immediately pointed to the spot and Fabinho sent Marosi the wrong way from it. Shrewsbury maintained their shape and strategy throughout the second half but a lack of composure in front of goal cost them several opportunities to capitalise on the counterattack. The clearest threat arrived consistently from Liverpool. Marosi denied Dixon-Bonner at close range moments after the restart but was beaten for a third time by a cheeky finish from the substitute Firmino. Bradley claimed his second assist of the match when he hooked the ball back from the byline for Konaté. The defender’s attempted shot was deflected on to Firmino via a Shrewsbury boot and, facing away from goal, the Brazilian backheeled past the exposed Shrewsbury keeper. Fabinho claimed his second of the game, and Liverpool’s fourth, with an emphatic finish into the roof of the net from Kostas Tsimikas’s injury‑time free-kick.Reflective of a broader Australian conversation, talk around the A-Leagues’ response to Omicron and its flood of postponements has predominantly been framed as a logistical and financial challenge. But for coaching, medical and sports science staff, it is also a very real and uncertain health challenge. Prior to the emergence of the latest variant, the A-Leagues – like most Australian sports – had been able to avoid Covid-19 seeping into their ranks. Due to a combination of societal restrictions, biosecurity measures and sheer fortune, the virus existed as some sort of malignant, external force – shutting down leagues and forcing games behind closed doors but, for the most part, staying out of dressing rooms. But now, the call is coming from inside the house. Australian football is proving no more immune to the highly communicable variant than any other segment of society, leaving coaches and players across the leagues to come to the conclusion that it is simply a matter of time until the virus rips through their dressing rooms. The past week’s fixtures were again decimated by postponements resulting from at least five players returning positive tests. Fortunately, the greater physical base elite athletes possess and superior levels of monitoring and care they can access puts professional footballers – who are all vaccinated apart from a small handful of players – in a strong position. The likelihood of an A-Leagues player developing serious complications from the virus are slim – even if acute presentations can still be worrying. “I copped it pretty hard,” Melbourne City and Socceroos attacker Andrew Nabbout said. “The first couple of days in training was very difficult, trying to get back into it. I felt really strong before it happened and I was able to bounce back pretty quickly, but the first couple of days really hit me hard.” Footballers, as a rule, are in much better condition than the general population but their working conditions are also far more taxing; a sharp contrast exists between getting out of quarantine and being able to perform in an elite sporting competition after suffering from a respiratory infection. In the weeks and months ahead, players who return to action following infection will not only have to deal with a series of short turnarounds to make up for fixtures postponed by outbreaks, but also the dog days of summer. “For [players to return to training], we have to get the players in to do some moderate-intensity exercise and we’ll look at some heart rate data on that,” Tim Knight, the head of performance at Central Coast Mariners, who had 14 players contract Covid, said. “The doctors want to see the heart rate data and how they respond to that. We have baseline data from pre-Covid so the doctors are able to compare post-Covid to pre-Covid and see if there are any abnormalities in response. Then there’s usually an interview asking about symptoms hanging around and once he’s happy that they’re able to return he’ll give them the all-clear [for a staggered return to full training]. “Sometimes players can hide things from coaches if they think it’s going to impact selection but with our games being postponed we’ve really got the information across that this is about returning to health. We understand this period might be challenging so they need to be really honest with us.” The leagues’ anticipated fixture postponement pile-up will begin abating next week, but the long-term ramifications of the current wave of infections around the league – including the dreaded spectre of long Covid – remains unclear. “The hard thing is, it’s a medical condition. I didn’t really finish school, I don’t really know,” said City coach Patrick Kisnorbo. “That’s why it’s so hard to know exactly what will happen physically with the player. You’ve just got to judge it as you see it. If they’re OK, they’re OK but I know personally we have to adapt and treat it on its merit.” In a recent study, researchers examined the lasting impact of Covid in Serie A and Bundesliga players and found that while there was a minimal difference, after the initial quarantining period, in the number of games players were able to take part in pre- and post-infection, there was a small but noticeable decrease in the number of minutes they were able to log. This was accompanied by a more than 5% decrease in player’s performance in metrics such as passes completed and, in contrast to the effects of influenza, these phenomena “remain persistent for far more than six months”. The study also found that widespread outbreaks amongst teams led to a “negative effect that is likely larger than the sum of individual effects”. “We have historical data on player’s responses to different exercises that we do,” said Knight. “We’re able to compare that data pre- and post-Covid. With the effects of long Covid, there hasn’t been too much research on it for sportspeople. “For us, it’s a case of looking at everything and keeping a keen eye out. You get to know your athletes and how they respond to training or what they’re capable of. It’s about being vigilant and making sure that we don’t miss any warning signs that could potentially pop up.”The New South Wales and Tasmanian state Liberal governments have expressed concern the federal religious discrimination bill will override their anti-discrimination laws. Central provisions of the Morrison government bill, including those protecting statements of belief and religious institutions’ hiring practices, would override state laws potentially making claims unworkable, they submitted to a parliamentary inquiry. The Coalition is struggling to win support for the proposed legislation, with a trio of moderate Liberal MPs reserving their right to vote against it and a deal between the attorney general and another group of disaffected MPs breaking down after a religious backlash. The bill is being considered by two parliamentary inquiries, including the joint committee on human rights. The Tasmanian attorney general, Elise Archer, submitted the federal bill appeared “to effectively invalidate the operation of the Tasmanian Anti-Discrimination Act”, including the provision banning speech that offends, insults or humiliates a person based on a protected attribute. Archer submitted a person need only claim that their statement was a protected statement of belief and the Tasmanian anti-discrimination tribunal “must decline to hear the matter” unless the claim was specious. While the person who made the statement was not required to show it was a statement of belief, the complainant would be required to prove it breached the bill’s safeguards that such statements must not be malicious, intimidating or harassing, she said. “I would like to reiterate that the Tasmanian government’s view is [the package] would diminish the ability of the Tasmanian anti-discrimination tribunal to deal with certain complaints and … we continue to strongly advocate for no weakening of our anti-discrimination laws.” The New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, has openly questioned the need for the federal bill. Anti-Discrimination NSW, the state government body that administers discrimination law, submitted it “remains concerned” the bill does not strike the right balance between freedom of religion and other rights. It warned the religious discrimination bill would override provisions in state law “that limit the circumstances under which faith-based schools can discriminate against job applicants and existing employees”. The statement of belief and hiring clauses “would also create significant procedural and access to justice issues”, it said, because the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal may not have jurisdiction to consider state claims where the federal law is invoked as a defence. Moving the matter to a federal court would add “procedural and financial burdens on complainants and create a barrier to access to justice”. Professor of constitutional law Anne Twomey submitted the federal government had attempted a “provocative” takeover of state law, but the drafting was “conceptually confused and probably invalid”. Both sections “seek to control the operation of a state law”, she argued, rather than merely creating an inconsistency with state law. “How can a commonwealth law dictate the interpretation of what amounts to discrimination under a state law? “It cannot do so. It cannot amend or alter a state law or instruct a court as to how to interpret the state law.” The Australian Catholic Bishops Conference praised the bill, arguing that it “does not go far enough” to ensure that freedom of religion is protected. The conference accused state governments including Victoria of seeking to constrain religious institutions’ hiring and firing powers. The Australian Human Rights Commission submitted that it “strongly supports the introduction of enforceable protections against religious discrimination for all people in Australia”. But while it endorsed those elements of the bill, it warned other sections “would provide protection to religious belief or activity at the expense of other rights”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning These were “unnecessary and disproportionate, or are otherwise inconsistent with international human rights law” and should be removed, it said. In addition to the statements of belief clause, the AHRC complained the bill “provides very broad exemptions that allow ‘religious bodies’ to engage in religious discrimination” and allows corporations to make a complaint of religious discrimination. “This is a significant departure from domestic and international human rights laws which protect only the rights of individuals, that is, humans.”Heart disease, an umbrella term for conditions that impair blood flow including stroke and vascular disease, affects about 1.2 million Australians and is one of the leading causes of death worldwide. Lifestyle factors, including exercise, are important for heart disease prevention and are vital for recovery. While exercise can be daunting for fear of injury, experiencing symptoms or having a heart attack, Dr Angela Spence from Curtin University says it can be done safely. Getting it right could even be a life saver. “When prescribed well, the benefits of exercise for people with heart disease can be extensive and include improved quality of life, physical performance [and] reduced risk of having another event and developing additional conditions,” she says. During a heart attack, heart rate and blood pressure go up, explains accredited exercise physiologist Bridget Nash. Heart rate and blood pressure also go up when exercising, so this will improve the body’s ability to handle that stress. But when being active it’s important to focus on intensity, Nash adds, as medications tend to interfere with heart rate and blood pressure response. Before undertaking any exercise regimen or activity, consult your doctor or physician. The move: interval training To strengthen the heart’s ability to handle high blood pressure and heart rate, Nash recommends high-intensity interval training. “But when I say high-intensity interval training, I don’t mean anyone with a heart condition should be signing up for the nearest F45 class,” she hastens to add. Completing a 10-second effort at a perceived exertion level of six to seven out of 10, followed by 50 seconds of complete rest and repeating a couple of times, will hit the mark while allowing the body to recover quickly. The easiest way to do this is on a bike, Nash says. If doing longer spurts of activity, Spence recommends a lower intensity level that feels light to moderate – around two to four out of 10. Cardio-based activity helps improve blood flow around the heart, she says but strength training is also important, as it can build muscle as well as improving self-confidence to perform activities of daily living. Nash agrees, saying: “The importance of exercise is to increase the efficiency of the muscles to de-load the heart. A strong muscle is an efficient muscle.” The class: dancing Get out your dancing shoes! Nash is a big fan of dance for a social class activity. Not only can dancing be fun, but it can be a safer option without the one-on-one attention you might have with an exercise physiologist. “A dance class, ballroom, jive or tap gets the heart rate up a little, but not an awful lot,” she says. “And it’s a great way to build some strength along the way.” Water aerobics is also a good option, says Spence. She describes a recent study in which people with stable heart disease who took part in a 12-week water-based circuit exercise program (three 60-minute sessions a week) improved their fitness and leg strength while also reducing body fat – a key risk factor for heart disease. The free: walking The world’s your oyster when it comes to opportunities for free exercise, just by increasing incidental activity. “Reducing sedentary behaviours can be a great way of incorporating more activity into your day,” says Spence, “simply by modifying your habits.” To achieve current recommendations for exercise in people with heart disease – 30 minutes of moderate intensity activity on most, if not all, days of the week – try breaking up time sitting down, listening to podcasts or audiobooks while walking, cleaning or gardening. Use active modes of transport like getting off the bus one stop earlier or parking the car further away from the shops. Indeed, “walking will always be one of the easiest, most available and most affordable heart-healthy exercises”, Nash says. The hard pass: too much or not enough It could be risky exercising at a prolonged intensity rating of eight out of 10 without rest, Nash warns. She suggests not starting any new exercise without expert supervision and an individually tailored program, particularly if you have resting blood pressure of 180/100 or higher. Heart Research Australia recommends consulting a health professional if exercise feels uncomfortable or painful. Are there any exercises to avoid? “Avoid being inactive,” says Spence.In the midst of legal challenges in tennis and inglorious scandals plaguing cricket, the AFLW’s return this weekend came as a welcome relief. Entering its sixth season, the league kicked off on Friday night with a thumping win by expansion team, Richmond, over fellow newcomers, St Kilda. While both teams entered the system in season four, the score could not have been more different, with the Tigers managing an almost perfect 10 goals one (61) to the Saints’ 3.5 (23). Ironically, it was the previously underperforming Tigers who provided one of the most impressive passages of play ever witnessed in women’s football. Setting aside inevitable first game wobbles and some uneven score lines, the main takeout from the opening round was the dramatic improvement across all aspects of the game. This was despite Covid-19 delaying the start of the season, forcing last minute fixture changes and depriving the crowds of seeing W Award winner, Emma Kearney, line up for North, after she tested positive to Covid earlier in the week. While Covid and injuries are a risk for all athletes, AFLW players’ six-month season and part-time wage offset by year-round fitness and conditioning means most AFLW players also have full time jobs, family or educational commitments. The challenge of “living with Covid” in the face of multiple responsibilities and activities increases significantly. Yet astonishingly, despite all of this, the standard of the competition continues to take great leaps, year after year. Some of the improvement comes down to experience – players have simply had more time in the AFL system. Foundation players have now notched up five campaigns, and as seasons have been extended to 10 home and away games plus three finals matches, this means significantly more playing time. Clubs have reviewed and improved their women’s football departments, staffing and resources, fitness programs and player support every year. This means players have more targeted and consistent preparation. The “cross-code experiment” has also changed emphasis, with cross-code players either committing entirely to football, or dropping out of the AFLW system. The Tigers’ Mon Conti’s outstanding display on Friday night (29 disposals, nine clearances and seven tackles) is testament to what she’s capable of after completing the first full pre-season of her AFLW career since putting her basketball career on hold. Uninterrupted pathways have also helped the rising standard of play. Since the inception of the AFLW the AFL and state competitions have established pathways for girls and young women into elite AFL football with the introduction of national and youth academies. Prior to 2017, there was no established youth pathway through teenage years, and most of the senior players who have dominated the competition were forced out of football for extended periods, often to join other sports, or leaving sport altogether, due to a lack of youth competitions for girls beyond 14 or 15 years old. Most notably, two-time W Award winner, Erin Phillips turned to basketball when she was no longer allowed to play AFL foootball, forging a career in the WNBL and playing for the Opals at the Olympics. It took her out of footy for 19 years before her triumphant return to her first sport. The introduction of new rules have also had an impact on the game. Despite generations of women’s football development at their disposal, clubs attempted to simply overlay coaching strategies from the men’s game when setting up AFLW programs. At the same time, the AFL made significant changes to the rules, introducing a smaller ball, and fielding only 16 players a side. “It’s problematic when you remove two players from the traditional field when they don’t have a full-time endurance engine to make up for it,” said Julia Chiera, Darebin Falcons VFLW assistant coach, former teammate and coach to many of the game’s biggest stars. “Part-time players’ skills, fitness and playing experience were just not ready-made in 2017 for that vision.” This is less of a problem in 2022. Additional rule changes to the boundary throw in, this year’s stand rule, and the goal square kick in have also had a positive impact. Another development, according to Chiera, is that “male coaches have finally adjusted the game style to suit the women’s game, and women players’ strengths”. This has been a common complaint among women’s football experts, beyond the issue of fairness, about the limitations and frustrations of seeing new or untried male coaches cross over from the men’s game without the depth of experience or a solid understanding of the specifics of the women’s game. Whether in acknowledgement of issues of equity or the need for relevant experience, there has been a noted increase in female assistant coaches drawn from women’s football. And it shows. In round one, multiple players racked up north of 30 possessions and there was an early goal of the year contender from Fremantle’s Ebony Antonio. Whatever further challenges 2022 throws at the AFLW this season, players and clubs have already demonstrated their commitment to digging deeper and playing harder and smarter with every new game.As the Sex and the City finale aired in 2004, another television fantasy of female friendship dreamed up by a gay man was just beginning. But where Carrie and her BFFs live a “you go girl” life of cosmopolitans and Manolos, Marc Cherry’s Desperate Housewives inhabit the decidedly darker universe of Wisteria Lane. Susan Mayer (Teri Hatcher) is a single mum with the fittingly quaint profession of children’s book illustrator. Her neighbours Bree Van de Kamp (Marcia Cross), Gabrielle Solis (Eva Longoria) and Lynette Scavo (Felicity Huffman) are homemakers. They’re also financially dependent on their husbands, so are forced to exert power in subversive and sometimes downright violent ways. Cherry was inspired to create the show after watching a news report on Andrea Yates, a Texan housewife who drowned her five kids in a bathtub while suffering from postpartum psychosis. While Desperate Housewives immediately drew large audiences, critics were unsure how to categorise it. Was it a drama, mystery, comedy or merely a trashy soap? Speaking to Vanity Fair in 2005, Hatcher and James Denton, who plays Susan’s partner Mike, rejected the soap opera label, for its association with “bad lighting, bad writing, [and] bad acting”. To the contrary, Desperate Housewives is superbly acted, slickly produced and packed with delightfully acerbic lines. Yet, it’s the show’s highly stylised theatricality – its “soapy” elements – that both drew me to it as a teenager and make it so enduringly fun nearly two decades on. The plot is by no means believable: the first season alone sees suicide, infanticide, murder, blackmail and not one, but two house fires. But no one watches narrative television for the humdrum of real life! We watch for the theatre of Gabrielle mowing the lawn in a ball gown and stilettos in the dead of the night, so her husband doesn’t find out she’s sleeping with their teenage gardener. And for the macabre hijinks of town busybody Mrs Huber, who is so jealous of her perfect neighbour Bree’s lawn that, when a jogger collapses outside her house, she dumps the body on Bree’s hydrangeas rather than call 911. The show’s success proved that a fantastical spin on the lives of housewives – albeit unreasonably hot ones – was meaty and compelling enough to sustain a primetime audience’s attention. Beneath its fairy floss exterior, Desperate Housewives explores the deep sadness, thwarted hopes and simmering rage that often afflicts women confined to the domestic sphere. Season one begins with the death of Mary Alice Young who, despite her “perfect life”, felt compelled to blow her brains out with a pistol one pleasant afternoon. While Bree, Gabrielle, Lynette and Susan are shocked and confused by her death, they all understand her desperation more than they let on. In one memorable scene, Lynette, who is overwhelmed by her children and coming down hard from the ADD medication she’s been stealing from them, suddenly sees her dead friend bathed in a halo of white light. Looking calm and peaceful, Mary Alice hands over the pistol she used to kill herself and smiles encouragingly as Lynette guides it to her own head, to the sound of Simon and Garfunkel’s Feelin’ Groovy. This grim scene is one of Desperate Housewives’ many allusions to the fragile and tenuous nature of family life. Clocking eight seasons, Desperate Housewives is still the longest running hour-long scripted series with all-female leads. The tentacles of its legacy are far-reaching, as it inspired the behemoth Real Housewives reality franchise. In the opening credits of The Real Housewives of Orange County, which premiered in 2006, the women hold oranges in their hands, an homage to the biblical apples featured in the credits of Desperate Housewives. Both shows use glamour and wealth as a Trojan horse to offer a complex, moving exploration of the many joys and humiliations of middle-aged womanhood. But while betrayal, infidelity and financial ruin are par for the course on Real Housewives, reality is yet to deliver the murderous twists and turns of Wisteria Lane.Raising my daughter through this teenage stage is scary and I don’t know if I will get through it These years in the thick of raising teenagers are a little like the first years of parenthood. You, once again, feel overwhelmed and incompetent. There is also the aloneness. Sometimes, when I admit to another parent that this is hard, harder than I expected, they lower their heads near mine and, with eyes widened, whisper urgently about something very worrying they are contending with as a parent. Their voices convey the relief of an honest conversation but also, the ache of big problems that cannot be immediately fixed for a child. The aloneness we felt when we were raising babies was about maintaining the facade that babies weren’t softening us too much or that the days were filled with nothing but joy. Now, the aloneness is about being discreet. Teenagers have a right to privacy and rebirth as they muddle along. While adolescent impulsiveness is entirely predictable, poor choices are still judged very harshly by the rest of the world. I do not know if the world is getting more complex to raise teenagers in or if it has long been this fraught. I don’t know, because like I said, no one talks about this part of parenting with much real honesty. I recently asked a close friend for advice. She was facing a tough time of her own as a mother, but she said, reassuringly, it is probably like that book we read over and over to our children when they were little: We’re Going on a Bear Hunt. In the book, a young family go on an adventure to find a bear. The plot resembles the motivations you fabricate to keep the energy of small children up on long walks. We are walking, why? To find a bear, of course. When you are walking with small children even the simplest of walks present challenges. Every bit of mud or water that you manage to get through without a child falling over in it feels like an achievement. So, it always made sense to me that the book focuses more on the obstacles of the walk than the dangers of a bear. And each time the family is deterred by new terrain, the book repeats the mantra: we can’t go over it, we can’t go under it, we’ve got to go through it. When I used to read that story to my children, I assumed its appeal lay in the whimsical sense of drama and sing-song lessons in prepositions and spatial concepts. But maybe the book was written for parents? Rereading it as the mother of a 16-year-old daughter, it seems obvious that its true purpose is imprinting a script for living. And so, I now look with curiosity at the depictions of mother and daughter in the book. In one part of the story the family are making their way through an overgrown field. The mother and the little daughter, with their arms stretched towards one another, are holding hands but are swallowed chest-deep into long grass. Is the daughter showing her mother the way or is the mother helping her daughter through the grass? We cannot assume by this stage of parenting teenagers that we, as parents, always know what is best. I am reminded of a quietly haunting poem by Lucille Clifton, My Mama moved among the days, describing the experience of being the child of a mother who is unravelling. The mother does her best – “she got us almost through the high grass” – before tragically succumbing to something terrible inside herself and running back into the grass alone. My own experience with mothering a teenage daughter is that there is a lot of push-pull. She still wants to hold my hand, but she is insistent that she knows the right way ahead through the long grass. So, when I look at that illustration in the Bear Hunt story, I see a mother trying to pull her daughter back from a dangerous course. I try to explain this fear to my daughter carefully, so as not to offend her. How it feels to not only be scared, as a parent, but also unexpectedly powerless. My daughter and I were walking our dogs off-leash, when I told her about a fear in the United States, real or imaginary, that dogs can be lured away from their owners by coyotes. Whether the dog follows a coyote for play or out of bravado, we cannot say, but the result is they underestimate the small, impish creature until finding themselves isolated and surrounded by a pack of them. Then, far from their owner’s protection, they are killed. Her mouth dropped in horror. That is how it sometimes feels to be a parent, I told her. I am trying to call you back, to warn you of the dangers in the world, but you are disappearing into the long grass. Of course, my daughter is not like a pet. She is not mine; she is becoming her own person. And I deliberately sought not to raise my daughter to be too fearful of the world, lest she curb her participation in it as a young woman. But the youthful underestimation, my corresponding powerlessness and the collision of all this with a world not as kind as I hoped for my children are proving to be a daunting combination for me as a mother. What to do? When I am feeling engulfed, I remember the instruction of the book. The resistance and avoidance are their own pain. Reaching acceptance – that I will have to go through this and do the hard work involved – is the only way for me to get to the other side. My friend, if this is you too, I have these words for you: keep going. • Andie Fox is a freelance writer who writes about motherhood from a feminist perspective“If it’s your job to eat a frog, you’d better do it first thing in the morning” is a bit of wisdom attributed to Mark Twain that has inspired many an entrepreneurial go-getter. But in my 37 years of endeavour, procrastination, discipline and punishment, one thing I have learned is that even the worst days are infinitely better if you start them not by swallowing the frog, but by being just a little bit kind to yourself. Consider: which activities bring you joy? What’s your idea of bliss or comfort? What do you do to feel most like yourself? Now, imagine: what if that blissful, comforting, singular joy was the thing you woke up to? Maybe your joy is having a bubble bath. What if you started having them first thing in the morning, in the quiet, before anyone else in the house was awake? Maybe it’s lying on the couch, reading a poem. What if you did that with your coffee in the morning sun? Maybe it’s listening to your favourite heavy metal song at ear-splitting volume. Maybe it’s sketching, or throwing a stick for the dog, or staying in bed, doing other bedtime things. I think many of us are doing mornings all wrong. We’ve been telling ourselves that because they so often involve gruel and grind, this is what they must always be. But that is kind of the point, because even with the tightest schedule and the most soul-destroying list of tasks to accomplish, it’s all the more difficult and important to tend to your soul – to make time for your own desires, joys, pleasures. My advice is: do that first. Very first. For five minutes, if that’s all you have. My joys are fairly small, like reading a good novel and knitting, sometimes both at once. Frequently, now, these are the first things I do when I wake up. Even on workdays. Especially on workdays. Sometimes I get up earlier so I can do them – it’s the closest I get to the childlike joy of knowing when I open my eyes there will be a treat under the tree. Yes, I know the frog is waiting – maybe a whole pond of them – but it’s so much easier to get out of bed knowing that between the frog and me sits a little slice of pure joy.I fell into open ocean swimming after an incident in 2012. Not long after my 48th birthday, I ripped my right bicep tendon off the bone mucking around at the beach with my kids. After surgery to reattach the tendon, I started swimming for rehab. Then I met long-distance swimmer Trent Grimsey, who encouraged me to train for ocean swimming. In 2018 I became the first Australian to complete the Oceans Seven, solo swimming across seven channels around the world. When Covid made overseas swims impossible, I considered Lord Howe Island, not just for a family holiday, but an island to swim around. No one had done it! I also discovered the work of scientist Dr Jennifer Lavers. She leads a small team researching the impact of plastic pollution in the stomachs of Lord Howe’s shearwater birds. Her project gave me extra impetus to do the swim – to raise money for their research. On the morning of the swim, Valentine’s Day 2021, my wife, Lisa and our three kids were up at 4am, having breakfast and preparing my swim food. You can’t do ocean swimming without your support team following in a boat. To keep my energy up to swim for such long periods, I stop around every 40 minutes and tread water while consuming a “feed” – drinks like Gatorade, electrolytes or Ovaltine. We left our cabin at 5am, our backpacks packed with food and camera equipment. Because Lord Howe is a bike-only island we had to ride bikes down a massive hill, in the dark, using our phone torches for lights. I thought if I survive this, I can survive anything! Waiting at the beach was Michael Bannister (Banno) who had offered to accompany me around the island, on a paddleboard. Having Banno, an experienced lifesaver, paddling by my side at water level gave extra reassurance. On the support boat was captain Jack Shick, my family, and three Lord Howe islanders. I entered the water at 6.30am. It was rough swimming out of the lagoon to the top of the island. I punched through choppy waves, conditions I favour. I’ve earned my nickname, Sea Bull, for good reason. After swimming around the top of the island I was out in the deep ocean. Stopping for a feed below Mount Gower, the highest peak on the island, was extraordinary. The view from the water to the top was like Jurassic Park meets Atlantis. Trevor Hendy, an old friend and former Ironman champion who runs a swim school on the island, had joined us and paddled over to me on an ocean ski. “Mate are you just taking it all in?” he asked. I said, “Yeah, when am I ever going to do something like this again?” And that’s when it became interesting. The oceans around Lord Howe are home to Galápagos whaler sharks. They are not known to be aggressive, but in packs they can be. I’d spied one cruising below me at a depth of about 50m. At my next feed, there were more, and they were closer. My team carries two shark shields – two metres of trailing antenna which emit an electronic field around me. They cause harmless spasms in sharks’ short-range electrical receptors that in theory turns them away. The “safe” range is within two metres. Anything beyond that, the shield doesn’t work. The shark numbers were increasing, their body movements becoming jerkier. As I turned to keep vision on them, suddenly, a bigger one emerged from the deep, swimming straight towards me, eyeballing me from about three metres. I yelled out to Jack, “I think they’re definitely inquisitive now mate.” Jack yelled back, “Don’t worry big fella, it would take 20 of the bastards to eat you!” That helped break the tension. My eldest son dropped a shark shield in the water. I continued swimming behind the line, attached to my son’s ocean kayak. The sharks dropped off a little, eventually trailing away by the time we got around the mountain. Returning to the lagoon at sunset was beautiful. My family swam with me to shore. Somehow, I’d scraped my ankle on coral, but nothing was going to stop me walking up the beach and grabbing a cold beer from the local greeting party. The official end time was 6.59pm. I’d circumnavigated Lord Howe – over 30km in 12 hours and 29 minutes. Walking into the restaurant that night for dinner, I received a standing ovation. It was a little embarrassing. Ocean swimming is not an individual event – it’s a team sport.Football can be ever so cruel. For much of the afternoon Charlton Athletic of League One sensed an upset. Norwich may be a top-flight club in name only but defeat at the Valley would still have been a shock of sorts. Blush avoidance required the half-time intervention of a substitute duo vital to Norwich’s slim survival hopes. Teemu Pukki crossed and Milot Rashica tapped in his first goal in Canary yellow. The 2,200-strong travelling contingent housed in the Jimmy Seed Stand celebrated their side’s first goal for 541 minutes; Dean Smith was relieved. “It certainly wasn’t a pretty game,” he said. “I thought they would be right up for it and would make it a proper FA Cup tie. I wanted us to control the tempo and I don’t think we did that. We weren’t good enough on the ball but thankfully the bench helped us out.” Charlton’s manager, Johnnie Jackson, was patrolling the midfield last time his side progressed to the fourth round. This was their first chance to host Premier League opponents since demotion a decade and a half ago and Jackson can draw comfort from the way his players acquitted themselves – pride then but not progression. Jackson was frustrated, disappointed and honest in his assessment. “If you were watching that game, you wouldn’t have known there was a gulf between the teams as far as levels,” he said. “I would argue my team was the dominant one. “I’m really proud of the players, but at the same time we’ve lost, we’re out and they’re through. That rankles a little bit. We have to look at ourselves and ask why we didn’t turn chances into goals.” The game had ambled along for 20 minutes until the Norwich centre‑back Ozan Kabak seized the initiative. Kabak may have a reputation for the over-adventurous but his foray forward was most welcome here; it kick-started the tie. But despite yellow flanking him on both sides, the attack was ended abruptly by a fine sliding challenge from Ryan Inniss, playing only owing to Akin Famewo’s ineligibility against his parent club. A rapid counter saw Elliot Lee cut inside and curl a shot narrowly wide of both Tim Krul at full stretch and the goal frame. Belief, however, grew on three sides of the Valley and rightly so. Despite the absence of their two leading goalscorers, Jayden Stockley and Conor Washington, Charlton carried much of the attacking threat. Diallang Jaiyesimi, who spent more than four years at Carrow Road without featuring, was a livewire down the right, while Lee was a beating red heart. It was Lee, though, who teed up Jonathan Leko later in the half but the forward, despite little by way of defensive attention, lifted his effort high and wide from six yards. An awkward bounce meant Krul did well to parry Alex Gilbey’s strike shortly afterwards. A penny was not required for the thoughts of Norwich fans. For the second time in less than a fortnight they had travelled to south London to watch a side lacking in quality, cohesion and, unforgivably, endeavour. Amid the gallows humour – “We’ve had a shot” was audible as Kenny McLean drove their only attempt of the first half over the bar – there were murmurings of discontent directed at Delia Smith. Even their half-time switch-up failed, initially at least, to change the direction of the wind. Lee forced Krul to save with his feet, and Charlton’s 18-year-old Mason Burstow visibly grew in confidence; a pair of strikes in short order saw the volume rise. Pukki’s first involvement, on the other hand, was to pass to no one, before McLean failed to sort out his feet when presented with a golden chance to strike from dead centre. “That’s why you’re going down,” the home fans taunted. With a rearranged league visit to West Ham in 72 hours, Smith wanted extra time like a hole in the head. And so the relief was palpable when Rashica intervened decisively. There was still time for Chris Gunter to slam a stoppage-time header into the bar. But that, for Charlton, was that.A Saudi princess and human rights advocate has returned to her home in Jeddah after three years in a state prison without charge, her supporters and lawyer have confirmed. Princess Basmah bint Saud bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, 57, a staunch critic of her cousin and Saudi Arabia’s de facto leader, Mohammed bin Salman, was released on Saturday, along with her daughter, Souhoud Al Sharif, who was arrested with her in March 2019. Mystery surrounds the pair’s detention and release, which was met with silence by Saudi officials over the weekend. However, announcing her arrest on Twitter 13 months after she vanished, Princess Basmah claimed to have done no wrong and said she was facing “very critical” health issues. Her tweets in April 2020, which were apparently sent from detention, were quickly deleted. The move appeared to fit a pattern of the arrest of dozens of Saudi dissidents and attempts to spy on activists in exile. Saudi dissidents and rights activists say Basmah had been especially vocal about a crackdown on dissent and consolidation of power led by Prince Mohammed. She had also been critical of the kingdom’s treatment of women, who had little ability to shape their lives under the kingdom’s heavily restrictive guardianship laws – some of which have been revoked in the past three years. “She thought that her family connections would give her cover,” said one senior Saudi royal in exile. “But MBS [Mohammed bin Salman] has locked up bigger family members than her.” They include two brothers of the incumbent monarch, King Salman, the crown prince’s father. A former crown prince, Mohammed bin Nayef, remains under house arrest in the kingdom after being ousted by Mohammed. Basmah is the youngest child of the late King Saud, who ruled from 1953 to 1964. In bulldozing through a reform agenda that has introduced a range of individual freedoms, Mohammed has at the same time consolidated power like few other Saudi leaders before him. A ruthless crackdown on dissent has been a centrepiece of his new regime, with critics, or political activists given no leeway and in some cases jailed indefinitely. Basmah’s legal adviser, Henri Estramant, confirmed on Saturday: “The two ladies were released from their arbitrary imprisonment, and arrived at their home in Jeddah on Thursday 6 January 2022. “The princess is doing fine but will be seeking medical expertise. She seems worn out but is in good spirits, and thankful to reunite with her sons in person.” Basmah was detained in al-Ha’ir prison, where numerous other political detainees have been held, including the activist Loujain al-Hathloul, a prominent advocate of allowing women to drive in the kingdom. She was released in February last year and has not since spoken publicly about her ordeal, which her family has said involved physical abuse and torture. Several senior Saudi officials familiar with Mohammed’s thinking say he is sensitive to being seen as making concessions under political pressure, and wants reforms to be seen as a gift from on high, rather than bowing to demands. “Many of the things that are being demanded publicly are already being delivered,” one official said last September. “In the eyes of the leadership, [activists] went too far.” However, human rights groups and dissidents in exile insist that dissent remains fundamental to a functional society and that even by the standards of an absolute monarchy, the domestic fear surrounding Mohammed’s rule has been disturbing. “This is quite the police state now,” said one activist based in North America. “No one feels safe, and that’s how he likes it.” Basmah had been due to travel abroad for medical treatment around the time of her arrest and was informed after her detention that she was accused of trying to forge a passport, a close relative said at the time. The nature of her illness has never been disclosed. Following her release, the rights group ALQST for Human Rights said: “She was denied the medical care she needed for a potentially life-threatening condition. At no point during her detention has any charge been levelled against her.” In written testimony to the UN in 2020, Basmah’s family said her detention was probably due in large part to her “record as an outspoken critic of abuses”. She was also deemed an ally of Mohammed bin Nayef, the written testimony added.The education secretary has called for the UK to show the rest of the world how to move from pandemic to endemic Covid, as he suggested it would be helpful to cut the isolation period to five days to ease workforce shortages. Nadhim Zahawi, played down suggestions that the government was about to start charging for free lateral flow tests (LFTs), which would lead to fewer infections in the community being identified. He said the ultimate aim was to move to a position where Covid was endemic in the UK and the country had learned to live with the virus. His comments came on the same day that a leading statistician, Prof David Spiegelhalter, poured cold water on the idea of a big rise in intensive care admissions and deaths from the Omicron wave. Asked whether Boris Johnson had taken a gamble in resisting lockdown measures over Christmas, he replied: “I mean, it was a gamble, and you know, I think the best we can say is, he may have got away with it, but we’re going to have to see in the next few weeks.” There were 141,472 new lab-confirmed Covid-19 cases recorded in the UK on Sunday, the government said. A further 97 people died within 28 days of testing positive, bringing the total to 150,154. Zahawi also said the government’s health experts and scientists were looking at whether it would be possible to move from asking people to isolate for just five days after a positive test, rather than the current seven days – recently cut from 10. He told Sky’s Trevor Phillips on Sunday: “It would certainly help mitigate some of the pressures on schools, on critical workforce and others. “But I would absolutely be driven by advice from the experts, the scientists, on whether we should move to five days from seven days. What you don’t want is to create the wrong outcome by higher levels of infection. “I hope we will be one of the first major economies to demonstrate to the world how you transition from pandemic to endemic, and then deal with this however long it remains with us, whether that’s five, six, seven, 10 years.” Rishi Sunak is reportedly one of a number of cabinet ministers supportive of a move to cut isolation to five days. The chancellor and other ministers, including the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, would back the policy if it was supported by scientists, according to the Daily Telegraph. The move to further cut the self-isolation period has been mooted in the past fortnight, but experts fear up to 30% of those released on day five may still be infectious. The US allows people to leave the house after five days, but citizens have to start isolating only after testing positive, rather than from their first symptoms. Zahawi said about 8.5% of the schools workforce was off, with 90% of secondary schools so far having reopened after Christmas. He said staff absence rates “will increase, no doubt, because now schools are back we’re going to see an increase in infection rates”. Zahawi said he was making contingency plans for rising rates of staff absence, saying some schools had had up to 40% off but remained open. “I have to have contingency plans for 10, 15, 20, 25% absenteeism because Omicron is far more infectious,” he told the BBC’s Sunday Morning. Spiegelhalter said cases were “not going up as fast as they were and may have stabilised over the whole country”, but that they would not come down rapidly. “We’re certainly not going to see a big rise in intensive care admissions and deaths and those really severe outcomes,” he said. He also said daily infection rates could still be hitting around 500,000, which would have been devastating without vaccines. With the move from pandemic to endemic Covid, the Sunday Times reported free LFTs could be limited to high-risk settings such as care homes, hospitals and schools, and to people with symptoms. This was set out as an eventual aim by the government’s winter Covid plan, which said at some stage the government’s provision of free lateral flows would end and “individuals and businesses would bear the cost”. Zahawi told Sky News this was “absolutely not where we are at”, with 425m lateral flows available for January to help identify cases in the Omicron wave. Pressed on whether the government had plans to scrap the free tests, he said: “Absolutely not. Absolutely not. Absolutely not.” The reports on LFTs were met with instant disapproval from opposition politicians including Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon. She wrote on Twitter: Sturgeon said testing was vital and the Scottish government would have to consider continued funding from its existing budgets, and raised the prospects of such a move affecting the way public expenditure was allocated to devolved nations. The Scottish government accesses LFTs that are procured by the UK government on behalf of all four countries, and it pays for them via funding arrangements as part of the UK-wide national testing programme. Labour joined Sturgeon in urging the prime minister against the move. The shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, said: “This would be the wrong decision at the wrong time.” Government sources have disputed the report and said it was too early to say what the future held for free lateral flow tests. A government spokesperson did not address whether access to free tests would be scaled back in the future, but said: “Everyone can continue to get free tests and we are continuing to encourage people to use rapid tests when they need them. “Testing continues to play an important role in helping people live their day-to-day lives, keep businesses running and keep young people in school.”Wolves v Norwich Manchester City v Fulham Nottingham Forest v Leicester Stoke v Wigan Liverpool v Cardiff Tottenham v Brighton Manchester United or Aston Villa v Middlesbrough Kidderminster v West Ham Everton v Brentford Chelsea v Plymouth Southampton v Coventry Cambridge v Luton Peterborough v QPR Huddersfield v Barnsley Bournemouth v Boreham Wood Crystal Palace v Hartlepool So that’s your lot. Standout ties at a glance would be West Ham’s trip to Kidderminster – the lowest-ranked team still in the competition – as well as some all-Premier League ties in Wolves-Norwich and Spurs-Brighton and Everton-Brentford. Meanwhile Boreham Wood, who go to Bournemouth, might just fancy their chances of getting themselves into the fifth round. And a meeting with the current holders awaits Nottingham Forest after their stunning win over Arsenal. Wolves v Norwich Man City v Fulham Nottingham Forest/Arsenal v Leicester Stoke City v Wigan Athletic Liverpool v Cardiff City Tottenham v Brighton &amp; Hove Albion Manchester United/Aston Villa v Middlesbrough Kidderminster Harriers v West Ham United Everton v Brentford Chelsea v Plymouth Argyle Southampton v Coventry City Cambridge United v Luton Town Peterborough United v QPR Huddersfield Town v Barnsley Bournemouth v Boreham Wood 1st up: Crystal Palace v Hartlepool United Now, for the draw. It will be done by Leah Williamson, who won the FA Cup twice with Arsneal, and David James, who wore a lovely suit ahead of the showpiece fixture back in 1996. And here’s our report from the Valley, where Norwich made it past Charlton by the skin of their teeth: … and West Ham’s even-easier-than-it-looked win against Leeds: … Tottenham’s not-as-easy-as-it-looked win against Morecambe … And from today, Liverpool’s not-as-easy-as-it-looked win against Shrewsbury … And another nice moment, this time from Stamford Bridge – the fun to be found in defeat: A reminder of the joy on show yesterday (look away now, Newcastle fans): So then, what next? As hangovers were blearily shaken off in Cambridge and Kidderminster this morning, the gleeful recollections of yesterday’s wins will have slowly transformed into speculation on who could await in the next round. And while those clubs are the ones to have carried off the headline upsets, they are hardly the only ones who’ll be watching this afternoon’s draw with bated breath – Hartlepool are the sole fourth-tier club in the mix, while Boreham Wood join Kidderminster in having defied their non-league status to make it this far. As for the giants, they’re pretty much all here, with Leeds, Watford and Newcastle the only Premier League sides to fall at the first hurdle. Stay tuned!The home knit is having a moment this winter as the “Tom Daley effect” sees more young men and women picking up knitting needles to create “slow” fashion. Figures show that about 1 million people have taken up the hobby since the start of the pandemic, and the Olympic gold medal-winner turned supercrafter has launched a new range that could encourage yet more to take it up. Since being seen knitting at the Tokyo Games, Daley has become a craft influencer whose dedicated Instagram page attracts 1.4m followers. He now has a collection of high-end knitting kits for sale on the website LoveCrafts. The kits, aimed at beginners, include a £90 pullover with on-trend Varsity stripes and a £125 unisex jumper with a flamingo on the front. The hefty price tags in part reflect the cost of the thick merino wool, which, it says, is “ethically sourced” in the UK. In 2020, newly locked-down Britons filled time at home baking banana bread and sourdough. But by 2021, with the realisation that they were in it for the long haul, the focus shifted to crafting as many sought to stave off home-working burnout. The UK Hand Knitting Association (UKHKA) said about 1 million people have taken up knitting since the start of the pandemic. The figure, based on last year’s Craft Intelligence report, means the country now has around 7 million knitters. The sight of Daley winning medals without dropping a stitch has encouraged more men to get involved, says UKHKA spokesperson Juliet Bernard. A quarter of the people using its site, which supports independent wool shops, were now men, she said, up from about 10% before the Olympic Games. Daley’s national treasure status propelled needles and wool into the 2021 John Lewis retail report, which identified the major shopping trends. Sales of yarn increased “ridiculously” during the pandemic, said Bernard, who suggested people had cottoned on to the “meditative quality” of knitting. Daley says the hobby helped him to his medal haul, describing knitting as his “secret weapon”. During the pandemic, hobbies acted as a “safety valve for many Britons, offering solace and escape”, according to a recent report by market researchers Mintel. However, when it comes to knitting and sewing, two in five people said they were doing it to save money, while a similar number cited environmental reasons. Described as “slow” fashion, this DIY approach is seen as an antidote to harmful high-street fast fashion. Edward Griffith, the LoveCrafts chief executive, said sales at the company hit £66m last year. The new Covid wave meant things were “busier again”, said Griffith, who describes crafting as a “winter sport”. In December, sales of knitting and crochet kits on the site were 225% up on 2019. While knitting’s traditional heartland was among women in their 40s or 50s, Daley was attracting younger customers as well as a male audience, he added. Not everyone will be able to carry off Daley’s fashion-forward designs, which cost as much as buying the finished article, but Bernard said they would appeal to the Zoom generation. “You’ve got on your PJ bottoms and this glorious, extravagant, jumper on top,” she said. “People are worn out by what’s happened over the last few years. They want cocooning, but they also want a bit of fun.” The Covid “pet baby boom”, which has sent sales of animal lifestyle products into overdrive, means dogs as well as humans are being showered with luxurious knits. The crafting site Ravelry, for example, has more than 400 different patterns for dog coats. While children’s knits can be bought on the high street for less than the balls of wool needed to make them, there is an enduring demand for patterns. “That is one way that people still seem to express their love,” said Bernard.British online retail company THG has handed information to regulators over what its billionaire founder, Matthew Moulding, has described as a coordinated attack on its share price. THG, formerly known as the Hut Group, shared data with the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) related to what it claims is irregular trading of its shares. THG floated as one of the UK’s most prominent tech successes, but it has endured a torrid 12 months after investors questioned its value. After rising from a value of £5.6bn after its first day on the London Stock Exchange to £13bn in January 2021, it plunged in the autumn and on Friday stood at £2.8bn. Most of THG’s earnings come from retail websites such as the makeup seller Lookfantastic and sports nutrition site Myprotein. Moulding had pinned his hopes on the growth of Ingenuity, a division building direct-to-consumer websites for other companies but that unravelled when shares slumped by a third following a presentation he made to investors . It is understood some of the data shared by THG with the FCA related to trading patterns on 12 October, the day of a large share price drop. The data handover was first reported by the Sunday Times. Moulding has said THG was subjected to a “pretty aggressive short attack” and likened shorting (in which investors bet on share prices falling) to robbing a bank, in an interview last year with GQ magazine. The company has so far made public little evidence to back up its claim of a coordinated attack. THG handed over data after the regulator approached it as part of inquiries into the actions of a salesperson at Numis, a City of London stockbroker. Numis had been one of the investment banks running THG’s initial public offering in September 2020, but its analysts’ view of the company turned negative. In October 2021, following Moulding’s investor presentation, a Numis analyst ascribed a value of 235p to shares. Their value fell to 194p on Friday. In November, shortly after THG shares hit a record low but several weeks after the initial slump, a Numis salesperson sent clients a note on THG that included references to “irregularities in accounting”. However, Numis quickly retracted what it described as “inaccuracies” in the note and removed the reference to accounting irregularities. A Numis spokesperson in November confirmed that the company had corrected the note to clients and apologised. Numis declined to comment further. THG and the FCA declined to comment.Facing accusations of confusing messaging about the Omicron Covid surge, a senior Biden administration official was forced on to the back foot on Sunday by a supreme court justice’s mistaken remark about hospitalisations among children. During oral arguments over a vaccinations mandate for private employers, the liberal justice Sonya Sotomayor said on Friday the US had “over 100,000 children, which we’ve never had before, in serious condition and many on ventilators”. Reporters were swift to point out she was wrong. Though concern about children and Omicron is widespread, the Washington Post cited official data in saying there were “about 5,000 children hospitalised … either with suspected Covid or a confirmed laboratory test”. According to Johns Hopkins University, more than 836,000 people have died of Covid in the US. More than 206 million Americans, or 62.5% of the eligible population, are considered fully vaccinated. The Covid response has been dogged by resistance to vaccines and other public health measures stoked by politicians and rightwing media prominently including Fox News. Nonetheless, critics charge that official messaging has become muddled, not least over the recent decision to cut recommended quarantine from 10 days to five, and confusion about when or if the infected should test again. Earlier this week, it was reported that Dr Rochelle Walensky, director of the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, was undergoing media training. She also told told reporters she was “committed to improve” communications. Walensky was interviewed on Fox News Sunday. In Bret Baier, she faced perhaps Fox’s toughest interviewer, after the departure of Chris Wallace. It was not an easy experience. Baier asked: “The supreme court is in the process of dealing with this big issue about mandates. Do you feel it is the responsibility of the CDC director to correct a very big mischaracterisation by one of the supreme court justices?” “Yeah,” said Walensky. “Here’s what I’ll tell you. I’ll tell you that right now, if you’re unvaccinated, you’re 17 times more likely to be in the hospital and 20 times more likely to die than if you’re boosted. “And so my responsibility is to provide guidance and recommendations to protect the American people. Those recommendations strongly recommend vaccination for our children above the age of five and boosting for everyone above the age of 18 if they’re eligible.” Baier asked if the administration knew how many children were on ventilators. “I do not have that off the top of my head,” Walensky said. “But what I can say is I don’t believe there are any in many of these hospitals who are vaccinated. “So really, the highest risk of being on a ventilator for a child is if you’re unvaccinated. We also have recent data out just this week that’s demonstrated that dangerous MIS-C syndrome that we’re seeing in children, 91% protection if you’ve been vaccinated.” Baier said: “The risk of death or serious illness in children is still very small, right?” Walensky said: “Comparatively, the risk of death is small. But of course, you know, children are not supposed to die. So you know, if we have a child who is sick with Covid-19, we want to protect them.” Baier said: “Officially, you emphasise that one of your primary goals was to restore public trust, but do you think it’s fair to say that the trust and confidence of the public has gone down with the CDC?” “You know,” Walensky said, “this is hard. We have ever-evolving science with an ever-evolving variant and my job is to provide updated advice in the context of rapidly rising cases. And that is what we’ve done and I’m here to explain it to the American people and I am committed to continuing to do so and to continuing to improve.” Baier said: “We appreciate you coming on, we really do. Just getting facts out there.” Most observers think the supreme court, tilted 6-3 in favour of conservatives after three appointments under Donald Trump, seems likely to strike down the workplace mandate. The rule is due to come into effect on Monday. Baier said: “The questioning in the supreme court also said that Omicron was as deadly as Delta. That is not true, right?” Walensky said: “We are starting to see data from other countries that indicate on a person-by-person basis it may not be. However, given the volume of cases that we’re seeing with Omicron we very well may see death rates rise dramatically.” Asked if mandates for private employers or government employees including members of the armed forces were necessary if prior infection conferred protection, Walensky said: “I think the thing that’s most disruptive to any business or industry has to have half their workforce out because they’re sick with Covid.” Such is the case in New York City, where essential services are struggling for staff. “We have seen with the Omicron variant,” Walensky added, “that prior infection protects you less well than it had … with prior variants. “Right now, I think the most important thing to do is to protect Americans. We do that by getting them vaccinated and getting them boosted.”Wise words from Grant Shapps: people “can’t just go round and cause vandalism, destroy the public realm, and then essentially not be prosecuted” (Minister vows to close ‘loophole’ after court clears Colston statue topplers, 6 January). But could our courts handle the flood of corrupt Tories? John Airs Liverpool • Interesting that dogs respond selectively to human speech (Report, 6 January); the same may be true of humans. I used to turn on the Today programme at my 7am alarm, and would fall asleep again, to be woken with a start by John Humphrys at around 8.10am. Since Nick Robinson et al have taken over, I have slept right through and have had to resort to a further alarm. Margaret Squires St Andrews, Fife • Royal Mail has a long history of delivering incompletely addressed letters (‘Lives across from the Spar’: bizarrely labelled letter finds way to UK address, 7 January). The only piece of fan mail I ever received – in 1967 – came addressed to Dave the Folk Singer, Westward Ho!. It was delivered in person by the local head postmaster (my father). David Cooper Nafferton, East Riding of Yorkshire • As a postman in the 1970s, I once successfully delivered a card addressed “Nearly opposite the Church, Blue doors, Red Curtains”. Trevor Lindley Weymouth, Dorset • So Norwegian conscripts have got to return their underwear as Covid hits supplies (Report, 7 January). I suppose they’ll just have to go commando. Chris Osborne West Bridgford, Nottinghamshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Jonathan Malesic’s article (Your work is not your god: welcome to the age of the burnout epidemic, 6 January) sheds vital light on the psychological contract between public sector employees, their employers and society. Meaningful work and public recognition are vital to their wellbeing and sense of purpose. How else can we explain why so many nurses and doctors have remained in post despite the burgeoning workload and pay freezes of the past decade? How else can we understand why anyone would endure the gruelling conditions on Covid wards day after day? Boris Johnson forgets this at our peril. When he opines that hospital staff “may feel overwhelmed” it must seem like a slap in the face. Desperate social media posts from the frontline indicate that we are burning out the people we need most. When cheese and wine are consumed by ministers and their staff on grassy lawns behind the prime minister’s flat in the May sunshine, we must all wonder why kudos, comfort and recognition flow more freely to the privileged than to the productive members of the national workforce. Since our government has forgotten how to value our health professionals in public discourse, perhaps it could let the money do the talking for us by rewarding their contribution to the nation’s survival through a truly substantial pay rise. Yvonne Williams Ryde, Isle of Wight • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The life of my brother Adrian Crilly, who has died aged 70, began with great academic promise, but unhappily his aspirations were frustrated. Born in Bristol, the son of Alexander, a school science teacher, and Vera, a secretary, Adrian was the youngest in a family of four children. He was educated at St Brendan’s college in the city and progressed to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, to study English. Early on in his course he was overtaken by mental health problems and these cut short his time at Cambridge and remained with him for the rest of his life. He worked for a short period at the Bristol Royal Infirmary as a porter, but his health circumstances precluded sustained employment. He lived in the Bedminster district of Bristol for nearly 50 years intermittently broken by periods in hospitals and mental health institutions. Adrian was an imaginative child who created and inhabited a make-believe world, including his town of “Kegworth”, where he managed its football team and charted its movement up and down a league table. At St Brendan’s he was inspired by teachers of English literature and the history of art. He became an accomplished artist in oils and showed an attraction to poetry, Thomas Hardy being among his favourites. While at Caius he was taught by the modern poet JH Prynne, whose work he admired. In Bedminster he was most content with life around his books, and he accumulated a large library. He was a keen motorcyclist, but an abiding image is of him chain-smoking with a poetry book six inches from his nose, oblivious of his surroundings. His early love of English literature and his knowledge of it remained undimmed. He was completely impractical and lived, at first with a friend and later alone, in a ramshackle Victorian house which needed upkeep but never received it. He felt at home in the Bedminster village, where people knew him – in second-hand bookshops, coffee shops and at the local Windmill City farm, where he helped out from time to time. Later his health problems became more acute and in 2017 he moved to a care home, where his reclusive life of study continued. In the summer of 2021 he had a stroke. He is survived by his siblings, Andrew, Veronica and me.Steve Bell, Keith Flett (Letters, 5 January) and Simon Jenkins (‘Sir Tony Blair’? How cheaply knighthoods come in our broken honours system, 5 January) represent a formidable trio to engage in a quarrel for which few Guardian readers would choose to build the barricades: the elevation of a discredited former prime minister to an outdated institution through a corrupted honours system. Nonetheless, there is arguably a danger in acquiescing in the attack on Tony Blair orchestrated by the press and others on the right that is greater than marching to the front in a lost cause. The case rests on the motives behind this denigration and its intended outcomes. The right have no particular quarrel with bellicosity, under-regulation of financial markets or lucrative consultancies in Kazakhstan. The real – but concealed – target of their attack is the substantial body of achievement under New Labour: restoring the NHS, rebuilding schools and colleges, establishing Sure Start and committing, more broadly, to an idea of social justice that has since been sacrificed. Equally important, one of Blair’s finest achievements was surely the Belfast agreement, reflecting his tireless energy and ability to engage with the key players. Since Brexit requires either a border across the island of Ireland or down the Irish Sea, the posturings of Lord Frost and now Liz Truss pose a real threat to the agreement, and those that support this manifest folly have a vested interest in pretending there is nothing substantial to lose. The attack on Blair is surely designed to airbrush his most historic achievement out of the record altogether. For no other reason than that, Sir Tony Blair deserves our unwavering support. Paul Clarke Horsham, West Sussex • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.OK: blank sheet of thought-scap. How do we root‑and‑branch this? What are the bite‑ables here? What, exactly, do our targeted people units want more of? When the England and Wales Cricket Board’s inevitable Ashes review gets round to the glorious oddity of day five of the fourth Test, it is tempting to wonder exactly how those present will dice and slice the events of Sunday afternoon at the Sydney Cricket Ground. The last-ditch, non-result, dead‑series Test match draw: there is no other substance quite like this in sport. It’s good. It’s great. It’s irresistible. But try to explain it, and it just kind of slips away. Perhaps the heart of the thing was there in Jimmy Anderson’s walk to the crease after five days and 2,292 balls of the Sydney Test, after endless rain and endless rain chat, after men in shorts sprinting wildly to hammer a brown hessian sheet, as though only this, the brown hessian sheet, can preserve humanity from its inevitable late‑civilisation collapse. After all those snaking narratives of players and careers, of falling and rising stars, after the transformation of that strip of grass from green, through brown and grey, to its final note of stately decay. With 10 minutes to play and one wicket to fall this was what we had left. Anderson walked out slowly, fiddling with straps, allowing his pupils to widen and the air to cool just a little. The key numbers at that point were 4, 2, 0, 2, 5, 2, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 4, 8, 1, 10, 0, 0, 0, 1, 4, 7, or the scores, with a fair few not outs, from Anderson’s last 23 Test innings (so you’re saying … there’s a 10 in there) from Galle to Sydney. Anderson would be facing Steve Smith, whose previous Test wicket before this innings had been five years ago in Perth. And the first real marvel of Sydney day five was that both teams still had the will to do this. By this stage in an Ashes series everyone here is running on bone marrow and spit. The series is gone. The walking injured are close to forming their own majority party. You can almost feel careers finding their own edges and end points. And yet somehow, as day came to an end in Sydney, none of this mattered. At moments such as these something seems to go wrong with the air, with the light above the stands, the clocks on the wall, all of it subsumed by those five-day tectonic forces. These are the best moments. How many more of them will we get? It seems fair to say the light saved Anderson. Probably Pat Cummins could have forced the game to this point a little quicker. How long would Anderson’s toenails have survived Mitchell Starc with the new-ish, hard-ish ball? How long is a very short piece of string? In the event it was the spirit of the village green, deus ex Paul Reiffel, that decided Nathan Lyon and Smith would bowl the final 12 balls. At which point, like the rest of that final hour, the whole thing dissolved into a series of vivid images. We remember the resistance of Stuart Broad, who came out hopping about and whirling his bat – game, ready, calm, cool, fooling no one – and immediately leapt into a comical defensive stoop as one kept low, bent double like a folding step ladder, that piece of wood tiny in his hands, a man batting with a ruler. With seven overs left Starc returned. Cue the extortionary spectacle of Broad forcing every fibre to say yes to this thing, to obey his orders to leap into line with that fizzing, bone-crushing missile. Broad leapt back and across but still, by some stage magic, ended up cartwheeling towards square leg. He backflipped under a bouncer and got up with his jumper covered in scruff and mud. Without fear there can be no courage. Broad is a very brave man. This is not criticism. It’s applause. We know how this feels. Jack Leach was beautifully serene through most of this, oblivious to the howls, the banshee chuckles of the Australia’s close fielders. Leach wiped his glasses in response. Yes: it’s that. At one point he scored 23 off 17 balls. He whipped away a Cummins yorker with an ankle raised, an absurd piece of muscle memory, then eased Cummins’s final ball gloriously though mid-on Trescothick-style, perfectly balanced, head still. Wait. What? Smith got Leach with a beauty to summon Anderson from the pavilion. His two overs at the death were freakishly good. But Anderson played out the last six balls like a man whose bat was welded to his pad, unable to imagine any other movement but full-body defence. Even the reactions from the players were a perfect read of the day. England’s handshakes and hugs were fond and low-key. The only real congratulations were from Australia’s players, who were winning this match in every single moment right up to that final one, but showed real grace at the end. Nothing changes in the wider picture. A draw in Sydney may provide the tiniest merkin to a disastrous tour. But Australia are still a much better cricket team, even if that gap narrowed as England overcame some of the hurdles placed by their own management. There had been some fears voiced that England’s players might be fatally thrown by the absence of their Covid‑addled coaching staff. Hmm. Are we talking about the same coaching staff? Much can be taken from the heart and the spleen of the players in providing this spectacle. Jonny Bairstow was gloriously defiant in both innings. Ben Stokes showed familiar grit, striking a disco-strut hand-on-hip pose after every forward prop, product of those poor battered ribs. Earlier in the day there was the promise of a brisk, clean, fearless 77 from Zak Crawley, plus the spectacle of those wonderful twin Waqar‑style yorkers summoned up by Cummins to get rid of Mark Wood and Jos Buttler. And in the end this was probably the takeaway, the voice speaking quietly under all this action: a comfortable, leathery voice, the voice of Test cricket as narrated by a particularly wise and benevolent John Hurt. A voice telling you that if you build it they will come, that this thing is good, that while it may be difficult and hard to package, the time to start worrying is when your product doesn’t have this brilliance to sell. England will now decamp to Hobart. The wounded will be packed off home. Sam Billings may or may not have finished his story tape collection during the Covid-bubble road trip to a likely Test debut (cut to the voice of John Hurt – “if you build it they will come” – as Bilbo, in shades, checks his mirrors). And right now the final dead Test of this done‑and-dusted series feels strangely alive.George Monbiot writes movingly about his despair in the face of environmental inaction (Watching Don’t Look Up made me see my whole life of campaigning flash before me, 4 January). It is possible to understand the strange lack of urgency by considering what George articulates elsewhere, namely that humanity is trapped in a consumer-capitalist system, whose effects are environmentally disastrous. The problem leading to pessimism is that changes to the fundamental belief systems of any culture must inevitably be very slow. The associated values are so taken for granted as the atmosphere of social existence, and shared as the basic assumptions of life, that it takes generations for cultures to change in their fundamentals. The disasters faced by the world, directly caused by our cultural values, are so serious and so imminent that change is needed immediately. However, change requires an alternative system of values to be adopted by humanity to create a new cultural context. It is not possible to create cultural values intellectually and then impose them on a society; they only enter as a social presence by a process of organic growth. So the momentum of our predominant values, deep in our psyches, overwhelms the evidence of our peril and very effectively maintains the status quo, apart from a bit of tinkering. We are all collectively mad because we share the same intimate values, and the collective nature of our delusions both obscures reality and comforts us. Stephen Smith Glasgow • The problem is not so much the media, as George Monbiot suggests, as academia. Judged from the standpoint of helping us solve the climate crisis, academia is an intellectual and practical disaster. If academia was rationally and effectively devoted to helping us solve the climate crisis, and other global problems, it would give absolute intellectual priority to the tasks of articulating the problems, and proposing and critically assessing possible solutions. The pursuit of knowledge would be important, but secondary. A central task would be to engage actively with the public to promote action designed to solve the climate crisis – above all, put pressure on the government to act. But universities do not remotely proceed in such a way. They are devoted to the pursuit and application of knowledge; they do not take their primary task to be intelligently conducted public education about what our problems are, and what we need to do to solve them. As I have argued in book after book, article after article, for nearly 50 years, we face climate catastrophe because of the gross and profoundly damaging structural irrationality of academia, which prohibits giving priority to our all-important problems of living. Nicholas Maxwell Science and technology studies, University College London • I felt a deep empathy with George Monbiot’s frustration with the media. Last evening I stormed out of the room where my husband was watching the news because I was so frustrated at the relative unimportance of the main items. Where is the news about the progress, or lack of it, on the actions that should be taking place by world leaders on climate change? What can we do to make them sit up and take notice of Monbiot, and those like him, who tell us the painful truth? My fear and frustration are not for myself – I’m 80 – but for the following generations. All I can do is rant. Chrys Henning Alhampton, Somerset • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.On the 14 June 2017, a fire broke out in the 24-storey Grenfell Tower block in north Kensington, west London, in the deadliest structural fire in the United Kingdom since the second world war – 72 people died and more than 70 were injured. A government review into building regulations after the fire concluded that indifference and ignorance led to a “race to the bottom” in building safety practices, with cost prioritised over safety. What is the cladding crisis? In 2019, the then chairman of the Grenfell inquiry panel, Sir Martin Moore-Bick, concluded that the “principal reason” the fire spread at such pace was down to combustible cladding with polyethylene cores, which acted as a “source of fuel”. In the wake of the tragedy the government established a building safety programme “ensuring that residents of high-rise residential buildings are safe, and feel safe from the risk of fire, now and in the future”. A national ban was introduced on using combustible cladding on new buildings and sprinklers became mandatory on new-builds over 11 metres. A total of 477 high-rise residential buildings and publicly owned buildings were identified as having aluminium composite material (ACM) cladding such as that on Grenfell Tower, which had to be removed. What is the estimated cost of the crisis? Removing cladding can cost millions of pounds per block, and the full cost of fire safety work on all affected blocks has been estimated at about £15bn. By June last year the government had committed an estimated £5bn through the Building Safety Fund to remove flammable cladding on high-rise buildings. Who will pay for the removal? Under the leasehold system in England and Wales the cost is often borne by individual flat owners, some of whom have been left with spiralling insurance costs, service charges, and high fees for 24-hour “waking watch” fire patrols. After Grenfell, ministers said building owners had to pay for the required fire safety measures, including the replacement of dangerous cladding. The government said it would meet the reasonable cost of the removal and replacement of unsafe cladding by councils and housing associations. Some owners have refused to carry out the work needed to make buildings safe. In May 2019 the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government (MHCLG) said the government “will fully fund the replacement of unsafe aluminium composite material (ACM) cladding on high-rise private residential properties where building owners have failed to do so”. Buildings between 11 metres and 18 metres were not covered by the Building Safety Fund, so ministers announced a loan scheme, through which leaseholders would repay a maximum of £50 a month. That was paused in November by the housing secretary, Michael Gove, who said he was “still unhappy” with the principle of leaseholders having to pay at all. What is going to happen now? Gove is expected to announce that leaseholders in buildings between 11 and 18 metres (36-60ft) tall will no longer have to take out loans to cover costs. Instead, he will try to make developers pay £4bn, according to a leaked Treasury letter reported by BBC Newsnight. But the Treasury letter states that approval for funding applies only to fixing cladding, meaning that leaseholders who are facing bills for defective fire compartmentation, fire doors and other non-cladding faults still face bills and uncertainty over whether mortgage companies will lend against their homes to make them sellable.The number of Covid reinfections reported in Spain in the past fortnight has exceeded the total number of repeat infections documented during the rest of the pandemic, according to the latest data from Spanish researchers. In the span of two weeks in late December and early January, 20,890 reinfections were reported in Spain, figures from the state-backed Carlos III Health Institute suggested. While the bulk of cases appeared to be mild, the number is higher than the 17,140 cases of reinfection documented from the start of the pandemic to 22 December. The Spanish data includes both confirmed and suspected reinfections. Researchers attributed the growing number of repeat infections to the fast-spreading Omicron variant. “Prior to this variant, reinfections were anecdotal at the global level,” the immunologist Prof Alfredo Corell, from the University of Valladolid, told the Spanish news site Nius. “Omicron has changed this paradigm.” The Spanish data adds to previous research that has linked Omicron to an increase in reinfections. A report released by researchers at Imperial College London in mid-December estimated the risk of reinfection with Omicron to be 5.4 times greater than with Delta. “This study provides further evidence of the very substantial extent to which Omicron can evade prior immunity given by both infection or vaccination,” the study lead, Prof Neil Ferguson, said in a statement at the time. The report, modelled on people who tested positive in England in late November and early December, added impetus to a call by scientists to include reinfections in UK Covid figures. In South Africa, where the Omicron variant was first identified, preliminary research suggested the variant appears to be reinfecting people at three times the rate of previous strains. “Previous infection used to protect against Delta but now, with Omicron, that doesn’t seem to be the case,” said Prof Anne von Gottberg, from South Africa’s National Institute for Communicable Diseases, in early December. The findings from the UK and South Africa were echoed online by the World Health Organization in late December. “Individuals who have recovered from Covid-19 are three to five times more likely to be reinfected with Omicron compared with Delta,” it said in an update on Covid-19. A limited study in the United States suggested that those who are reinfected with Omicron may experience fewer and milder symptoms compared with infections from previous strains of the virus. The study, published by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, looked at a cluster of Omicron cases in a family of six in Nebraska and found that the five reinfections were reported to be less severe than previous bouts of the virus. In Spain, the researchers pointed to several factors that may explain the rising number of reinfections. “Either the virus mutates or a person’s immunity wanes,” said Dr Pere Domingo, the Covid coordinator at Barcelona’s Santa Creu i Sant Pau hospital, in comments to El País. “In this wave, we’ve seen both factors at play.” Others suggested that the potential for reinfection was magnified given the large number of Covid-19 cases being reported. “Even if the possibility of reinfection is small – say, one out of 100 – if there are millions of infections, the reinfections will be in the tens of thousands,” Prof José Antonio López Guerrero, of Madrid’s Autonomous University, told Nius. Recent weeks have seen the number of Covid cases in Spain rise to record highs, pushing the 14-day infection rate to 2,723 cases per 100,000, according to the latest figures from the health ministry. To date, the sharp rise in cases has not resulted in a surge of hospitalisations; the number of patients in intensive care units is about half that of the figure from a year earlier. Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, said last month he was confident that the country’s high vaccination rate – hovering at about 80% of the population – would translate into a milder wave as the country grapples with the Omicron variant. “We are obviously going to see high numbers of infections, but not hospitalisations and ICU admissions compared to previous waves,” he told reporters.Hi-tech advertising screens that have been criticised for blocking pavements in Manchester each use the same amount of electricity as three households, the Guardian has learned. The council-branded screens, which became a pedestrian bugbear when they were covered with mysterious grey boxes during their installation, earn the local authority £2.4m a year in rent from the advertising firm JCDecaux, plus 2.8% of the revenue from each advert. In recent weeks the boards have advertised GB News and Floki, a cryptocurrency whose marketing is being investigated by the Advertising Standards Authority (ASA). According to analysis of data revealed by a freedom of information request, each of the 86 digital advertising boards in Manchester city centre uses 11,501kWh of electricity every year. Manchester city council, which declared a climate emergency in 2019, says the screens are powered by renewable energy, but they are connected to the mains supply, rather than powered, for example, by a solar panel. “JCDecaux’s electricity supplier has supply agreements with independent UK wind generators and purchases renewable electricity certificates and renewable energy guarantees of origin (or Regos),” a council spokesperson said. “The council’s aim of becoming zero-carbon by the year 2038 isn’t about not using electricity at all. This would be an absurd assumption. What it does mean is about a cultural change locally, which the council is trying to effect, to use electricity which is renewably sourced and does not involve the burning of fossil fuels to generate.” Regos have been criticised for loopholes that risk “double counting” the UK’s renewable energy use or even claiming foreign renewables as its own. The screens, which are almost three metres tall and a metre wide, have been condemned for taking up valuable pavement space in a city that claimed it wanted to prioritise pedestrians. Asked why the boards could not take space away from cars instead of pedestrians, a council spokesperson said: “The placement of advertising boards in the road would not meet the criteria of highways safety.” No equality impact assessments were done before the installation of the boards, but the council insisted that the placement of each would pass the “double buggy test”, by ensuring sufficient room is provided to allow pedestrians to pass. In its brochure for the boards, under the heading “inclusivity and accessibility”, JCDecaux shows only a picture of a blind man with a cane and the caption “unit easily detectable by people using a white cane”. Of the boards, 22 are able to monitor pedestrian footfall and air quality – something the council says will only be used internally to inform policy. All but five of the 86 units replaced previous backlit paper displays and columns that had been in place since the late 1990s. All advertising appearing on the boards must comply with the Advertising Standards Authority’s code of practice, the council said. Roberta Fusco, the interim director of policy and communications for the walking charity Living Streets, said: “Creating streets that encourage walking has huge potential to reduce congestion and air pollution, tackle loneliness and isolation, and revive our local high streets. Cluttering streets with electronic advertising boards flies in the face of that. “Local authorities need to prioritise clearing footways and pavements. This includes banning advertising boards, removing excessive signs and utility boxes, and ensuring there is always at least 1.5 metres of pavement space left when street furniture is in place.”Over 140,000 more people have tested positive for coronavirus in the UK, amid reports that lateral flow tests will remain free. A further 141,472 lab-confirmed Covid-19 cases were recorded as of 9am on Sunday, the fourth consecutive day that infection numbers have fallen. The education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, told Sky’s Trevor Phillips on Sunday that the UK had “425m lateral flow tests coming in and they will continue to be available for free”. The government said a further 97 people had died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid, bringing the total to 150,154. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have now been 174,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. Meanwhile, 51,950,528 first doses of Covid-19 vaccine had been delivered in the UK by 8 January, government figures show. This is a rise of 30,713 on the previous day. A total of 47,677,951 second doses have been delivered, an increase of 45,468. A combined total of 35,499,486 booster and third doses have also been given, a day-on-day rise of 225,541. Separate totals for booster and third doses are not available.One of the most useful qualities of labor unions is their ability to force Good Liberals to actually demonstrate their principles in a tangible way. It is easy for a self-proclaimed progressive business owner to say all the nice things about how they believe in equality and fair wages and worker rights – but when their employees unionize and come to claim those rights, those nice bosses must stop talking about how nice they are, and prove it. For limousine liberals, dealing with unions is where the rubber hits the road. Needless to say, many Good Liberals turn out to be charlatans. There is a saying in the union world: “A boss is a boss.” This is a more pithy way of saying: “A boss is kind of a greedy jerk, no matter how many ‘Nevertheless, she persisted’ bumper stickers they have plastered on their Volvos.” The New York Times is one of America’s most vital totems of mainstream liberalism, right up there with expensive coffee and defensive explanations for sending your kids to private school. The New York Times is also, it turns out, one of America’s very best examples of how a boss is a boss. Because even as the paper pontificates about the dangers of inequality and gives sympathetic coverage to major union drives, the leaders of the company’s business side are busily trying to undermine their own unions. Last April, 650 tech employees at the New York Times announced that they were unionizing. Rather than applauding them and proceeding to negotiate a contract, the company instead refused to voluntarily recognize the union. This is despite its own editorial board supporting a bill that would have made it legally binding for employers to voluntarily accept union requests when they are backed by a majority of the staff. As the paper’s own editorial explained: “Under current law, an employer can reject the majority’s signatures and insist on a secret ballot. But in a disturbingly high number of cases, the employer uses the time before the vote to pressure employees to rethink their decision to unionize.” Now, this is what the New York Times company is accused of doing to its own employees. Since last year, the Times has been accused of trying to scare workers into changing their minds – to sow division among the employees, divide the unit, and erode support for organized labor. Last week, federal labor regulators claimed that the company had broken the law by telling large swaths of employees that they were actually “managers”, and that they were therefore prohibited from publicly supporting the union. (A hearing is scheduled for this March. A spokesperson for the Times said they “strongly disagree” with the union’s allegations.) If you find this sort of anti-union behavior from the New York Times surprising, remember that another unit of unionized workers at the paper, those who worked for the product review section Wirecutter, had to go on strike during the busy Black Friday shopping weekend in order to secure a minimally fair contract. So while most of the editorial employees at the Times have been unionized for decades, the company is still exhibiting a chesty commitment to doing everything possible to keep any more of its workers from securing the same sort of benefits. I don’t want to get caught up here in the details of labor regulations and lose sight of the big picture. Which is this: the New York Times Company, which makes its money by branding itself as the foremost defender of liberal American values, is fighting against its own workers pursuing their right to organize a union and bargain collectively. To me, that makes the New York Times an anti-union company. I can say this with no qualms. Companies that are not anti-union will honor a formal request from their employees for voluntary union recognition; they will bargain fair contracts that include pay equity for all; and they will certainly not run internal messaging campaigns trying to convince their employees that unionizing is a bad idea. The New York Times has done all of these things, quite recently. This means that it can stand proudly with its dishonorable peers across corporate America in that regard. While its writers editorialize against the deep political and economic problems plaguing our country, its management is very much a part of those problems. The New York Times gets away with a lot. They are the journalism equivalent of the supreme court. They offer prestige, big budgets and job stability at a time when those things are in short supply in this industry. The half of our country terrified by Trump sees them as an army of truth, and everyone in media wants to work there. (Call me!) But let’s be honest: the people who control the New York Times company are acting like real weasels. It’s not just that they are hypocritical, yammering about the public good while acting from pure selfishness – it’s that they want to have it both ways. While more outwardly evil media bosses like Rupert Murdoch may be proud to embrace their Ayn Randian reputation, those who lead the Times want to be accepted as good people on the Brooklyn-brownstone cocktail party circuit, even as they quietly try to stop those who work for them from having an equal seat at their tastefully appointed table. Screw that. I have covered hundreds of anti-union campaigns. No matter where they happen, they are all based on lies and fear. Whether they happen at an Amazon warehouse or at the New York Times, they are a demonstration of contempt for the idea that an employee may deserve to be treated as someone whose humanity is just as real as that of an employer. Respectable people don’t engage in union-busting. People who run anti-union campaigns are not Good Liberals. Hundreds of workers raising their voices have not been enough to convince the New York Times executives to act right. Maybe it’s time to stop inviting them to the cocktail parties. Hamilton Nolan is a labor reporter at In These TimesMy father, Danny Sharpe, who has died aged 84, spent most of his career as a civil servant, helping to bring investment and opportunities to the north-east of England. He joined the civil service in 1959, entering at the lowest clerical officer grade. Eventually he became deputy regional director for the north-east at the Department of Trade and Industry. Danny was born in Blyth, Northumberland, the son of Elizabeth (nee Donnelly) and Daniel Sharpe, who worked in insurance. On leaving St Cuthbert’s grammar school, Newcastle, at the age of 15 with no qualifications, he worked as a door-to-door salesman and delivery van driver, and then undertook national service in the RAF. His civil service career began at the the Ministry of Transport and Aviation in London under the national service resettlement programme. After 10 years he seized an an opportunity to return to the north-east, working at the new Ministry of Technology. He was attracted by the optimistic outlook of Harold Wilson’s “white heat of technology” drive, bringing scientific advances into industry. The loss of traditional industries in coal mining, steelmaking and shipbuilding meant that the region needed creative solutions. Throughout the 1980s and 90s, he was often called on to brief ministers and also to accompany members of the royal family on visits to the area. In 1992 he was appointed to chair the Recharge North East initiative by the energy minister. Danny led export trade missions to south-east Asia, Europe and North America, which brought significant investment successes. In his final posting, a secondment to a private sector company, the Newcastle Initiative, in 1994, he raised finance to kickstart local initiatives as well as funding the clean-up of the historic buildings of Newcastle’s Grainger Town and lighting the famous Tyne Bridge. In 1991 he was appointed OBE. He retired in 1995 and the following year was awarded an honorary fellowship of the University of Northumbria. Outside his work, Danny was a keen amateur artist, and visitors to the house would invariably leave with at least one painting under their arm. A practising Catholic, he devoted many hours to St Cuthbert’s church, Kenton. He also served on the board of the Northumbrian Industrial Mission, placing chaplains in industry. In 1959 Danny married Sheila Young. She survives him, along with their daughter, Clare, and sons, Paul and me, as well as two grandsons, Joseph and Alfie.Sinéad O’Connor has criticised the Irish authorities after the death of her 17-year-old son, Shane, whom she alleges left hospital while “on suicide watch”. The singer announced the news of Shane’s death on social media on Saturday, writing: “My beautiful son, Nevi’im Nesta Ali Shane O’Connor, the very light of my life, decided to end his earthly struggle today and is now with God. “May he rest in peace and may no one follow his example. My baby. I love you so much. Please be at peace.” Shane O’Connor had been reported missing two days before his death, with the Garda Síochána launching an appeal for his whereabouts. He was missing from Newbridge, County Kildare, and was last seen on Friday morning in the Tallaght area of Dublin. Officers said they were concerned for his welfare. O’Connor had previously alleged Shane was “on suicide watch”. In a series of tweets on Saturday night, after police confirmation of his death, the Irish musician condemned authorities including the Irish health service HSE and the child and family agency Tusla, for their “refusal to accept responsibility”. She wrote: “26 hours after my son died in so the so called care of the Irish State in the form of Tusla, I have yet to receive any contact from Tusla or their representatives. I was informed by Gardai of my son’s death and later I spoke with the GAL. No contact from Tusla is unacceptable.” She later posted that she had “formally identified the remains of my son”, adding: “May God forgive the Irish State for I never will”. In another tweet, she said: “Now Tusla want to discuss with me ‘a media release’ no doubt wishing to have me join in their efforts to make this death of my child seem like it wasn’t at the hands of the Irish State.” An HSE spokesperson said: “The HSE cannot comment on individual cases when to do so might reveal information in relation to identifiable individuals, breaching the ethical requirement on us to observe our duty of confidentiality.” Tusla and Tallaght hospital have been contacted for comment. Shane was one of O’Connor’s four children, along with Jake Reynolds, Roisin Waters and Yeshua Francis Neil Bonadio. She also tweeted a Bob Marley song, which she dedicated to Shane, describing him as her “blue-eye baby” and the “light of my life”. The singer has been sent thousands of messages of condolences on social media, including from public figures and other mothers who have gone through similar ordeals. The Pogues singer Shane MacGowan tweeted: “Sinead you have always been there for me and for so many people, you have been a comfort &amp; a soul who is not afraid to feel the pain of the suffering. “You have always tried to heal &amp; help. I pray that you can be comforted &amp; find strength, healing &amp; peace in your own sorrow &amp; loss. “He was a beautiful boy and I loved him. I pray that he can be at peace and also be able to stay connected with you.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.And that is that for the opening match at the 2022 Africa Cup of Nations. Cameroon came through a serious test against Burkina Faso to notch an opening win thanks to two penalties from the impressive Vincent Aboubakar. Moumi Ngamaleu, in addition, had a fine match and André-Frank Zambo Anguissa was none too shabby in the middle of the park for the hosts. Thanks for reading today, and roll on the next four weeks at the Africa Cup of Nations. Bye for now. There is time for Tolo to try an outrageous volley from the edge of the penalty area which flies wide ... the final whistle blows, and Cameroon seal an opening win thanks to two first-half penalties by Aboubakar. After a somewhat nervy start, the match burst into life towards the end of the first half – and Cameroon eventually survive a big scare against an impressive Burkina Faso outfit. 90 min + 3: Cameroon drive down the right. Koffi initially spills a cross but then gathers. The seconds are ticking down to what will be an opening win for the tournament hosts. 90 min + 2: Konate has the merest hint of a sight of goal for Burkina Faso from a tight angle. He gets his shot on target but Onana is able to gather cleanly. 90 min: Time’s up, but five added minutes at a minimum will be played – mostly as a result of an incredibly long VAR check for that disallowed Cameroon goal. 87 min: Aboubakar, the two-penalty hero for Cameroon, is now taken off with Neyou coming on. This is certainly tense, although it’s hard to argue the football has been consistently of great quality. As stated, though, it’s often the way with the nerves and high stakes that come with a tournament opener. 85 min: Traore, another strong performer today, is replaced by Bande for Burkina Faso. Fresh legs for one final push on the Cameroon goal ... 83 min: Toni Conceição, the Cameroon manager, issues a few instructions from the bench. His side are edging towards the win here but he’d love a third goal. 81 min: Another change for Cameroon: Christian Bassogog comes on for Ngamaleu, who has been outstanding, and absolutely full of running and quality on the ball. Man of the match, for me. 78 min: The hat-trick hunting Aboubakar of Cameroon gets a sight of goal from an angle on the right of the area, and gives his shot everything, but it flies over. The wall of noise from the crowd is relentless, and as it stands the home fans will be going home happy, but Burkina Faso are still carrying plenty of threat on the break. 73 min: Zambo Anguissa hammers a powerful shot goalwards from the edge of the box for Cameroon. It nicks off a defender and out for a corner. The resulting set piece is contested aerially but goes out for a goal kick to Burkina Faso. 68 min: A double change for Burkina Faso now, with Konate and Sanogo coming on. 66 min: Traore smacks a powerful shot from an angle for Burkina Faso, Onana saves. Double change now for Cameroon: Toko Ekambi and Kunde go off, with Clinton and Choupo-Moting come on. The time seems to have disappeared from my screen on Sky Sports so I’m not entirely sure how long there is left ... 64 min: Ngamaleu, who seems to be popping up on either flank, now takes the ball down the Cameroon left. The ball finds its way to Aboubakar, and it takes two defenders to take him out of the action, his shot blocked desperately at the last minute by two covering defenders. This is a very, very long VAR check ... and at the end of it, the on-field decision for offside stands, and Cameroon still lead 2-1. Cameroon, again, burst forward in numbers. Aboubakar lays the ball off to Ngamaleu on the right, whose initial shot is saved, but then hits Aboubakar and floats into the net. It’s a VAR check ... 52 min: Traore smashes the free-kick into the six-yard box ... the ball ricochets around, cleared off the Cameroon line not once but twice, with Onana making a brilliant save from point-blank range! So nearly the equaliser for Burkina Faso. 51 min: Rather like the beginning of the first half, the game has lost a bit of shape, with neither side being able to build any passing rhythm. Burkina Faso break down the right and Tolo of Cameroon gives away a free-kick right on the byline ... 49 min: Cameroon break quickly and three players swarm into the penalty area. Aboubakar hits a shot but it lacks power and it dribbles towards the Burkina Faso goal. 46 min: Burkina Faso win a free-kick in a central area. Traore hits it powerfully, his effort swerving late, and Onana can only punch it away. Burkina Faso get the second half under way. Can they find a way back, after being shocked by those two Cameroon penalties late in the first half? Well – that was lively. Two penalties have Cameroon, the tournament hosts, in the lead after Burkina Faso opened the scoring. It was a nervy, disjointed start but a much more entertaining affair later in the half. See you in a few minutes for more. There was a lightning-fast break down the left by Cameroon. Dayo slid in and tackled Nouhou. The referee pointed to the spot. Aboubakar tucks it away, putting it to his left this time, rather than to his right like the first one. Cameroon lead. The hosts can go in the break leading! 41 min: Another booking, this time for the home side. Onguene of Cameroon goes in the book for an off-the-ball incident. Tapsoba goes down in a heap, appearing to clutch his neck, and a stretcher comes on and takes him off the field. He comes straight back on, and there doesn’t appear to be a VAR check either. A stuttering run-up but an assured finish. Cameroon are back on terms and the crowd is up. A brilliant penalty into the bottom corner, his 26th goal for his country. Anguissa wins a spot-kick! It went to VAR. There was a long check. Aboubakar will take. 33 min: Ngamaleu takes the free-kick himself. Traore heads it out for a corner. The resulting set piece is wasted despite several Cameroon players lining up in the penalty area. Worrying signs for Cameroon here, they have lost their way since conceding and need to re-establish themselves. 31 min: Another booking for Burkina Faso: Malo goes in the referee’s book for a horrible diving challenge on Ngamaleu, who continues to cause problems on the Cameroon right. 24 min: That was a manic passage of play. Burkina Faso counterattack on the left. They win a corner, and Traore powers a stunning header which is flying in the top corner, only to be desperately cleared off the line by a Cameroon defender who is stationed on the far post. Another ball across from the opposite side kisses the crossbar, as Onana misjudges the delivery. The ball ends up on the Burkina Faso right, and a superb deep cross to the far post is acrobatically volleyed into the roof of the net by Sangare, who plays his club football in Ligue 2 for Quevilly-Rouen. That was not Onana’s finest hour. What a finish on the volley! Great goal by Sangare, after Traore’s header was cleared off the line from a corner, moments before! 19 min: Zambo Anguissa – who has been excellent for Napoli this season, on loan from Fulham – starts a flowing Cameroon move which again ends with Ngamaleu in space on the right. But the defending from Burkina Faso is solid. 17 min: Cyrille Bayala races on to a good ball in behind by Burkina Faso. This time it’s Onana’s turn to come rushing out of his area, but he gets there first and wins a strong 50-50 tackle. Bayala writhes around in pain for a while but he’s OK to continue. 15 min: Ngamaleu, who is full of running on the Cameroon right, forces a corner. But it’s a poor delivery and doesn’t clear the first defender. 12 min: Cameroon come forward again. Ngamaleu bends a deep cross over from the right wing, but it’s overhit. This has been fairly short on quality so far, but then again, major tournament openers aren’t exactly well-known for producing memorable football. 9 min: Cameroon surge down the right again. Koffi, the Burkina Faso goalie, comes rushing out of his area but fails to get the ball. Error. He gets away with it, though, as the resulting cross-shot sails high and wide and out for a goal kick. 7 min: This is more like it from Cameroon. Aboubakar comes short to take a pass into feet from the right wing. He turns wonderfully as he receives the ball, taking two defenders out of the game entirely, and buying himself plenty of space to fashion a shot from the edge of the penalty area. He tries to wrap his left boot around a curler but it skews off his boot and out for a goal kick. 5 min: After that full-on start, it’s all settled down a bit. Burkina Faso are sitting deep and clearly hoping to hit the tournament hosts on the break. Cameroon are having most of the ball, but aside from the set-piece that resulted from Yago’s rush of blood in the opening moments, they haven’t created anything. 1 min: Cameroon attack down the right wing with a direct ball from defence. Yago of Burkina Faso goes in the referee’s book in the first few seconds for a lusty, studs up challenge on Fai Collins, who had brought the ball down well and was bursting into space on the edge of the penalty area. A lively start to say the least. Cameroon get the 2022 Africa Cup of Nations under way. They’re playing in their familiar home strip of green shirts, red shorts and yellow socks. Burkina Faso are all in white with red and green trim. The teams are out. So are the vuvuzelas, it would seem. The respective sides huddle together before kick-off. The Cameroon midfielder Yvan Neyou, who plays his club football for Saint-Étienne, warms up. And the goalie, André Onana, plays club football for Ajax at the moment, but is going to join Internazionale in the summer. “It’s not very straightforward – it’s not something that you’ll find every day,” Mario Marinica says. But the Romania-born British citizen, who is set to manage Malawi at the Africa Cup of Nations in Cameroon – his team kick off against Naby Keïta’s Guinea on Monday – wants to explain why a turn of events that feels bizarre is actually all perfectly normal. Five minutes until the big kick-off. You can email me or tweet with any thoughts on the match. More Covid-19 news from the Senegal camp: The goalkeeper Édouard Mendy and striker Famara Diedhiou will join captain Kalidou Koulibaly on the sidelines for Senegal’s opening match at the Africa Cup of Nations in Cameroon after both tested positive for Covid-19, the country’s football federation said on Sunday. That leaves Senegal, already hit by six positive cases before they departed for the tournament, with a threadbare squad for their opening Group B clash against Zimbabwe in Bafoussam on Monday. Koulibaly’s positive test was revealed by his club Napoli on Saturday, who said he was vaccinated and asymptomatic. The Senegal federation then confirmed the Chelsea goalkeeper and Turkey-based striker, formerly with Bristol City, were in isolation. Saliou Ciss, Bamba Dieng, Mame Baba Thiam, Pape Matar Sarr, Nampalys Mendy and second choice goalkeeper Alfred Gomis all remained in Dakar on Wednesday after testing positive as the team were to depart for the finals. Ismaïla Sarr is not available because of injury, as is Abdoulaye Seck, leaving coach Aliou Cisse with just 17 players. “It’s a difficult and complicated situation,” Cisse told a news conference in Bafoussam on Sunday. “But we are going to be competitive and those there are going to play for those who are absent. We are still going into the game against Zimbabwe full of confidence.” The Confederation of African Football has laid down strict rules regarding Covid-19. If any player tests positive they will not be authorised to go to the stadium or participate in the match, while teams must play as long as they have a minimum of 11 players available. If they have no goalkeeper available, another player must play in that position. Teams that do not have a minimum of 11 players available will be considered to have lost the match 2-0, according to CAF. (Reuters) The opening ceremony is well under way – in fact it’s nearly finished – but Sky Sports aren’t showing it. Here are some photos. “It was always my ambition and I told myself it was going to happen one day,” says Jojo Wollacott of Ghana and Swindon Town. “To play for your country at a major tournament is every boy’s dream … I’ve got to pinch myself again.” Here’s Ben Fisher: Cameroon: Andre Onana, Onguene, Ngadeu-Ngadjui, Tolo, Zambo Anguissa, Fai, Gouet, Kunde, Ngamaleu, Aboubakar, Toko Ekambi. Substitutes: Moukoudi, Oyongo, N’Jie, Bahoken, Bassogog, Choupo-Moting, Epassy, Ganago, Castelletto, Omossola, Lea Siliki, Neyou. Burkina Faso: Koffi, Kabore, Dayo, Yago, Malo, Guira, Toure, Bertrand Traore, Sangare, Bayala, Abdoul Tapsoba. Substitutes: Sawadogo, Djibril Ouattara, Eric Traore, Abdoul Nikiema, Konate, Hermann Nikiema, Sanogo, Ismahila Ouedraogo, Bande, Farid Ouedraogo, Botue. Paul Doyle is here with some players to watch - including Steven Caulker of Sierra Leone, who you may remember from an England friendly against Sweden back in 2012: Leon Osman, Raheem Sterling, Carl Jenkinson (!!), Ryan Shawcross (!!!) and Wilfried Zaha also debuted for England on the same night. Where are they now? A couple of familiar faces on Twitter – Senegal’s Sadio Mané with a message for his Liverpool teammates, Naby Keïta (Guinea) and Mohamed Salah (Egypt): And Riyad Mahrez of Algeria and Manchester City with a thank you for the fans: Jonathan Wilson writes that the Africa Cup of Nations is worthy of respect, even if the scheduling doesn’t fit with many other competitions around the world: Like pretty much everything else, this long-awaited tournament has been badly affected by Covid-19: initially scheduled for 2021, it was delayed by the initial wave of the pandemic, before the emergence of the Omicron variant late last year led to the threat of yet another delay. There have been accusations of disrespect, and even racism, regarding the attitude of certain clubs at the prospect of losing their players in the middle of the European season. But this tournament is far bigger than the vastly overhyped Premier League – or indeed any other domestic competition. Those tiresome arguments over player availability and the complaints of myopic managers and supporters will – hopefully – fade into the background when the football finally begins in Yaoundé today. Several squads are dealing with Covid-19 outbreaks, including the bookies’ favourites Senegal, with Napoli’s Kalidou Koulibaly in isolation after testing positive this week. But this show is on the road, with 24 teams vying for a place in the final in four weeks’ time, on Sunday 6 February. Kick-off is at 4pm UK time as tournament hosts Cameroon open the tournament against Burkina Faso. Team news, pre-match reading and more coming right up.Donald Trump cannot hide behind immunity from criminal prosecution and faces the possibility of being debarred from running for public office over his role in the Capitol attack, several members of Congress said on Sunday. Days after the anniversary of the 6 January insurrection that left five people dead and scores injured after Trump supporters attempted to scupper the certification of Joe Biden’s victory in the 2020 election, the threat of possible criminal proceedings looms large over the former president. Lawmakers from both main parties, including moderate Republicans, warned on Sunday that Trump will not be spared criminal liability should evidence emerge that he actively coordinated the attack. A Republican senator, Mike Rounds from South Dakota, told ABC’s This Week that any immunity from prosecution that Trump enjoyed while in the White House evaporated on 20 January 2021, when he left office. “The shield of the presidency does not exist for someone who was a former president – everybody in this country is subject to the courts of this country,” Rounds said. Rounds added that it was up to the justice department, not Congress, to decide whether evidence existed of criminal wrongdoing by Trump. On Saturday, the Guardian revealed that the House select committee investigating 6 January is homing in on the question of whether Trump led a criminal conspiracy to try and block Biden’s certification as his successor in the White House. Depending on what they find, the committee has the power to refer the matter to the Department of Justice for possible criminal prosecution. Adam Kinzinger, a Republican congressman from Illinois who sits on the committee, underlined the laser-like focus of the investigation on Trump’s potential complicity. Speaking on NBC’s Meet the Press, he said the key question now was: “What did the president know about 6 January leading up to 6 January?” Kinzinger added that the panel wanted to know why Trump failed to take any action for almost three hours while the violence at the Capitol was unfolding on his TV screen. Was it a sign of weakness or complicity? “It’s the difference between, was the president absolutely incompetent or a coward on 6 January when he didn’t do anything or did he know what was coming? That’s a difference between incompetence with your oath and possibly criminal.” While the question of whether the former president broke the law is fast rising up the political agenda, Congress is also considering another potential route to hold Trump accountable for the violence of a year ago: action under the 14th amendment of the constitution. Section three of the amendment holds that nobody in elected federal office, including the president, should engage in “insurrection or rebellion” against the union. Jamie Raskin, a Democrat from Maryland who led the second impeachment of Trump for “incitement of insurrection”, told ABC the 14th amendment might yet be “a blockade for [Trump] ever being able to run for office again”. While the relatively tiny number of moderate Republicans who have been willing openly to criticize the former president were airing their views on Sunday, the opposing tack taken by most party leaders was also on display. Senator Lindsey Graham, a Trump loyalist from South Carolina, told a New York radio channel the Capitol attack was a “dark day”, but went on to lambast Biden for marking the anniversary this week. “It was an effort on his part to create a brazen political moment to try to deflect from their failed presidency,” Graham said. A moment of silence staged at the House to mark the anniversary was attended by only two Republicans: the congresswoman Liz Cheney and her father, the former vice-president Dick Cheney. Afterwards, the older Cheney expressed his disappointment at the “failure of many members of my party to recognize the grave nature of the 6 January attacks and the ongoing threat to our nation”. Asa Hutchinson, the Republican governor of Arkansas, attempted to defend Congress members from his state, all of whom sat out the anniversary proceedings. “I don’t know that absolute attendance was the only way to show frustration with 6 January,” he told CNN’s State of the Union. But Hutchinson did say he regretted that large numbers of Republican candidates running for public office are openly embracing Trump’s big lie that the 2020 election was rigged. “What worries me is that they are not demonstrating leadership,” he said. “We have to make clear that [6 January] was unacceptable, it was an attempt to stop the peaceful transfer of power and we have to make clear that President Trump had some responsibility for that.”My friend Malcolm Greenwood, who has died aged 86, was a key figure in education in Bradford. From 1958, Malcolm taught history at Carlton boys’ grammar school, and five years later joined Bradford grammar school. There he started and developed the economics department, later introducing business studies and philosophy. When Malcolm retired from BGS in 1993, his pupils acknowledged how much future students would benefit from his foresight. Malcolm subsequently taught for three years at the Bradford University Management Centre, where he contributed modules to the MA business studies course. He published on management in education and competition in business, and in 2013 published A Life Well Lived, on female experience of the SOE, based on the recollections of his neighbour Fan Craig, a member of the First Aid Nursing Yeomanry (Fany) in the second world war. In the 1950s, it was unusual for those from Malcolm’s modest background to achieve such academic success. Born in Bradford, he was the son of Hilda (nee Piggin), a typist, and Edward Greenwood, a dispensing chemist. From Thornton grammar school Malcolm went to the London School of Economics, and then obtained a PGCE teaching qualification from Hull University. In 1986, he was elected schoolmaster-fellow at Merton College, Oxford, where he completed with distinction an Open University degree in psychology. Malcolm was a great admirer of the OU, for which he was a tutor and counsellor, frequently travelling far afield to teach the social sciences. He was especially keen to encourage mature students. A proud Yorkshireman, Malcolm chaired Bradford’s industry and commerce committee and was an early promoter of heritage tourism. He fought the Bingley Rural ward for the Liberal party in council elections in 1982 and 1983. For more than a decade, he volunteered at the Skipton Citizens Advice Bureau. In 1961 he married Winifred Dean, and they had two children. After her premature death from cancer, he was sustained by his rich hinterland. He was a keen cricketer, golfer and enthusiastic angler. His beautiful tenor voice led to him meeting Anne Wicks at a local choir and the couple were married in 1978. Malcolm is survived by Anne, his daughter, Sarah, and son, Jonathan, from his first marriage, two stepsons, David and Robert, and nine grandchildren.It’s nothing new to note that the rise of streaming services has the potential to unleash the screen artwork from its standard length and form. The television documentary maker Adam Curtis, for example, long ago embraced iPlayer rather than linear television for his films, because on the streaming platform they would find a home away from the “rigid formats and schedules of network television”. In 2015, his film Bitter Lake, about the banal narratives imposed on a complex world by reductive world leaders, occupied two hours and 20 minutes – more time than he would have been allotted by even the most indulgent channel controller. In audio, podcasting has long liberated itself from the tight, clock-regulated schedules of radio. James Cameron, the director of Avatar and Titanic, has now mooted a world in which there is further freedom from time constraints: he imagines movies with a long-form version made for streaming, and a shorter version for the cinema – the cinema being a space, in many cultures, traditionally ruled by the ineluctable timetable of the human bladder (though Bollywood films, for instance, are long, and the bladder issue is easily dealt with by an acceptance that audience members will come and go from the auditorium). “I want to do a movie that’s six hours long and two-and-a-half hours long at the same time,” Cameron told Variety magazine. “Same movie. You can stream it for six hours, or you can go and have a more condensed, rollercoaster, immersive version of that experience in a movie theatre … Why not? Let’s just use these platforms in ways that haven’t been done before.” It is a fascinating notion and one that, if enacted, would cast light on the underrated work of the editor in film and TV, beyond the emergence of directors’ cuts of films from time to time (which are not invariably superior to, and often rather longer than, the usually tighter and more ruthless versions originally released by the studio). The potential freedom for artists to be liberated from the strictures of scheduling and “acceptable” lengths is not necessarily a good thing, of course. Nobody wants to watch a maundering, meandering, overlong artwork that could have said all that it needed to say within 30 minutes or could easily have had an hour sliced out of it. The most recent James Bond film, at two hours 28 minutes, was felt by many people to be “too long” for its material. On the other hand, length is a curious business in time-based art. The speed at which minutes appear to pass has little to do with the actual progress of hands round a clock face. In the right hands, a work as mighty in scale and length as The Valkyrie – as evinced by its recent reappearance on the stage of the Coliseum in London with English National Opera – can slip by, although the official run time was five hours. Wagner’s opera is full of twists and drama, and – perhaps unlike some of his other works – never drags. But scale isn’t everything. Caryl Churchill’s latest play What If If Only, staged at London’s Royal Court, occupied 20 minutes – and yet, in its brief and concentrated span, as it explored loss and bereavement, plumbed depths. The reality is that great artworks find the length they need to be. Getting that right isn’t easy: but it is part of the artist’s job.No Italian has ever voted for Mario Draghi in an election, but given the opportunity it seems that many might choose to do so. Recent polls indicate that Italy’s technocrat prime minister, appointed last February by the country’s president, Sergio Mattarella, basks in stellar approval ratings of about 65%. As honeymoon periods go, this one has justified the “Super Mario” hype that accompanied Mr Draghi’s installation. The explanation for his success lies in the unaccustomed sense of stability and calm that the former head of the European Central Bank has delivered. Since taking office, following the mid-Covid implosion of a centre-left coalition government, Mr Draghi has presided with authority over a unity administration that involves every party apart from the far-right Brothers of Italy. Rome’s Covid recovery plan is being enthusiastically funded by the European Commission, whose officials see the prime minister as a safe pair of hands, and Italy’s handling of the pandemic on Mr Draghi’s watch has been assured. In comparison to France, where far-right demagoguery is setting the tone in the presidential race, or Britain, where the public has been scandalised by the behaviour in Boris Johnson’s Downing Street, Italian politics has distinguished itself in 2021 by being reassuringly, unusually dull. One way or another, however, this novel interlude is coming to an end. A general election is not due until 2023, but by the end of the month a new Italian president must be installed by MPs and senators – Mr Mattarella having come to the end of his seven-year term. Silvio Berlusconi, at the age of 85, is angling for the largely ceremonial job, but Mr Draghi has emerged as the clear favourite and seems interested. His departure would severely weaken the authority of the government and increase the likelihood of early elections, which the populist right would be favourites to win. For that reason, many on the centre-left want the prime minister to stay where he is for as long as possible. So should Mr Draghi stay as PM or go to become president? The febrile speculation surrounding this question suggests that Italy, and in particular the centre-left, has become unhealthily Draghi-dependent. The Covid emergency – coinciding with a chaotic parliament in which two unstable coalitions fell apart – justified a suspension of normal politics and Mr Draghi has used the time well. His banking career and international reputation have lent Italy a new respectability in the financial markets and greater influence within the EU. There is also little doubt that the advent of a new, aggressively nationalist, rightwing government would be disastrous for Italy’s fledgling recovery and its new status in Brussels. But Mr Draghi, however accomplished and formidable an operator, should not be viewed as the primary bulwark against such a possibility. The polarisation that has characterised the country’s politics over the past decade, leading to the rise of blowhard rightwing figures such as Matteo Salvini and the Brothers of Italy leader Giorgia Meloni, can only ultimately be resolved via the ballot box. The centre-left Democratic party did well in local elections during the autumn, profiting from alliances with the anti-establishment Five Star Movement. For a proper revival of the Italian left, it now needs to find a way to build on those successes, extending its reach beyond the urban professionals who form the bedrock of its support. That task has become urgent because, after a successful pause for which Mr Draghi deserves much credit, traditional politics is set to make a comeback in Italy.Antonio Conte bemoaned Tottenham’s laboured performance in the 3-1 FA Cup win against Morecambe on a day when a section of the club’s fans turned on the record signing Tanguy Ndombele. Conte needed to introduce Lucas Moura and Harry Kane as 69th-minute substitutes – together with Oliver Skipp – as a heavily rotated lineup trailed 1-0 against the League One strugglers. The Tottenham Hotspur Stadium support booed Ndombele when he took an age to leave the field after Conte’s decision to replace him with Skipp. But Spurs turned the game around late on, Harry Winks’s equaliser being followed by goals from Moura and Kane. “In the first part of the game, for a big part of the game, we struggled,” Conte said. “In this type of game you have to score and, when you concede, for sure your opponent starts to feel they can beat you. We struggled to be creative and also to score goals. We had some chances but not too many. “At the end, we have to be a bit disappointed because we can do much better. In the end, it’s OK. We mustn’t be happy, for sure, but we reached the target and that’s all. We have to do much better and also to know that we have to struggle. We have to know that if the situation is this, we have to be prepared to struggle this season.” Ndombele, who started for only the third time under Conte, did not break his slow stride as the fans reacted negatively to him when he went off. But the manager was keen to downplay the flashpoint. “This type of situation, they are in football,” Conte said. “You have to be good to change the opinions. I was a player and it happened sometimes to me that someone was unhappy with my performance. “This is our life. It’s OK. We have to continue to work and try to be better next time. We have to know very well that if we perform well, the fans are happy. If you don’t perform well, the fans are not happy.”Reports on Sunday that free lateral flow tests could be axed under a strategy of living with Covid within weeks were met with a swift backlash. The government promptly denied the suggestion that free tests could soon be scrapped. The story highlights a gulf in opinions on what “living with Covid” might look like, with some saying we will achieve this only through continued caution and others equating the phrase to ditching all Covid measures and partying like it’s 2019. Wherever your instincts lie, it is not surprising – or even undesirable – that the mass testing of asymptomatic people is being reviewed. The policy was rapidly brought in at a time when, faced with a new, highly infectious variant of unknown virulence, it made sense to throw everything we had at Omicron to slow down transmission and to minimise disruption caused by essential workers having to self-isolate. With case numbers wildly outstripping the UK’s laboratory testing capacity, lateral flow tests continue to be vital for tracking case numbers. However, these tests are not ultimately “free”. More than £6bn in public funding has been spent on lateral flow test kits. As the Omicron wave recedes, the use of lateral flow tests needs to be justified as part of a wider public health policy. Undoubtedly, the tests pick up some cases that would have gone under the radar. They also provide reassurance to people. However, we need much better real-world evidence on the most effective way to target testing. It is likely that this would continue to include screening healthcare workers and carers of vulnerable people. It is not clear, in the future, that it would extend to people routinely monitoring themselves before attending social events. Some question why the government is even thinking about how we can “live with Covid” in the same week that case numbers have hit record highs. But mapping out the path to normality does not have to equate to misguided optimism that we have already arrived at this destination. In advice given in November, before the emergence of Omicron, Sage scientists predicted it would take “at least five years” for Covid-19 to settle into an endemic state and that this path would be critically dependent on factors such as the rate of waning of immunity and chosen policies on vaccination and surveillance. Active management would be required for at least the next five years, during which time there would remain a realistic risk of “epidemics of sufficient size to overwhelm health and care services”, they said. While five years may sound disappointingly distant, the advice also reminds us that we are not powerless in steering our course and that, as time goes on, the uncertainties will decrease. We know now, for instance, that immunity against severe illness appears to be holding up well and that second boosters will not be immediately necessary. Within the next few months, it will become clear whether we can hold off until the autumn, which would bring Covid boosters roughly in line with annual flu jabs. “Living with Covid” does not have to mean reversing every protective measure. If better ventilation and face masks reduce the impact of winter respiratory illnesses, that is a positive, even if the NHS is no longer under imminent threat of being overwhelmed. We will also need to remain vigilant about the threat from new variants, which could still cause big setbacks. There is no guarantee that another variant, more infectious and more virulent than Omicron, could emerge in the future. Scientists say that supporting global vaccination efforts will be crucial to securing the path to normality.Arsenal’s manager, Jonas Eidevall, conceded that the shock 2-0 defeat of the Women’s Super League leaders at Birmingham City, who began the day rooted to the bottom of the table, was “100% my responsibility”. Libby Smith scored her first WSL goal in the third minute to give the hosts the lead and Veatriki Sarri added a second before the break to complete the win in which Arsenal always looked second best. “There were a number of occasions during the game when we lost the ball at the wrong times and didn’t have a good structure around the ball which meant the counter attacks hurt us,” said the Swedish manager. “We didn’t play well enough under their pressure, and we didn’t break their low block down well enough, so very disappointed with our performance today.” Arsenal had been unbeaten in the league while the Blues were without a win. However, with the former Birmingham player Darren Carter in place as interim manager following the dismissal of Scott Booth in November, Birmingham look a far more organised and potent force. “We weren’t naive enough to think we were going to dominate the ball or territory in the game,” explained Carter. “We knew out of possession we’d have to be good in our structure and shape and the players executed that so so well. We’re asking them to put in a lot of hard work and we asked them to empty the tank. We knew we had finishers on the bench ready to come on but I didn’t make a sub until the 90th minute because they gave us everything.” Lucy Quinn’s pass to release Smith early on caught out Arsenal’s defence and she slotted coolly past Manuela Zinsberger in goal. Sarri delivered the hammer blow to the Gunners’ hopes of getting back into the game three minutes before half-time, finishing a move she had begun and firing in after Jen Beattie failed to clear and Frida Maanum failed to track her run. Having conceded 10 goals in 19 games in all competitions up to December, Arsenal have since conceded 13 in five and the team’s defensive woes and organisational incoherence look far from over. With Chelsea’s home game against Tottenham – alongside West Ham’s match with Manchester United and Aston Villa’s with Everton – postponed due to Covid outbreaks, Arsenal maintain a four-point lead over Emma Hayes’ side but have played a game more. Birmingham, meanwhile, have a one-point lead over Leicester at the other end of the table following the Foxes’ 1-0 defeat by Reading.A trove of 209 Roman coins in a cave in northern Spain – hailed by researchers as an “exceptional find” – is believed to have been uncovered by a badger desperately foraging for food. The coins, dating from between the third and fifth century AD, were spotted in a cave in the municipality of Grado in the northern region of Asturias. They were found mere feet from the den of a badger, months after Storm Filomena dumped heavy snow across swaths of the country. Researchers believe that the snow forced the badger to step up its foraging efforts, leaving it prodding at a small crack near its den in hopes of uncovering berries or worms. Instead it appears that the animal hit on a stockpile of worn Roman coins, forged in places as far away as Constantinople and Thessaloniki, archaeologist Alfonso Fanjul Peraza told El País newspaper. Most of the coins are made of copper and bronze and the largest, weighing more than eight grams and containing 4% silver, is believed to have been forged in London. “To date, this is the largest treasure trove of Roman coins found in a cave in northern Spain,” the researchers said in a recently published report. It is not the first time archaeologists have uncovered treasure in the dense woodlands of Grado; about 85 years ago, 14 gold coins dating to the reign of Constantine were found in the area. “The accumulation of significant finds could – with caution – be seen as a response to the intense conflict experienced in the border territory,” said Fanjul. The Romans conquered the Iberian peninsula in 218BC, ruling until they were ousted by the Visigoths in the early fifth century. Researchers have speculated that the latest trove of coins were likely part of a larger haul that was hastily hidden in hopes of keeping them safe amid political and social instability. The find marks the first phase of the project, and researchers hope to return to the area for further excavations, Fanjul told reporters earlier this year. “We want to know if it was a one-off hiding place or if there was a group of humans living there.”Furniture retailer Ikea has cut sick pay for unvaccinated UK staff who are forced to self-isolate because of close contact with someone with Covid-19, it has emerged. Unvaccinated workers at Ikea are only eligible for statutory sick pay of £96.35 a week during 10 days of isolation, compared with weekly pay of more than £400 before tax for an average worker on the shop floor. However, managers at the retailer, which employs 10,000 staff in the UK, will consider mitigating circumstances. Some employers have experimented with incentives for workers to get vaccinated, including free time off during work hours, but Ikea and utility company Wessex Water, have joined supermarket Morrisons in imposing a financial cost on those without an exemption who decline to be vaccinated. People in England who are fully vaccinated – with at least two doses of most of the approved vaccines – are not required to self-isolate if they have been in close contact with someone infected with Covid-19. However, unvaccinated people contacted through the government’s test-and-trace system must still self-isolate by law. Other nations of the UK have set similar rules. Ikea’s policy was first introduced in September, while Wessex Water will implement the cut on Monday. The Mail on Sunday first reported the policies. Wessex Water, which serves 2.8 million customers in the South West of England, has taken action after enduring record Covid-19-related absences during the past week. Workers self-isolating because they are infected with Covid-19 will still be paid their full wage. An Ikea spokesperson said: “We appreciate that this is an emotive topic and all circumstances will be considered on a case-by-case basis. Therefore, anyone in doubt or concerned about their situation is encouraged to speak to their manager.” A Wessex Water spokesperson said: “The vast majority of our workforce has been vaccinated and it’s important as a company providing essential services with key-worker employees [that] the remainder get vaccinated to protect themselves, customers and their colleagues. To make it easy for our staff, vaccine appointments can be booked in work time. “Absences due to Covid have doubled in the last week, so we need everyone to be available so we can continue to provide uninterrupted essential water and sewerage services.” Wessex Water said that throughout the pandemic it had not furloughed staff, and anyone who had to self-isolate after contracting Covid received full pay. In some countries, including the US, companies have insisted that staff receive coronavirus vaccines or else pay monthly fees, in the case of Delta Air Lines, or even lose their jobs at employers such as United Airlines, tech company Google and Citigroup, one of the world’s largest banks. French president Emmanuel Macron has also pledged to “piss off” unvaccinated people (who are not exempt) by making daily life slightly more difficult for them. Employment experts have suggested that “no jab, no job” policies would be difficult for companies in the UK to enforce because of stronger worker protections and rules against discrimination. However, UK care workers have been obliged to be vaccinated since November.Four years ago, a defeat at the City Ground put paid to Arsène Wenger’s unblemished record in the FA Cup third round. Nobody seriously expected Mikel Arteta to put a 21-year streak together but Nottingham Forest ensured he has also now lost his first game at this stage. The frustration for Arsenal’s manager will be that this defeat was entirely deserved, because the Championship side were simply brighter, bolder and, it often seemed, hungrier. Their winner, scored by the substitute Lewis Grabban seven minutes from time, did not come as a huge surprise and Arsenal departed without registering a shot on target. Grabban’s goal was dispatched expertly, in the familiar style of a 33-year-old who has made a career of coming alive in the box, and the move that brought it encapsulated most of what had come before. When Ryan Yates intercepted Albert Sambi Lokonga’s sloppy pass in midfield and, via a pass from Brennan Johnson, was sent away down the right it was far from the first time Arsenal had been exposed down that side. Forest had enjoyed themselves there all night and, when Yates crossed perfectly for the stretching Grabban, that translated into unconfined delight. A mini pitch invasion ensued and Steve Cooper’s hosts, who look a sight better than ninth in the second tier, can anticipate a derby with Leicester next month. Arsenal’s players had cut striking figures in a one-off, whited-out kit designed to highlight their “No More Red” anti-knife crime initiative. It was a crisp look but they struggled throughout for precision against opponents who, in lining up strongly, clearly felt this tie could do their play-off hopes little harm. Forest were brisk and snappy, urged on by a crowd that clearly fancied the occasion, and looked far more willing than their visitors to go through the gears. Nuno Tavares, one of seven injury, Covid and Africa Cup of Nations-enforced changes to the Arsenal side that ran Manchester City close last Saturday, threatened to increase the prospects of another upset early on with a bizarre intervention as proceedings continued to fizz. His right-footed backpass towards Bernd Leno was wildly overhit and aimed at chest height, forcing the keeper to concede a corner awkwardly. Arteta had been able to select a familiar attacking midfield trio of Bukayo Saka, Martin Ødegaard and Gabriel Martinelli but there was more of a scratch feel elsewhere. Charlie Patino, the gifted 18-year-old whose debut in the Carabao Cup last month brought a goal against Sunderland, was given his first start in midfield alongside Lokonga. Sliding into a sharp challenge inside 40 seconds, Patino quickly showed some understanding that steel would be required alongside grace but not all of his colleagues cottoned on. Forest forced the tempo through Djed Spence, a rangy wing-back who restricted Martinelli on the Arsenal left while frequently exposing Tavares, and the speed of Johnson. Philip Zinckernagel probed around them, standing up a delicate cross from the byline that begged to be attacked, but for all their bright work Forest had not managed a shot of note by half-time. Not that Arsenal achieved significantly more. Saka and Lokonga both saw efforts deflected off target, the latter strike causing Brice Samba brief concern in Forest’s goal, but an agitated Arteta did not look happy. He made that obvious in replacing the struggling Tavares, who was not injured, with Kieran Tierney in the 35th minute. Tavares needs to seize chances like this one and knew it, judging by a frustrated reaction before he sat down. Inspiration had come second to perspiration at both ends. Spence attempted to reverse that within a minute of the restart but sliced a cross-shot behind. It was another strong start from Forest, Zinckernagel sparking plaintive shouts for a penalty after falling in the box, although Eddie Nketiah saw Steve Cook block his shot as Arsenal countered and had his ears warmed by a well-positioned Saka. The game’s first shot on target came within a whisker of producing its opening goal. Zinckernagel took it, forcing Leno to react smartly after connecting from 12 yards out, but the chance owed everything to the highly rated Johnson. He flipped the ball over his own head on halfway and showed Rob Holding a clean pair of heels before centring accurately for his teammate. It was an electric piece of initiative but, moments later, Arsenal should have rendered it a distant memory. Nketiah had the goal at his mercy when found unmarked by Saka just before the hour but got his header all wrong, sending it away from goal. Although a bit-part player nowadays, Nketiah usually dispatches such openings with no fuss and Forest had received a major let-off. For the first time, a goal for either side did not seem a tall order. James Garner drew a parry from Leno with a meaty free-kick from 30 yards before Nketiah blazed over from an angle. He was joined up front by Alexandre Lacazette who replaced the neat but quiet Patino as Arteta sought to avert the spectre of extra time. It was another replacement striker, though, who struck the decisive blow and gave Arteta his wish in a way he will find hard to stomach.And here’s our report from the City Ground on a brilliant night for Nottingham Forest. Thanks for reading! A word for Djed Spence, who was sensationally good today – alert, aggressive, decisive and composed on the ball – and will surely be awarded man of the match. He’s on loan from Middlesbrough until the end of the season, and Forest had better hope there aren’t many Premier League clubs on the lookout for a right-back this month. It will! Samba hoofs clear, Grabban charges down a clearance and that’s the final whistle. Arsenal are out, swatted aside by Forest – again – who absolutely deserve their win. They were better organised, better motivated, better to watch and can look forward to playing the holders in the next round. Bravo! 93 mins: … and Tierney is penalised for a foul throw. Will that be Arsenal’s last attack? 91 mins: Tierney’s long throw is headed away and booted clear by Spence, who hacks away again when the next attack arrives. 90 mins: Three minutes of stoppage time. For reasons unknown, Arsenal send on Kolasinac. 89 mins: Saka shuffles forward and send a cross into the Forest box. Worroll hoofs clear, the ball going into the clouds and then all the way back to Leno. 88 mins: Forest’s subs link up well, Cafu spinning brilliantly from the centre-forward position and feeding Grabban, who looks to shape a shot inside the far post but just doesn’t catch it right. 86 mins: Spence wins a throw high up the pitch with little more than effort and endeavour, chasing a lost cause and causing Tierney to panic. He’s been sensational today. Forest go ahead, and Lokonga is at fault for Arsenal, needlessly giving surrendering possession in midfield with a lazy attempted dink. Johnson pounces and lays off to Yates on the right, whose curled cross is absolutely inch perfect – taking out the entire Arsenal backline – and turned home by a lunging Grabban. 78 mins: Spence gets himself a yellow card of his own with a late hack on Tierney. Then White picks out the onrushing Saka, who declines to lob a backpedalling keeper and instead squares to Lacazette, who is just eased away from the ball by an alert Worroll, preventing a tap-in. Great defending 74 mins: More excellence from Spence: this time he marauds forward down the right, shaking off two challenges, and is eventually taken out by a cynical lunge from the frustrated Martinelli, who’s rightly booked. Speaking of marauding right-backs, Cafu comes on for Zinckernagel. 73 mins: Odegaard spins in the centre circle, scuttles forward and eventually draws a foul. He is the only Arsenal player with a sense of urgency about him. Cedric wafts the resulting free-kick striaght out of play. 71 mins: Ben White carries the ball forward and looks up to see all his teammates stood still. He turns around and passes to Tierney. 68 mins: And Arsenal respond with a change of their own, Lacazette coming on for Patino, who’s not affected the game at all. 67 mins: That Davis’s last contribution - Grabban comes on to replace him. And then a flash of danger from Nketiah, who darts past his marker inside the box but slices a left-foot strike wide of the near post. 65 mins: Forest have come alive again, Colback making a great interception and sending it forward to Davis, who makes headway down the left but isn’t decisive enough once he reaches the box. Eventually the pass goes backwards and the attack fizzles out. 63 mins: And that free-kick led to a big penalty claim for Forest after Colback, chasing the ball from the rebound, was bundled over from behind by Saka. It looked a foul. 61 mins: Forest win a free-kick 25 yards out when Martinelli barges into Yates – the archetypal “striker’s challenge”. Garner goes for goal, striking the ball beautifully, with real band, and Leno leaps across his goal to palm away at full stretch. 58 mins: Huge miss from Nketiah. Saka cuts in from the right, drops a shoulder and drifts a lovely cross into the back post, where the striker has peeled away from his marker with a great bit of movement. But five yards out, he misjudges the header badly and the ball skews back across the face of goal before bobbling out of play. 55 mins: Forest made inroads into the Arsenal box again. This time Colback strides forward from left-back and looks to play a clever one-two with Davis, but the striker’s return ball is just overhit and runs out for a goal kick. The home fans have woken up. 52 mins: Forest put forward the best attack of the game when Johnson picks up the ball with his back to goal, spins, and steams down the right flank, outpacing Holding on the way. At full pelt, he hits a cross to Zinckernagel, whose first-time volleyed shot is repelled by Leno at his near post. Brilliant counter. 49 mins: Tierney challenges Spence to a footrace, knocking the ball into space past the Forest man, but Spence is more than up for it, eating up the ground and easing the ball to a teammate after snuffing out the danger. The man of the match so far. 46 mins: And we’re back under way. Worrall looks to release Johnson down the Forest right. It comes to nothing but the hosts make their way forward again,Davis their focal point, and claim a penalty when Johnson falls over after some ball-jugging in the box – no dice. Alex Animashaun writes: “I count 5 attackers for Arsenal, how about a word on formation? Where’s Patino playing haven’t heard a pipsqueak about him.” Well, Patino hasn’t done much wrong but hasn’t done a lot right, either: he’s barely touched the ball – in fact he’s made fewer passes than the Forest keeper (and fewer than any of his teammates bar Nketiah), not a stat you want to your name as a central midfielder. As for formation, it looks like Patino is playing in the middle alongside Odegaard, with Saka advanced on the right, Martinelli on the left and Nketiah the central striker. Not a lot to separate the sides at the halfway mark, with Arsenal enjoying more of the ball but yet to open up a well-organised Forest defence. The hosts’ early exuberance has dissipated but they look a threat on the break. Stay tuned! 44 mins: Forest waste a good chance to getat the Arsenal back four after David steals forward down the left and lays off to Yates. The midfielder looks right, but his ball to Johnson is well behind the wide man and trickles out of play. 42 mins: Arsenal are starting to properly assert themselves now, with Forest’s meaningful ventures into the visitors’ half becoming ever rarer. Holding seems to be the defender tasked with carrying the ball out, but his distribution has been erratic so far. Meanwhile, Nketiah falls over while closing down Samba and takes the keeper clean out. 39 mins: Holding spots Martinelli scurrying free on the left, send it over the top, and from the byline the Brazilian picks out Tierney, who lays off the Holding on the edge of the box. The defender’s shot is blocked, and the ball rebounds improbably to Davis, who launches a counter of his own. But he’s all alone, surrounded by white shirts, and White steps across to dispossess. 37 mins: Arsenal spend a couple of minutes pegging Forest into their own half, though without creating anything clearcut. Eventually Saka cuts in from the right and floats one into the chest of Nketiah, who’s crowded out in the box. 35 mins: Some correspondence coming in about Arsenal’s all-white shirt - it’s a one-off kit being worn as part of the club’s ‘No more red’ campaign against knife crime in London. Meanwhile, Tierney comes on for Tavares, who doesn’t look injured … and throws the mildest of tantrums on his way to the bench. Eeek. 31 mins: More alert defending from Spence, who snaps into an interception at the feet of Martinelli. Arsenal regorup and put together an attack down the centre of the pitch, culminating in a Lokonga drive which flies wide off McKenna left buttock. 30 mins: Nketiah engineers a yard of space 20 yards out an unleashes a left-foot snapshot. It goes wide, via the tow of a defender. Corner, cleared. JR writes: “Any neutrals looking for a rooting interest need look no further than the end of the players’ arms. I count five begloved Arsenal players and zero Forest players. (I didn’t include the goalkeepers. They can wear gloves.)” 27 mins: Tavares burrows down the left and crosses into the box for McKenna to head clear. The ball falls on the edge of the box to Rob Holding, who sees a moment of glory beckoning – and why not! His volley goes out for a throw. 23 mins: Spence v Martinelli is going the way of the Forest player so far, the full-back shrugging his opponents off the ball in a very useful bit of defending. He sends it back to Samba who sprays a gloriously languid ball out to Colback on the left flank. Samba football. 22 mins: Davis holds up well, laying off to Garner to spark another impressive period of sustained possession from Forest … who react to losing the ball by wining it straight back from Tavares. the hosts are hitting their stride now – though you suspect they might have to score during spells like this one. 19 mins: Garner hits a sublime pass – volleyed, shoulder-height, perfectly flat – out to Johnson, who is buccaneering down the right. He cuts inside and his floated left-foot cross is half-cleared but Forest recover possession and put together some very tidy build-up play on the edge of the box. The opening never presents itself, and Forest don’t force it. They eventually get a throw. 17 mins: Holding saunters forward, as far as the Forest box, then zips the ball into teh feet of Martinelli - playing wide left today - whose cross is deflected out for a corner. It goes short to Odegaard, whose drifted cross is well claimed by Samba. 14 mins: It’s a first real touch for Davis, who spins his marker nicely and looks to feed Zinckernagel on the left but gets a simple pass wrong. 11 mins: Great stuff from Spence, who scuttles inside to snuff out an Arsenal attack before galloping up the left flank with purpose, nutmegging Cedric and winning a free-kick in the process. Seconds later Tavares, with all the time in the world, wellies a chest-high backpass at Leno, who can only clear behind for a corner. Are Arsenal looking nervy? 10 mins: Holding lofts forward out Martinelli, who controls ingeniously with his head but is pounced on by his marker. Forest threaten to break, with Davis in full sprint, but Holding steps across to cover as the last man. That got the fans out of their seats though. 7 mins: The first sight of goal from either side falls to a players who doesn’t get many of them. Ben White scuffs wide with his left foot after a half-cleared set piece falls to him on the edge of the box. Back he trots to centre-back, looking suitably sheepish. 5 mins: Spence will have a tricky task tonight in keeping the in-form Martinelli quiet. The Brazilian wastes no time in hounding down the full-back to win his side a throw. 3 mins: Not a huge amount of rhythm from either side so far but Forest get some early joy of sort from their full-backs, Colback neat and tidy in possession while Spence gallops forward to get on the end of a raking ball from Worrall … and miscontrols. 1 min: And we’re off. Forest kick off but give away early with an aimless ball forward. Arsenal gather possession and try to make headway down the left but it’s a cul-de-sac. The teams are out and the Forest XI gather for a quick mass gee-up before kickoff. The decibel level inside the City Ground is high. Patino is Arsenal’s much-hyped young attacker who makes his full debut today having scored on his only other outing, off the bench against Sunderland last month. All eyes on him today, though he’ll be up against a hugely capable a canny midfielder in Ryan Yates. Charles Antaki writes, brimming with hope and optimism: “Arsenal fans are understandably keen to see academy youngster Charlie Patino starting, but we also face a dilemma: if he’s great, then he sets up wholly unsustainable expectations which will ultimately lead to disappointment and chagrin; on the other hand if he’s terrible it will also lead to disappointment and chagrin, only much more quickly.”That’s the spirit Charles! Nottingham Forest: Samba, Spence, Worrall, McKenna, Cook, Garner, Colback, Johnson, Zinckernagel, Yates, Davis. Subs: Horvath, Tobias Figueiredo, Grabban, Joao Carvalho, Bong, Cafu, Xande Silva, Ojeda, Taylor. Arsenal: Leno, Cedric, White, Holding, Tavares, Sambi Lokonga, Patino, Saka, Odegaard, Martinelli, Nketiah. Subs: Biereth, Hutchinson, Tierney, Lacazette, Chambers, Pablo Mari, Kolasinac, Ramsdale, Oulad M’hand. Referee: Craig Pawson (South Yorkshire) It’s been an odd season-so-far for Arsenal, who have displayed all their quintessential signs of dysfunction and hardship – early defeat to bustling newly promoted side; tonkings by Chelsea, Man City and Liverpool; axing a grumpy captain – while simultaneously giving the impression of a team that has got its act together and should be taken seriously. The thrilling youngsters and intricate football may be well-worn Arsenal hallmarks, but not the no-frills defensive competence on display of late, and certainly not the big-game defiance witnessed last weekend. Then again, perhaps it’s easy to impress the punters in a game everyone expects you to lose. The really hard games are the ones against unfancied opponents – especially when they’re fired up, in front of their baying fans, under the floodlights. But then, Arsenal need little reminding of that. Speaking of which, Nottingham Forest have been flying high under the revitalising management of Steve Cooper, who has transformed the side’s fortunes since taking over from Chris Hughton in over in September. Though their two-month unbeaten run recently gave way to successive defeats, to Middlesbrough and Huddersfield, in which they failed to trouble the scoresheet, their promotion hopes remain alive and well, driven in large part fired by two academy products, Ryan Yates and Joe Worrall, whose consistently classy displays have been noted by a number of Premier League scouts. The avuncular Cooper has only been in the job fourth months but has made his presence firmly felt, upping the intensity in training, transforming the team’s playing style and bringing in Jack Colback from the cold. His nascent Forest side hit their apex with a 4-1 shellacking of Swansea just before Christmas, a performance that gave every impression of a team that would look right at home in the top tier. It’s fair to say today’s test will be rather more rigorous. Are they up to it?So Leicester are beatable after all. Few would have predicted that an injury-ravaged Wasps would be the team to end the sequence but, at the 16th time of asking in all competitions, the rampant Tigers have finally been tamed. It was a deserved outcome, too, for a Wasps side who lacked 16 frontline players and had to display serious character to weather a concerted late siege on their own line. While one result does not entirely level the Midlands playing field – Leicester remain eight points ahead at the top – it will do wonders for Wasps’ self-image after a horrendous run of luck that has deprived them of many of their biggest names. On this occasion, though, they steadfastly refused to bow to the seemingly inevitable in the final quarter after three second-half penalties from Jimmy Gopperth had put them ahead with 11 minutes of an absorbing contest remaining. The Tigers have made a habit of edging close games this season but had no answer this time to Wasps’ never-say-die resilience characterised by the man of the match, Alfie Barbeary, and the replacement front-rowers Dan Frost, Zac Nearchou and Biyi Alo. Barbeary was a man possessed during the frantic finale, while Frost produced the all-important turnover in the shadow of his own posts after Leicester had closed to within one further collapsed scrum of a decisive penalty try. Wasps’ director of rugby, Lee Blackett, called it “as good a win as we have had this season” and could barely contain his emotional pride afterwards. “To be under that much pressure and to come away with a win is really special. It was gritty, we had to scrap and we had to fight.” Leicester’s fly-half George Ford, meanwhile, declined to grasp for excuses. “I don’t think we played anywhere near what we could but it just shows the Premiership is such a tough competition. If you’re not quite on it on the day, you’re going to lose.” His head coach, Steve Borthwick, acknowledged Wasps’ third-quarter impetus had been crucial in transforming a contest that, until then, had seemed likely to yield a club record‑equalling 16th successive Leicester win. He also diplomatically swerved an incident shortly before half‑time when Leicester’s frustrated captain, Ellis Genge, lashed out at Francois Hougaard’s face and yanked the South African’s hair. The England prop, on his 100th Leicester appearance and watched by three of England’s assistant coaches, was shown a yellow card but will be hoping the citing officer does not take an interest with the Six Nations starting in less than four weeks’ time. On this evidence, either way, there is very little wrong with Wasps’ spirit, despite weekend reports suggesting three of their Kiwi mainstays – Vaea Fifita, Malakai Fekitoa and potentially Gopperth – will be leaving this summer. They clearly felt this was a day to make a statement about the perceived Midlands pecking order, despite losing Fifita and Tom West on the eve of the game through illness which necessitated a further pack reshuffle. The Tigers should have been licking their lips, but Wasps had a penalty try on the board inside four minutes when Tommy Reffell was also sent to the sin-bin for taking out Elliott Stooke close to the line. Leicester were also frustrated when a potential try for Jack van Poortvliet, following some neat approach work from Harry Potter and a weak tackle by Hougaard, was ruled out for obstruction. Ford, though, kept his side in touch with a couple of penalties and a timely ruck turnover courtesy of the evergreen Dan Cole kept the visitors’ line intact when Wasps seemed certain to score. Up the other end marched the Tigers and, seven minutes before the interval, the Argentina hooker Julián Montoya managed to satisfy the referee, Tom Foley, that he had grounded the ball beneath a heap of bodies. Having conceded 11 penalties in the first half alone, Wasps were also initially guilty of turning the ball over too often, nullifying the bulldozing efforts of the exuberant Barbeary. The latter has been encouraged to switch from hooker to No 8 by Eddie Jones but wore 6 here, as if to emphasise that his obvious ball-in-hand strength makes numbers irrelevant. The 38-year-old Gopperth, ironically wanted by Leicester, was another key figure, expertly hammering in the nails with three well-struck second-half penalties to hoist Wasps up to eighth and lift the prevailing mood. The club’s aggregate year-end financial losses since moving to Coventry are now almost £50m but, when it comes to boosting collective morale, days such as this are absolutely priceless.It was two and a half years later than planned but few in Yaoundé would be bothered by that. The hosts, Cameroon, suffered an early setback but, thanks to two penalties from their captain, Vincent Aboubakar, they preserved an unbeaten home record in competitive games that stretches back to 1973 and began their Cup of Nations campaign with a win, 2-1 against Burkina Faso. It was not just the result that should encourage Cameroon’s Portuguese coach, Toni Conceição. Aboubakar, who volleyed the winner in the final five years ago when Cameroon won their fifth title, looked lively throughout. André-Frank Zambo Anguissa controlled the tempo from the back of midfield. And, other than the misjudgment that cost the goal, André Onana impressed in goal in only his fifth game since returning after a drugs ban (in which he seems to have been unfortunate, mistaking a diuretic that had been prescribed to his wife for paracetamol), making a superb reflex block early in the second half. If there was relief about Cameroon’s comeback, there was relief also that the game was taking place at all, and that it was able to do so in front of relatively well-populated stands. A repeated issue in recent Cups of Nations has been almost empty stadiums for games not involving the hosts. There are numerous reasons for that, from high ticket prices to inaccessible stadiums, but the most significant tends to be the lack of a match-going culture. Football, for many, is a sport consumed on television and experience suggests that fans who are used to watching the Premier League or the Champions League at home or in a local bar tend not to change their habits just because Ethiopia are playing Cape Verde a couple of miles down the road. But Cameroon does have a match-going culture, and crowds there were excellent both for the Africa Women’s Cup of Nations in 2016 and the African Nations Championship, the tournament for domestically based players, in 2020. Covid restrictions mean that capacity is restricted to 80% for games featuring Cameroon and 60% for all other matches, but the atmosphere for Sunday’s opener was vibrant. There is a clear sense of pride that Cameroon is at last hosting the Cup of Nations again. It is 50 years since it last staged the tournament, when Congo, having beaten the hosts in the semi-final, overcame Mali in the final. This is a very different competition: then it comprised just eight teams and only six players were at European clubs (five in France plus Zaire’s Julien Kialunda at Anderlecht). Now there are 24 finalists and 404 players based at European clubs plus others in the US, China, South Korea, India, Qatar and Saudi Arabia. Africa has become a great exporter of talent, which brings both benefits, in that many are playing at the highest level and even those who are not are experiencing a range of styles and environments, and challenges, not least in trying to schedule the tournament. And for all the grumbling from European clubs about their players heading to Cameroon, it is worth bearing in mind that the vast majority do come, which has not always been the case. The expanded group stage may feel bloated with six groups of four filtering to a last 16, but, as with the Euros, that is more a question of format than of quality. There may be frustration that still no African side has got beyond the quarter-finals of the World Cup (in 1972, only two African nations had competed at a World Cup, and it would be 1978 before one won a game) but, while development may have stalled at the top end, there has been progress in the middle class. That includes Burkina Faso, runners-up in the 2013 Cup of Nations. They were a little unfortunate to miss out on March’s qualifying play-offs for the World Cup, finishing their group unbeaten but two points behind Algeria, the reigning African champions, but this is a bright young squad that has every chance of reaching the 2026 World Cup, the expansion of which means there will be nine African qualifiers. Here, despite fanciful talk of Kamou Malo’s bold 2-4-3-1 system (ie, 4-2-3-1 with spasmodically attacking full-backs), Burkina Faso largely sat deep, looked to absorb pressure and strike on the break. They had probably been the more dangerous side when Gustavo Sangaré capitalised on an Onana misjudgement to put them ahead with an airborne volley. But two wild challenges in the box, the first by Aston Villa’s Bertrand Traoré, the second by Issoufou Dayo, gifted Cameroon a pair of penalties before half-time, both of which were converted by Aboubakar. That eased home nerves and Cameroon can already begin looking forward to the last 16. Burkina Faso, meanwhile, showed enough to suggest that they should also progress to the knockout stages.Lawyers for Australia’s Department of Home Affairs have insisted Novak Djokovic was never given any assurances his medical exemption would allow him to enter Australia. While also confirming that the world No 1 is unvaccinated, the legal team from the Australian government said ahead of Monday’s appeal hearing that there is no valid reason for Djokovic to be granted access to Australia for the tournament which begins on 17 January. Djokovic saw his visa cancelled after arriving in Melbourne last week, and his lawyers have submitted a lengthy document arguing the 34-year-old fulfilled the criteria for a vaccine exemption certificate because of a recent Covid infection. However, a court filing on Sunday read: “There is no suggestion that the applicant had ‘acute major medical illness’ in December 2021. All he has said is that he tested positive for COVID-19. This is not the same,” adding there was “no such thing as an assurance of entry by a non-citizen into Australia”. It also said that “it is common ground” between the two parties that “the applicant is unvaccinated”. Sunday’sdevelopment came after a bid by the Australian government to delay Monday’s visa hearing by two days had been rejected by the federal circuit court. In an order, published on Sunday, judge Anthony Kelly rejected the move which would have delayed the hearing until Wednesday – after Tennis Australia’s stated deadline to include the Serb, nine times the men’s singles champion, in the Australian Open draw. Legal experts have warned even with the hearing proceeding on Monday, there is no guarantee Djokovic could secure a court order restoring his visa in time to play, and he could also face his visa being revoked again on fresh grounds. The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, applied to the court for the case to be delayed but the judge rejected that in an order made on Saturday – although he left open the option of the government trying again after Djokovic’s opening submissions at 10am on Monday. If the current timetable remains in place, the government’s lawyers will present oral submissions on Monday afternoon. Meanwhile the former world No 1 Andy Murray, who is set to compete in Melbourne, said the saga around Djokovic and his being barred entry to Australia was “really not good for tennis”. Murray, a long-time friend and rival of the Serb, said: “I think everyone is shocked by it, to be honest. I hope that Novak is OK. I know him well, and I’ve always had a good relationship with him and I hope that he’s OK. It’s really not good for tennis at all, and I don’t think it’s good for anyone involved.” The court heard on Thursday that Tennis Australia had said it would need to know whether Djokovic could compete by Tuesday for scheduling purposes. Kelly said at that time he would try to accommodate the parties to come to a resolution but stressed the court would not be rushed. “The tail won’t be wagging the dog here,” he said. The Australian government on Sunday confirmed that the Czech doubles specialist Renata Voracova and a tennis official, both of whom travelled to attend the Australian Open, had left the country voluntarily after their visas were cancelled. The health minister, Greg Hunt, told reporters border force had now finished its investigation into Australian Open visas. He would not comment on Djokovic’s case because that matter was before the court. “Two other individuals have now voluntarily left the country … any individual who has their visa cancelled is entitled to leave the country at any time, even while they are going through a court proceeding, but that is a matter for them,” Hunt said. Djokovic obtained a medical exemption to compete in the Australian Open but then fell foul of Australian border rules – which require arrivals to be fully vaccinated unless they can prove a valid exemption. He is currently in immigration detention at the Park hotel in Melbourne. Djokovic’s court challenge seeks to argue that errors in the notice of intention to cancel his visa and in the home affairs minister’s delegate’s decision mean the visa must be reinstated. Refugee lawyer and the founder of Human Rights for All, Alison Battisson, said if Djokovic won on Monday the government should respect the court’s decision rather than “seek to wriggle around by finding another way to cancel his visa”. “What we do know, however, with our dealings with the department of home affairs is that is often not the case,” she warned, citing three instances she had won in the federal court only for the minister to find a fresh reason to cancel a visa. Battisson suggested it would be “extraordinary” if the court decided the case in time for the Australian Open deadline as it was hearing “a visa issue not a playing tennis issue” and other urgent cases took weeks – at a minimum – to be resolved. Battisson argued Djokovic was experiencing the “draconian” way Australia runs immigration appeals which were “stacked against” the applicant in detention without access to documents. Former immigration department deputy secretary, Abul Rizvi, said he would be “surprised” if the government cancelled Djokovic’s visa again in the event the world No 1 succeeded on Monday. “They’d have to find another reason or it would be contemptuous of court,” he said. Rizvi said it was “possible” Djokovic might not have a result by the deadline but “his lawyers will argue that he can’t be left in detention while the judge cogitates on it”. A spokesman for Andrews told Guardian Australia: “As the matter is before the court, it is not appropriate to comment at this time.”15 May 2020 Sources told the Guardian there was a “wine and pizza” party in the Downing Street garden and inside No 10 during the first lockdown when socialising was banned. It is understood to have taken place after a press conference, and was described as having had a celebratory feel with drinking late into the evening. After No 10 denied this, a photograph was obtained by the Guardian showing Boris Johnson, his wife and two officials at a table with wine and cheese, with another 15 officials in the rest of the garden with wine bottles visible. No 10 says Johnson had been having a work meeting and went up to his flat with his family just after 7pm that evening. 20 May 2020 Dominic Cummings lifted the lid on a May gathering in the Downing Street garden, with invites to a “social distanced drinks”, which is believed to have been organised by the civil servant Martin Reynolds. No 10 has not denied that Johnson and his wife attended, with reports of food on tables and drinking. Restrictions on social mixing were still in place at this point. 13 November – Boris and Carrie Johnson flat party This is the date that Johnson’s chief adviser, Cummings, and communications director, Lee Cain, left their roles. Sources have reported loud music and sounds of a party coming from the flat occupied by Johnson and his wife on this date. Cummings has alleged there had been “other flat parties” and suggested the pair’s “bubble” policy should be investigated. Asked if a party went ahead in his flat on 13 November, Johnson said: “No.” 27 November – Downing Street leaving do While England was still in the grip of its second national lockdown, a leaving do was organised in No 10 – said to have been for Cleo Watson, a former aide to Cummings. A source told the Guardian that Johnson had personally attended and given a speech, remarking on how full with people the room was, before leaving to continue working. 10 December – Gavin Williamson’s staff party When London was in tier 2, which only allowed socialising in groups of six outside, the then education secretary, Gavin Williamson, threw a party in his Whitehall department. The most senior civil servant in the department, Susan Acland-Hood, attended and admitted that there had been a “work-related” gathering hosted in the canteen. She did not dispute people had been drinking wine, and appeared to blame Williamson for instigating the event. She recalled he had wanted to “say a few words” to thank staff after a difficult year. 17 December A quiz was held for members of the private office of Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, who was originally meant to be investigating the reports of parties in No 10. Invitations were sent out titled “Christmas Party!” and about 15 people were thought to be in attendance over Zoom. Responding to the claims, a government spokesperson said it was a virtual quiz with a small number of people from the office taking part from their desks. “The cabinet secretary played no part in the event, but walked through the team’s office on the way to his own office. No outside guests or other staff were invited or present. This lasted for an hour and drinks and snacks were bought by those attending. He also spoke briefly to staff in the office before leaving.” 18 December 2020 – Downing Street Christmas party A party was held in No 10 when London was in tier 3 restrictions, which banned social events, according to multiple sources after the Daily Mirror first broke the story. Several dozen people – a mix of civil servants and political staff – reportedly attended and were told to bring “secret Santa” presents, with cheese and wine laid on. While Johnson’s spokesperson insisted no rules had been broken and then denied any party took place, a video filmed four days after the event was published by ITV. The leaked footage showed Allegra Stratton, the prime minister’s then aide, rehearsing for televised press conferences and laughing and joking with aides about a party on 18 December. Stratton all but confirmed the event had taken place by laughing it off as a “business meeting” but added: “It was not socially distanced.” 15 December 2020 – a festive No 10 quiz A Christmas quiz was also organised for No 10 staff, with invitations emailed to everyone who worked in the building. Some guests were said to have dialled in by Zoom but others apparently attended in person and sat in groups of six, some wearing Christmas jumpers. A photograph later emerged in the Mirror of the prime minister taking part. 25 December 2020 – Christmas Day socialising The prime minister’s “bubble” has come under scrutiny before, after his spokesperson did not deny that Nimco Ali, a close friend of Carrie Johnson, stayed with them over Christmas. One of the explanations offered was that Ali was considered part of the Johnsons’ childcare bubble. However, under the rules, the arrangement was meant to be purely for a second household to look after children, with the adults not meant to be socialising.Good morning. A bid to delay Novak Djokovic’s visa hearing has been rejected. Federal and state governments scramble as Covid cases spike. A momentous week of diplomacy gets under way in Europe as Ukraine’s fate hangs in the balance. A bid by the Morrison government to delay Novak Djokovic’s visa hearing by two days has been rejected by the federal circuit court. In an order, published on Sunday, judge Anthony Kelly rejected the move which would have delayed the hearing until Wednesday – after Tennis Australia’s stated deadline to include the world No 1 in the Australian Open draw. But legal experts have warned even with the hearing proceeding on Monday, there is no guarantee Djokovic could secure a court order restoring his visa in time to play. The Serbian star could also face his visa being revoked again on fresh grounds. Omicron cases are spiking across Australia. On Sunday, New South Wales reported its deadliest day since the start of the pandemic with 16 deaths in the preceding 24 hours – eclipsing the highest daily totals of the Delta wave. Eight men and eight women in their 60s, 70s, 80s, and 90s died. Federal and state governments are taking dramatic measures to cope. In both Queensland and NSW, new rules allow people with Covid-19 to leave isolation to work if their job is critical for food supply or emergency services. In Queensland, the start of the school year has been delayed by two weeks, the state government has announced. Meanwhile, federal health officials revealed isolation rules may soon change nationwide due to case numbers spiking. A momentous week of diplomacy is about to get under way in Europe, with the fate of Ukraine, hemmed in by 100,000 Russian troops, hanging in the balance. Senior diplomats from the United States and Russia will meet in Geneva to discuss Moscow’s demands, set out last month in two draft treaties, one with the US and one with Nato. Much of their content is unacceptable to Washington and the alliance, most importantly a pledge that Ukraine will never be a Nato member. Australia A 14-year-old girl remains missing as parts of Queensland continue to be affected by major flooding. The aftermath of ex-tropical Cyclone Seth has caused “unexpected” heavy rains and storms across parts of the state, with further cyclone activity expected this week. Liberal state governments have voiced concern over the federal government’s religious discrimination bill. NSW and Tasmania fear the bill will override their anti-discrimination laws. Rough waters couldn’t slow long-distance swimmer Lynton Mortensen’s unprecedented attempt to swim around Lord Howe Island. But things became interesting when inquisitive Galápagos whaler sharks showed up. The world Authorities in Kazakhstan have said 164 people were killed in the unrest that rocked the country in the past week, including three children. The health ministry said 103 of the deaths were in Almaty, the country’s largest city and the centre of the violence. Donald Trump cannot hide behind immunity from criminal prosecution and faces the possibility of being debarred from running for public office over his role in the Capitol attack, several members of Congress said on Sunday. About 30% of former Guantánamo detainees who were resettled in third countries have not been granted legal status, according to new analysis shared exclusively with the Guardian, leaving them vulnerable to deportation and restricting their ability to rebuild their lives. At least 200 people are believed to have been killed in villages in the north-western Nigerian state of Zamfara, in some of the deadliest attacks by armed bandits at large in the region. More and more people around the world are suffering with autoimmune diseases, where their immune systems can no longer tell the difference between healthy cells and invading micro-organisms. Researchers blame western diets as a potential cause. Boris Johnson’s former Brexit minister who quit last month has warned him to commit to low taxes and the free market or risk losing the next election, as the prime minister comes under continuing pressure from the Conservative right. Recommended reads The ballerina’s tutu remains a traditional object of desire for many young girls: an enduring emblem of diaphanous femininity, as well as the twirling centrepiece of many a childhood music box. But is its longstanding link with the world of professional dance now out of date? Leading dancers and directors now say they find the classic costume both physically and artistically restrictive. The challenges of parenting a teenager can leave one powerless and alone. Accepting these challenges is the only way to get to the other side, writes Andie Fox. “I do not know if the world is getting more complex to raise teenagers in or if it has long been this fraught. I don’t know, because like I said, no one talks about this part of parenting with much real honesty.” Is the US really heading for a second civil war? With the country polarised and Republicans embracing authoritarianism, some experts fear a Northern Ireland-style insurgency could occur but others say armed conflict remains improbable. Listen In this standout 2021 episode of the Full Story podcast reflecting on the 20-year anniversary of the Tampa affair, Afghan refugee Abbas Nazari, then a seven-year-old child on the MV Tampa, and Guardian journalist David Marr remember the humanitarian and political crisis that shaped Australia’s policies on asylum seekers and their claims to this day. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Josh Cavallo says he has “no words” to describe his disappointment at being targeted by homophobic abuse during an A-League Men game over the weekend. Cavallo, who last year became the only openly gay professional top flight men’s footballer in the world, came on as a second-half substitute during the Reds’ away game at Melbourne Victory on Saturday night and said afterwards that he had received abuse from the crowd at AAMI Park. Teenager Genevieve Beacom has made history as the first female pitcher for an Australian professional baseball team, debuting for the Melbourne Aces in the Melbourne Challenge Series on Saturday. Media roundup Three men have been arrested over an alleged plot to smuggle almost $100m worth of methamphetamine into Western Australia, according to the Western Australian. Leaked letters show confusion over whether it was the federal or state government responsibility to give an exemption for Novak Djokovic from Australia’s double-vaccination rule, the Sydney Morning Herald exclusively reports. Coming up Five-to-11-year-olds can now be vaccinated in Australia. And if you’ve read this far … Carve out five minutes of fun before the work day begins. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.One of the televisual joys I most remember from childhood was when a programme – often a nature documentary, but sometimes a few seconds on Sesame Street or a Tomorrow’s World demonstration of new technology – would show a flower unfolding with time-lapse photography. It was always sudden, always fleeting, and of course there weren’t even any recording buttons – let alone live pausing and rewinding facilities – that you could quickly press in order to capture and relive the delight. It was ever ephemeral, and I could never get enough. Until now, with the latest gift from David Attenborough and his endlessly patient and dedicated team of camera operators (to whom a now traditional 10-minute coda is again devoted), The Green Planet (BBC One). The new five-part series presented by the veteran naturalist (though “veteran” hardly seems enough any more – Attenborough has now been making gobsmacking documentaries for two-thirds of the BBC’s entire broadcasting history) is about plants. Those that spring up in their tropical millions in the rainforests, those that endure in snowy wastelands, those who wrest life from the desiccated jaws of death in the desert, those that anchor themselves in rivers and streams – all of them and their cyclical splendours are gathered together for our awed delectation. We begin with those rainforests. We watch seedlings sprout – that fresh inimitable green, bright against the brown-leaved forest floor – in the wake of a fallen tree, followed apparent seconds later by vines and their wagging, opportunistic tendrils searching for support. We are shown balsa tree blossoms filling and refilling with nectar seven times in a night to attract the pollinators they need, and the warty, blood-coloured petals of the gigantic, stinking rafflesia or “corpse flower” opening to welcome the carrion flies. We see the bioluminescent fungus known in Congo as “chimpanzee fire”, glowing in the dark as it releases its billions upon billions of spores into the air. And whenever you think there’s going to be a moment to catch all the breath you have gasped out in astonishment, they will hit you with something even more full of wonder – such as the leafcutter ants that are controlled by chemical signals sent out by a sprawling subterranean fungus and that bring back whatever type of leaf it commands, as well as excavating more space for their underlord as it grows. I mean – could we just take a moment, please? The fundamentals of evolution, competition, photosynthesis, parasitism and so on are lightly covered. I sometimes wonder if the anthropomorphic metaphors (about “battlefields” and so on, and the implied ascription of human motivations and considerations to the flora and especially fauna that appear on screen) annoy purists. But I am not one of them, and if I were I think I would try to take comfort in the trade-off made. What you lose in appreciation of blind forces, you gain in mass accessibility and the rousing of interest in millions of viewers – some of whom, at least, will then go on to study and understand everything as fully as you could wish. But maybe only because someone described a vine as “strangling” a monstera first. The extraordinary time-lapse photography – which is no longer a static thing but in the round – shows us seeds cracking, leaves unfurling, saplings straining greedily up towards the sky, as if an army of miniature drones had been hovering for months round every one. It is shown to be the BBC team’s development of work by the former US military engineer Chris Field. Enraptured by their nature docs and by time-lapse scenes in particular, he has spent his spare time for the past 10 years combining suitable cameras with motion controls, eventually allowing us to see things in a way they have never been seen before. There must be a documentary about him and people like him too someday, mustn’t there? At the same time, heartfelt thanks must be given to all. Assistant producer Louis Rummer-Downing described life eight days into what he did not yet know would be a two-week shoot for the leafcutter sequence, comprising shots from 7,000 different positions, which would last seconds on screen. “Wake up,” he said. “Film ants. Go to sleep. Dream of ants. Wake up …” At the other end of the scale, however, is the moment when an Underwood’s bat arrives to drink from a flower just as Attenborough is standing next to one, explaining the process. Attenborough’s face lights up and his gaze – after a quick flick sideways to check with the cameraman that all is well – fixes on the miracle in front of him with as much glee and reverence as ever. From mountain gorillas to tiny tropical bats, via more moments of fascination than there are fungal spores in the Congolese air – has ever a man known, done or shared so much?Downing Street is facing calls to ensure that Boris Johnson will be personally interviewed by the Sue Gray inquiry about alleged No 10 gatherings during the first lockdown, after it emerged he may have been present at a “bring your own booze” party that month. The inquiry, into allegations of social mixing bans being broken in No 10, was widened this weekend to include reported gatherings from May 2020, amid reports that an official emailed Downing Street staff inviting them to socially distanced drinks. No 10 did not deny on Sunday that the prime minister and his wife attended the event on 20 May, which is said to have been organised by a senior civil servant in Johnson’s private office, Martin Reynolds, with food and wine set out on tables. It comes after the Guardian reported a “wine and pizza” party in Downing Street in the garden and inside No 10 on 15 May, with staff drinking late into the evening after a press conference that day. After No 10 insisted staff were working, the Guardian obtained a photograph of the prime minister and his wife sitting with officials at a table with wine and cheese, with 15 other staff in the background and bottles of wine visible. These events come alongside reports of at least five other potential gatherings in Downing Street and Whitehall in December 2020, including a Christmas party, leaving do, quiz, No 11 flat party and drinks at the Department for Education. After the newest allegations, of another May 2020 gathering during lockdown, Alistair Carmichael, Lib Dem MP and constitutional reform spokesperson, called for the prime minister himself to be interviewed by Gray. “The government should not skirt around the issue on this. If they are serious about healing public trust, the head of the No 10 Christmas party inquiry Sue Gray should personally interview the prime minister.” Angela Rayner, the Labour deputy leader, also called for assurances that Gray would be able to interview the prime minister. “It is vital that Sue Gray has all the information and access she needs to carry out a full and fair investigation,” she said. “Under the terms of reference of the previous investigation, Simon Case was given assurances he would be able to interview any politicians, officials and party staff he needed to. “While the terms of reference for the new investigation have not been published, it is paramount that Sue Gray is given the same access – including if she needs to interview the prime minister. No 10 must give such assurances in order to help bolster public faith which has been shaken by this series of revelations.” Downing Street has given no timeline for the completion of the Gray inquiry, which was taken over by the veteran civil servant last month. Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, had been leading the investigation until it emerged his own private office had held a virtual quiz, attended by some people from their desks. Johnson is under pressure from Tory backbenchers to shake up his top team over the allegations that parties took place in Downing Street, with speculation that Reynolds could be moved as a result. Some MPs are also pushing for the removal of Dan Rosenfield, Johnson’s chief of staff, with a report in the Sunday Times alleging he contributed to the departure of some women from No 10 after allegedly making them buy sandwiches for his lunch, collect his dry-cleaning and buy presents. Asked whether this was true, a No 10 source said they “totally reject that”. The continuing furore over the parties is one in a long list of scandals dogging No 10, after it emerged last week that Johnson had not handed over all text messages relating to the refurbishment of his No 11 flat to Lord Geidt, the independent adviser on ministerial interests. On Sunday, the Lib Dems wrote to Lady Hallett, the recently appointed chair of the official Covid inquiry, asking what steps she is taking to ensure she is not being misled by Johnson in the same way that Geidt was. It also asked for the inquiry to examine the reports of No 10’s lockdown-breaching parties, saying: “The Covid inquiry must look into these allegations and the damage done to public trust in the fight against the pandemic.” The letter from Carmichael asked Hallett, a retired judge, to set out what steps she is taking to ensure the Covid inquiry has access to all relevant evidence including text and WhatsApp messages, to ensure it has “the confidence of bereaved families and of the public in general throughout the course of its work.” It also asks if the inquiry will have the power to request that evidence is handed over, and what sanctions if any there will be if key witnesses such as Johnson fail to do so.A disappointed Mikel Arteta lamented his side’s lack of “purpose and determination” after Arsenal were sent tumbling out of the FA Cup by an impressive Nottingham Forest, saying they had not been hungry enough to turn the game in their favour. Lewis Grabban’s 83rd-minute winner settled a tight affair in favour of the Championship team and Arsenal, whose only genuine chance was fluffed by Eddie Nketiah, rarely threatened to turn a 67% share of possession into goals. It means they exit a competition that Arteta won in 2019-20, his first season as manager, and he was frustrated by the meek nature of their display. “It’s really hurting,” he said. “It’s a competition that is very related to our history and to get out of it today is a big bump. “I’m really disappointed with the performance, first of all. Not with the attitude, but how much purpose we had and what determination we showed to change the game when it’s difficult to play against [them] and the way they play. We needed more drive, more hunger to win at any cost in every single action, much more. We were not there at our level today.” Arteta substituted Nuno Tavares in the 35th minute after a shaky performance from the second-choice left-back and confirmed it had not been due to injury. “I just needed to try to improve the performance with the team,” he said. “I understand [that it will make a story] but I have to make the decision to try and improve the performance of the team when I see that it is not going in any other direction.” Arsenal were missing a number of first-choice players, Granit Xhaka among them after testing positive for Covid-19, but Arteta said he had not seen the defeat coming. “I know because I have played in games like that for the last 18 years and it’s no surprise the difficulties you are going to face, but when we do that we have to face it in a different way,” he said. The Forest manager, Steve Cooper, was understandably delighted with his team’s application. “The players were really engaged with what it took to win,” he said. “Whoever we play, we want to play a certain way. It’s great to do it against a team who we don’t face week in, week out.”• An article (Nord Stream 2: how Putin’s gas pipeline has divided the west, 23 December, p30) quoted “Schmidt” without further identification. It was Benjamin L Schmitt, a former US state department energy official and senior fellow at the Center for European Policy Analysis, whose details were inadvertently cut during editing. It also incorrectly described the port of Mukran, which was a works hub, as the point of landfall for the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline. • The theatre designer Philip Prowse was 84 on 29 December 2021, not 85 on 1 January 2022 as we said (Birthdays, 1 January, Journal, p9). • Other recently amended articles include: 2021: a year of climate crisis in review The missing elements in our battle against the climate crisis Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.Edinson Cavani, whom Barcelona are reported to be interested in signing, has informed Ralf Rangnick he will not depart Manchester United during this transfer window. “I told him that if it was up to me I would want him to stay and I had a conversation with him [last Thursday],” the interim manager said as he prepared for United’s FA Cup tie at home to Aston Villa on Monday. “We spoke for almost half an hour and he told me he will definitely stay and would want to stay until the end of the season. “Not only because I told him that he should stay or has to stay, he did it on his own behalf, and he told me that I can rely on him to stay until the end of the season and give his very best. “He’s happy to play. But even if he’s not playing, he will be trying to be the best possible role model for the other players and for me this is good news because Edi is one of those players who, with his vast amount of experience, with his mentality, his work ethic, I think he could really be a perfect role model.”Erin Jackson is heading to the Beijing Olympics thanks to Brittany Bowe. Bowe has given up her spot in the 500 meters, allowing Jackson – ranked No 1 in the world in the 500 – to make the US team, according to a report on USA Network. Jackson slipped in her race Friday in Milwaukee and finished third in the event she has dominated this season. Bowe won the 500 and Kimi Goetz took second, putting them on the team. The rules didn’t allow for Jackson to have a re-skate – only a mechanical failure or a fall are reason for a do-over. In November in Poland, the 29-year-old Jackson became the first Black woman to win a World Cup event. She won four of eight 500 races on the World Cup circuit, along with a second and third. Bowe and Jackson are friends from the same hometown of Ocala, Florida. The 33-year-old Bowe had hinted of her decision on Saturday, saying: “Hopefully we get three spots when we get to the Olympics, but as of now, it seems that the only way Erin will get to compete in the Olympics is if one of us gives up that spot. “I’m hopeful that internally we can figure that out and all three of us are in Beijing.” Jackson will be making her second Olympic appearance, having finished 24th in the 500 in 2018, not long after she switched from online skating to the ice. Three-time Olympian Bowe will compete in the 1,000 and 1,500 in Beijing.Australian children aged from five to 11 are now eligible for the Pfizer Covid vaccine, after the Therapeutic Goods Administration granted approval for its use. The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, has insisted there will be sufficient supply, despite claims from GPs they will struggle to inoculate children ahead of the return to school in February. Hunt has claimed there will be 3m vaccine doses available over January for the 2.3 million children who will be eligible for a jab, but opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, said parents were anxious because they could not get appointments. Hunt conceded that as there are 8,000 vaccination points around the country, each will have a limited number of doses a day, and therefore not every child will be able to get the jab right out of the gate. This was to make sure people in rural and regional areas, non-English-speaking areas and lower socioeconomic areas have the same access. But the head of the Commonwealth’s Covid-19 vaccine rollout, Lieutenant General John Frewen, said there were “absolutely more than enough” doses to get all eligible children vaccinated with their first dose before they go back to school. Frewen urged parents to have “a little bit of patience” and to shop around – checking pharmacies, GPs, and state clinics – to ensure they can book their child in. Where can children get vaccinated? Most state-run vaccine clinics, some GPs, and some pharmacies are administering Pfizer doses for the 5-11 age group. You can find a vaccine clinic at a GP or pharmacy through this link. Bookings for state-run vaccine hubs can be found on state and territory government websites. Here is Victoria, New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia, Western Australia, the Northern Territory, the ACT and Tasmania. How does the Pfizer vaccine differ for children? The Pfizer vaccine will be given to children aged five to 11 in two injections, at an interval of eight weeks apart. Each jab will contain 10 micrograms of the Covid vaccine, one third of the dose given to those aged 12 and older. To avoid mix-ups, the vaccine in 5 to 11-year-olds will be dispensed from vials with orange caps, instead of the purple or grey used in other age groups. Dr Vinod Balasubramaniam, a virologist at Monash University Malaysia, said in a statement to the Australian Science Media Centre: “The formula of the vaccine also varies slightly from the formula for adults. Pfizer’s vaccine for kids can be stored up to 10 weeks in a fridge, making it easier to administer. “The needle used to administer the vaccine will also be smaller.” Are other countries vaccinating children against Covid? Many countries are already vaccinating younger children. In the US, the Food and Drug Administration authorised Pfizer’s Covid vaccine for use in 5 to 11-year-olds at the end of October. More than 1.2 million American children have been fully vaccinated with two doses of the Pfizer vaccine, and 4.7 million have received their first dose, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Authorities in Israel and Canada also authorised the Pfizer vaccine for use in children aged 5 to 11, while the European Medicines Agency recommended that the Pfizer vaccine be approved for the same age group. China, Cambodia and Chile have been vaccinating children with Sinovac for months. Cuba is immunising children aged two to 10 with locally developed Covid vaccines, while India’s Covaxin vaccine has been approved for people aged two to 18. Is the Pfizer vaccine safe in children? Clinical trials of the Pfizer vaccine in more than 2,000 children aged five to 11 showed it was “safe, well tolerated and showed robust neutralising antibody responses”, Pfizer reported in September. Sanjaya Senanayake, an infectious diseases specialist and associate professor at the Australian National University, said while published data from the US rollout in children was not yet available, anecdotally there had been no reports of serious adverse effects. “There aren’t any … alarm bells or red flags,” Senanayake said. Dr Nusrat Homaira, a paediatric respiratory epidemiologist at the University of New South Wales, said there have been no reports to date of myocarditis associated with the Pfizer vaccine in 5 to 11-year-olds. “That’s very good news. It seems that it’s relatively safe in that population,” she said. Rare cases of myocarditis have previously been reported in older age groups – in adolescents and young adults – after receiving mRNA vaccines. However, Israeli research has found the risk of developing myocarditis was significantly higher in people who had contracted Covid-19 than for those who received the vaccine. In September, data published by the CDC showed that for people aged 16 and younger, those who got Covid had 37 times the risk for developing myocarditis than those who were not infected. The timing of Australia’s vaccination program in children would allow for experts to review published results from rollouts internationally, Senanayake said, adding that any side effects would likely become apparent within six weeks of vaccinations commencing. “If we start on January 10 in Australia we will be very well placed.” What are the risks of Covid in kids? “Overall, the data we have so far suggests that Covid, thankfully, is a milder disease in children,” Homaira said. However, some children have been hospitalised, admitted to intensive care, put on ventilators, and in rare cases died from the disease. Children transmit Covid-19 and can also develop long Covid, although the exact risk of the latter is still unclear. “The other aspect of Covid that seems to be unique to kids is multisystem inflammatory syndrome, which occurs in around one in 3,000 children [following Covid infection],” Senanayake said. The condition, also known as paediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome, commonly results in fevers and gastrointestinal symptoms, and in serious cases can lead to organ failure. Emerging data from South Africa on the Omicron variant suggested more children under 18 were getting infected and presenting to hospitals, Homaira said, emphasising that direct comparison between countries is difficult due to differences in health systems, vaccination coverage and background infection rates. “These are very early days,” she said. “At this point it is suggested that Omicron is much more transmissible,” Homaira said. “Whether it’s severe or not, that we still don’t know.” “Given Omicron … we are now in a stage where we should be rolling out the vaccine for the paediatric population.”The Democratic congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez has tested positive for Covid-19. In a statement on Sunday evening, the office of the New York progressive said she was “experiencing symptoms and recovering at home. “The congresswoman received her booster shot this fall and encourages everyone to get their booster and follow all Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidance”. New York is experiencing a huge surge of Covid cases linked to the Omicron variant, placing strain on hospitals and public health resources. The city has posted high rates of vaccination. Earlier, in an interview on Fox News Sunday, the director of the CDC, Rochelle Walensky, was asked about the severity of the Omicron variant compared to the Delta variant. Walensky said: “We are starting to see data from other countries that indicate on a person-by-person basis it may not be. However, given the volume of cases that we’re seeing with Omicron we very well may see death rates rise dramatically.” According to Johns Hopkins University, more than 837,000 people have died of Covid-19 in the US. About two-thirds of the eligible population is considered fully vaccinated but resistance to public health measures stoked by conservative politicians and media has dogged the federal response. Walensky also emphasised the importance of vaccination and booster shots, saying: “We have seen with the Omicron variant that prior infection protects you less well than it had … with prior variants. “Right now, I think the most important thing to do is to protect Americans. We do that by getting them vaccinated and getting them boosted.”Grab a piece of fruit and a beverage of your preference and settle in for Five Great Reads: your morning tea wrap of great writing, curiosity and usefulness, lovingly selected by me – Alyx Gorman, Guardian Australia’s lifestyle editor (cold brew and blueberries, in case you’re wondering). If you’d rather be reading the news as it unfolds, hop over to our live blog; and if you just want a quick hit of something other than Covid, read about this badger that discovered a trove of 209 Roman coins in Spain. Now, on to the rest of the reads. 1. Big-name writers on Biden’s first year Four leading American authors – SA Cosby, Richard Ford, Margo Jefferson and Joyce Carol Oates – share their thoughts on Biden’s leadership through 12 months of political polarisation and the pandemic. Notable quote: “The other day, someone was talking about the DW Winnicott idea of the good enough mother,” writes Pulitzer-prize winning critic and author Margo Jefferson. “She’s not a saint, she has her own problems, but she’s good enough for the child to grow up reasonably well. With Joe Biden, it’s a case of the good enough president.” How long will it take me to read? About 10 minutes. 2. The rise of the sentient supermarket Well, OK they’re not really sentient, but they’re smart. AI-powered shops in the UK, Scandinavia and the US could spell the end of the grocery store as we know it. The bit that’s good for you: You never have to queue again. The bit that’s good for the supermarket: These stores have no shoplifting (and very few staff). The bit that’s a Black Mirror episode: All this is achieved by thousands of cameras tracking shoppers’ every move, and sending the bill to their phone as they walk out. How long will it take me to read? About five minutes. 3. A video game empire built on child labour Roblox – a platform which allows people to not only play games, but build and make money from them – is the most valuable video game company in the world. “It is an empire built on the sale of virtual boots and hats,” Simon Parkins writes. “And considering that almost half of its users are aged 13 or under, the creativity and labour of children.” Notable quote: “It began to have a negative effect on my mental health,” says Regan Green, who spent two years working as a developer on a Sonic the Hedgehog Roblox game. “I was constantly trying to find ways to improve the project, but [the game’s creator] always wanted more out of me and I became incredibly burned out.” Yeah, but everyone is burning out at the moment. Did I mention that he was working on the game between the ages of 12 and 14? Oh. Then: “The pressure caused me to break.” 4. Hanya Yanagihara on her new novel and America’s brattiness The A Little Life author’s new book To Paradise – a work of alternative history that spans three centuries – has already been called “as good as War and Peace” (by fellow author Edmund White). Here Yanagihara talks about the book and the American ideals it explores and critiques. Yanagihara on writing very big books, while holding down a very fancy job (as editor of T Magazine): “I’m not the smartest or hardest-working or most educated person, but I am the best at time management.” I guess I need to get better at time management then. Same. So how long will it take me to read this? Five well-managed minutes. 5. Exercising with a heart condition The latest in our How to Move series tackles fitness with a difficult ticker. Notable quote: “The importance of exercise is to increase the efficiency of the muscles to de-load the heart,” says exercise physiologist Bridget Nash. “A strong muscle is an efficient muscle.”