Click here to access the print version The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. Special announcement We regret to announce that, until further notice, we are unable to offer prizes for solvers of the Azed weekly crosswords. The special monthly Azed clue writing competitions are not affected and will continue as normal. Entry rules for these will appear as usual.Click here to access the print version. Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Click here to access the print version. Fill the grid using the numbers 1 to 9. Each number must appear just once in every row, column and 3x3 box. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Tech stocks have been nursing a new year hangover, pushing the Nasdaq into correction territory. Momentum is building against companies with exciting promises to reshape the world, as investors turn to “value” alternatives such as oil and banking. The tech sector now faces a crunch fortnight as its biggest names report results, including Microsoft on Tuesday, Tesla on Wednesday and Apple on Thursday. They must prove they can thrive in a post-lockdown world where the cost-of-living squeeze is leaving people with less money for tech products and services. “The outlook for the Nasdaq 100 will be much clearer in two weeks,” says Matt Weller, global head of research at Forex.com and City Index. Soft earnings reports or weak guidance could see the index make one of its worst starts in over a decade. Although a hesitant return to normal life has now been jolted by Omicron, smaller growth stocks such as the pandemic winners Peloton and Zoom have been under pressure for months. A near-record number of tech stocks have recently plunged at least 50% from their all-time highs. The technology giants’ shares have had an incredible run, helping the S&amp;P 500’s IT index to deliver blockbuster returns of 33% in 2021. But the sector lost about 10% in January. Anxiety over US interest rate rises hurts the unprofitable tech firms promising big earnings in the future. The Federal Reserve, which meets this week, is likely to raise rates several times this year to tame US inflation, now at its highest since 1982. The year 1982 was also when Time magazine presciently chose the personal computer as its person (or machine) of the year. Then, the notion of a company being worth 3 trillion dollars would have been staggering. Apple soared to the $3tn mark in early January (but has fallen 7% since) and must overcome the problems in global supply chains to continue justifying such a hefty valuation. Analysts predict Apple’s revenue rose 6% year-on-year in the last quarter, beating last year’s record earnings of $111.4bn. Profits could be up 13%. But it still faces a risk of a marked slowdown in momentum, warn Russ Mould and Danni Hewson of AJ Bell – “due to the tough base for comparison caused by huge spike in demand for iPhones, iPads and iMacs in 2020-21 as people worked from home, sought to stay in touch with people they could not meet or fought boredom by looking for things to do and watch online”. After smashing production targets in the last quarter, Tesla could have more to say about the future, with investors and customers keen to hear when long-awaited models such as the Cybertruck pickup and Roadster sports model will hit the road. Interest in both is high, but Tesla’s shares dropped this month after references to the Cybertruck entering production this year vanished from its website. And even if the tech giants hit their numbers, they still face scrutiny. Meta, owner of Facebook, which reports on 2 February, is being targeted by regulators who want to break it up, and the chair of the Federal Trade Commission, Lina Khan, is vowing not to back down. Khan is a competition law expert who published a seminal paper, “Amazon’s Antitrust Paradox”, while still a student. It argued the traditional competition-law framework wasn’t fit to assess the digital giants, so a more expansive one was needed. Amazon and Facebook claim Khan should be removed from antitrust probes because she’s not impartial. But her expertise could be just what’s required to keep Big Tech in check.In early December 2021, Palestinians and Arabs representing a diversity of creative, activist and academic practice approached the board of Sydney festival after it was revealed the board had accepted $20,000 funding from the Israeli embassy for the presentation of Sydney Dance Company’s realisation of Decadance, a work created by Israeli choreographer Ohad Naharin of the Batsheva Dance Company of Tel Aviv. The amount gave the embassy “star partnership” status with Sydney Festival. We made three requests: divest from the star partnership, end all relations with the State of Israel, and remove any Israeli government emblem from Sydney festival’s promotional material. In arguing our case for divestment, we said Arab and Palestinian communities would not participate in a festival that does business with a state that stands credibly accused of war crimes and crimes against humanity, according to crimes defined in the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. In 2021, Human Rights Watch found Israel is committing “crimes against humanity of apartheid and persecution”. We made it clear artists and arts organisations – fundamental partners in any arts festival – felt betrayed by Sydney festival. Finally, we pointed out this partnership denied artists an environment of cultural safety, leaving artists, creatives and companies with no choice but to withdraw. Our arguments were rejected by the board on the grounds Sydney festival is a “non-political organisation”. In response, Palestinians and a cross-section of artists, arts organisations and communities publicly called for a boycott of the Sydney festival, inspired and guided by the global Palestinian Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) movement, founded and led by Palestinian civil society. The effusive response to the boycott call has been unprecedented, in fact historic. It is being cited as the most effective, creative and impactful campaign targeting complicit Israeli sponsorship of an international arts event in Australia, and indeed one of the most successful in the world. The backlash to this artist-led cultural boycott has been predictable, indeed recycling arguments used in the 1980s against the boycott of apartheid South Africa. One criticism in particular exposes how liberalism’s conceits of “free speech”, “marketplace of ideas”, “open debate” and “dialogue” is weaponised against Palestinians to shut down their right to resist and to deny them “permission to narrate” as renowned Palestinian-American professor Edward Said famously argued in 1984. According to New South Wales arts minister Ben Franklin, it is the boycott – not the actions of Sydney festival – which “shut down specific creative voices simply on account of their nationality”, acting as a “kind of censorship”. In an opinion piece published in the Australian, federal arts minister Paul Fletcher described those involved in the boycott as Stalinist censors and Hamas’ “useful idiots”. Such contrived hysteria over the boycott “stultif[ying] and suppress[ing] artistic and creative excellence”, and laughable comparisons with “Stalinist Russia’”, are amusingly desperate claims and demonstrate just how rattled Israel’s defenders are in the face of incontrovertible daily evidence of that state’s brutality. The arguments are embarrassing and spurious. Organisers have repeatedly stated the cultural boycott aims at institutions not individuals, targeting complicity, not identity. There was never any attempt to shut down the actual production of Decadance. The target of the boycott call was Sydney festival as a cultural institution for its refusal to divest from its sponsorship and therefore its complicity with the State of Israel. That Palestinians and their supporters are being forced to explain and restate the basis and terms of the boycott call, only to be ignored and misrepresented is a form of censorship itself. Whose voices are privileged: those who defend oppression or those resisting it? Those arguing against the boycott claim boycotts “burn” rather than “build” bridges. At the first meeting with the board, artists made the crucial point bridges must be built on ethical and just foundations. A star partnership with the State of Israeli is one way to destroy these foundations and for this reason artists cannot, in good conscience, cross that bridge. The board’s refusal to listen to artists is a form of silencing. The weaponising of “censorship” against the boycott is hollow because the ministers conveniently ignore questions of power and privilege. The power dynamics between artists and the board of Sydney festival, between marginalised communities and the monocultural establishment, between individuals and institutions are key critical points of reflection here. What makes these censorship allegations even more disingenuous is the fact that in the same breath as Palestinians and their allies are accused of being censorious, opposition arts spokesperson, Labor’s Walt Secord called for legislation to cut off funding to arts organisations that participate in a boycott of Israel. Freedom of expression it seems is only afforded to those in power and with power. Those who attack cultural boycotts in the name of “free speech” are invariably missing in action when Palestinians are routinely censored, bullied and “cancelled” for daring to speak their truth. Certainly they remain silent and indifferent to the violent suppression of Palestinian arts and culture, on the raids, lawfare and intimidation of Palestinian artists and artistic and cultural institutions. This is precisely why the boycott of Sydney festival has been called and indeed, why it has been so impactful and effective. Randa Abdel-Fattah is an award-winning author and academic.That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, for today. Here’s a quick roundup of what’s happened today: New Zealand will move to its highest red traffic light setting at midnight on Sunday in an effort to tackle the spread of the Omicron variant. Face coverings are mandatory when travelling on public transport, in retail and to an extent in education. Public facilities and retail outlets are open, with capacity limits. The head of Pfizer has said that an annual Covid-19 vaccine would be preferable to more frequent booster shots in fighting the pandemic. Asked whether he sees booster shots being administered every four to five months on a regular basis, Pfizer’s CEO Albert Bourla replied: “This will not be a good scenario. What I’m hoping (is) that we will have a vaccine that you will have to do once a year.” The UK detected 76,807 new Covid infections in the past 24 hours, a 54% drop on the 176,191 cases detected two weeks ago as the record-breaking Omicron wave appears to have spiked. The UK reported a further 297 people died within 28 days of a positive Covid test on Saturday, 3% up on the 287 deaths reported last Saturday. The deadline for health workers to be vaccinated against Covid-19 should be delayed to prevent staff shortages in England, the Royal College of GPs has said. Martin Marshall, the chairman of the college, described compulsory vaccination for health professionals as “not the right way forward”. The small Pacific nation of Samoa has been placed under a 48-hour nationwide lockdown after 15 passengers on a flight from Australia tested positive for Covid-19. The passengers were on a flight from Brisbane carrying 73 people, all of whom were fully vaccinated and had tested negative for Covid-19 before departure. Food banks across the United States are experiencing a critical shortage of volunteers driven by fears over the Omicron variant. The extent of the problem was highlighted this past week during the Martin Luther King Jr. Day national holiday, when many food banks were forced to cancel their plans or had far lower numbers than pre-pandemic years. Thousands of people took to the streets of Sweden’s two biggest cities, Stockholm and Gothenburg, on Saturday to protest against the use of vaccine passes. In France, hundreds of people took part in small-scale demonstrations two days before tighter restrictions come into force against unvaccinated people. Greece has detected two cases of an offshoot of the Omicron variant in passengers arriving at Athens international airport. The travellers, who have the BA.2 sub-variant, are in isolation. The BA.2 sub-variant, of which 426 cases have been sequenced in the UK, may have an “increased growth rate” over the earlier form of Omicron, officially designated as BA.1, according to UKHSA. New Zealand’s prime minister Jacinda Arden has cancelled her wedding to partner Clarke Gayford, as the country prepares to move to red traffic light setting at midnight on Sunday. “My wedding will not be going ahead,” she told reporters, adding she was sorry for anyone caught up in a similar scenario. Asked how she felt about her wedding cancellation, Ardern replied: “Such is life.” She added: “I am no different to, dare I say it, thousands of other New Zealanders who have had much more devastating impacts felt by the pandemic, the most gutting of which is the inability to be with a loved one sometimes when they are gravely ill. That will far, far outstrip any sadness I experience.” Pressure is building on the Metropolitan police from Tory MPs who want the force to investigate Downing Street’s lockdown parties regardless of the findings of the Sue Gray report this week. Although many MPs have said that they are withholding judgment until the outcome of the Gray inquiry, some believe that the details of what is already publicly known are sufficient to merit police action. The Met’s stance, reiterated again on Saturday, is that it is content to wait for the result of the inquiry from the senior civil servant before deciding whether to investigate if potential criminal offences are unearthed. Since news of the first party emerged, opposition MPs have been calling for the Met to investigate, but backbench Tory MPs are now also urging the force to step in. Martin Vickers, Conservative MP for Cleethorpes since 2010, last week told constituents that “disciplinary actions, and possibly prosecutions, should follow”. “The truth is that none of this should have happened. I despair at the management structure in Downing Street that this could happen,” Vickers told the Observer on Saturday night. Read the full article below: Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has confirmed the entire country will move to the red traffic light setting at midnight on Sunday in an effort to tackle the spread of the Omicron variant. “Omicron is now circulating in Auckland and possibly the Nelson area, if not further,” she said today. Red is the highest level on New Zealand’s Covid traffic light system, but domestic travel can continue. Face coverings are mandatory when travelling on public transport, in retail and to an extent in education. Public facilities and retail outlets are open, with capacity limits. Vaccine passes are legally required to enter venues such as weddings, gyms and hospitality with a maximum of 100 people. Without passes, hospitality services must remain contactless and gatherings are limited to 25 people. When customers walk through the doors of V’s Punjabi Grill, a family-run restaurant in Gravesend in Kent, the sign above their heads says in gold-letters: cocktails, grills, events. Now, the family may need to paint a fourth bullet point: vaccinations. After their father, Jagtar Chopra, was hospitalised with Covid in December 2020, brothers Rav and Raj Chopra were inspired to immunise the local community from their Punjabi grill. The brothers’ kebab shop is one of hundreds of little walk-in vaccine centres, alongside sports stadiums and shopping centres and nightclubs, that form part of the NHS’s wider vaccination programme. It opened on 10 January in a marquee attached to the restaurant and has already immunised dozens of people. “Come down, get your jabs” to “protect everyone in society”, said Rav Chopra, who along with his brother is also a pharmacist. Raj, 43, told the PA news agency he was inspired by the experience of his 74-year-old father, who has since fully recovered, in battling the virus. “From a personal point of view, it was very debilitating to see Dad like that,” said Raj. “It got everyone’s emotions in play. “To see it hit home so close to our hearts, it was a very tough pill – pardon the pun – to take. However, every cloud has a silver lining and it’s inspired us to really emphasise the job that we do, help the community and help out the fellow citizens in our home town and really try and protect as many people as we can.” Read the full article here: A Virginia mother was charged with making a threat on school property after she told local board members she would bring “every single gun loaded” if the district instituted a mask mandate. Renewed mask fights were touched off this month after the new Republican governor of Virginia, Glenn Youngkin, issued an executive order making masks optional for students, subject to the preference of parents. In Luray, a small town in the Shenandoah Valley, the governor’s move prompted a special board meeting on Covid-19 mitigation strategies. At the Thursday meeting, Amelia Ruffner King, 42, told school board members: “No mask mandates – my child, my children will not come to school on Monday with masks on. That’s not happening.” She continued: “And I will bring every single gun loaded and ready to – I will,” before she was cut off. Food banks across the United States are experiencing a critical shortage of volunteers driven by fears over the Omicron variant, at a time when food banks are already dealing with higher food costs due to inflation and supply chain issues. The extent of the problem was highlighted this past week during the Martin Luther King Jr. Day national holiday, when many food banks have traditionally organised mass volunteer drives as part of a day of service, Associated Press reports. Many food banks chose to cancel their plans this year or had far lower numbers than pre-pandemic years. In Tallahassee, Florida, plans for a volunteer-driven event on the holiday were abruptly cancelled when all the volunteers dropped out. The head of Pfizer has said that an annual Covid-19 vaccine would be preferable to more frequent booster shots in fighting the pandemic, Reuters reports. In an interview with Israel’s N12 News, Pfizer’s CEO Albert Bourla was asked whether he sees booster shots being administered every four to five months on a regular basis. “This will not be a good scenario. What I’m hoping (is) that we will have a vaccine that you will have to do once a year,” Bourla said. “Once a year - it is easier to convince people to do it. It is easier for people to remember.” The UK detected 76,807 new Covid infections in the past 24 hours, a 54% drop on the 176,191 cases detected two weeks ago as the record-breaking Omicron wave appears to have spiked. The UK reported a further 297 people died within 28 days of a positive Covid test on Saturday, 3% up on the 287 deaths reported last Saturday. Over 177,000 people in the UK have Covid on their death certificate, according to the Office for National Statistics, the seventh highest tally in the world. It comes after the health secretary, Sajid Javid, reiterated his message the UK is “learning to live with” Covid. Javid confirmed steps on Wednesday to axe virtually all Covid restrictions in England despite warnings from senior NHS figures it could provoke a resurgent wave. Ahead of the deadline for England’s NHS workers to be vaccinated or lose their jobs on 1 April, Dr Nikki Kanani, deputy lead for the NHS Covid vaccination programme, said it’s the “duty” of staff to protect patients. Kanani’s comments were made amid protests against mandatory vaccines in London on Saturday. Read the full article here: France reported 389,320 new coronavirus cases today, after seeing four consecutive days with more than 400,000 new cases. The health ministry also reported 3,746 Covid patients in intensive care units, 46 fewer than on Friday and marking the fifth day in a row that the number of patients has fallen. Banners reading “Boot him out! - Stop Boris.com” were flown over Premier League matches held at Old Trafford in Manchester and Elland Road in Leeds. Campaign group Open Britain told the PA news agency it had “booked the aircraft”, adding it was taking its “campaign fighting to have Boris Johnson removed from power...to the skies”. The group said it had decided to “increase public pressure after the Prime Minister failed to step down this week” after he claimed “nobody warned me it was against the rules” for a drinks party to be hosted in Downing Street during the first lockdown. The deadline for health workers to be vaccinated against Covid-19 should be delayed to prevent staff shortages in England, the Royal College of GPs has said. Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Martin Marshall, the chairman of the college, described compulsory vaccination for health professionals as “not the right way forward”. He said the vast majority of NHS staff were vaccinated, but between 70,000 and 80,000 were not, accounting for 10% of staff at some hospital or GP surgeries. If unvaccinated staff were taken out of frontline roles by 1 April, there would be “massive consequences” for the NHS, and a delay would allow time for booster jabs and a “sensible conversation” about whether vaccines should be mandatory at all, he said. The Fox News host Tucker Carlson has compared coronavirus vaccine mandates imposed by US President Joe Biden’s government to medical experiments conducted by Nazi Germany and imperial Japan. “I thought that we had a kind of consensus,” he said on Friday. “I mean, after watching what the imperial Japanese army and the Nazis did in their medical experiments, I thought that American physicians agreed that compulsory medical care was unethical, it was immoral and it could never be imposed on anyone. When did we forget that?” Carlson’s guest, the virologist and anti-vaxxer Robert Malone, said: “Apparently about a year ago, I think yesterday” – a reference to Biden’s inauguration on 20 January 2021 – “was when we must have forgotten that, although Mr Biden prior to his election made clear statements that he wasn’t going to force vaccination.” Carlson is vastly influential, commanding huge primetime audiences. He has promoted resistance to vaccine mandates and conspiracy theories about the effects of the shots. It is not known if he is vaccinated, but Fox News has strict rules for its staff. Read the full article here: Italy reported 171,263 new cases on Saturday, down from 179,106 on Friday, the health ministry said. A further 333 deaths were also recorded, against 373 the previous day. The country’s overall toll stands at 143,296, the second-highest in Europe after the UK and the ninth highest in the world. The small Pacific nation of Samoa has been placed under a 48-hour nationwide lockdown after 15 passengers on a flight from Australia tested positive for Covid-19. The passengers were on a flight from Brisbane carrying 73 people, all of whom were fully vaccinated and had tested negative for Covid-19 before departure. The prime minister, Fiame Naomi Mata’afa, said government may cancel further flights from Australia. The local governor in neighbouring American Samoa announced the cancellation of flights between the territory and Samoa for a week. Another Pacific island, Kiribati, went into lockdown on Friday after two-thirds of passengers on the first commercial flight in almost two years tested positive for Covid-19. Thousands of people took to the streets of Sweden’s two biggest cities, Stockholm and Gothenburg, on Saturday to protest against the use of vaccine passes. Police had warned of possible clashes between neo-Nazi groups and opponents but the marches unfolded calmly, Agence France-Presse reports. Vaccine passes have been mandatory for indoor events of more than 50 people in Sweden since 12 January. More than 83% of Swedes over the age of 12 are fully vaccinated. In France, hundreds of people took part in small-scale demonstrations two days before tighter restrictions come into force against unvaccinated people. Although the size of protests has dropped off in recent weeks, a hard core remain angry at the country’s president, Emmanuel Macron, who has said he will continue to extend restrictions forthose who have not been vaccinated. From Monday, a new vaccine health passport system will require those aged 16 and above to show they have been vaccinated in order to access restaurants or bars, leisure activities or use inter-regional public transport. A negative Covid test will no longer be sufficient except to access health services. According to the UK government’s daily dashboard, 641,929 people had a confirmed positive test result for Covid-19 between 16 and 22 January, a decrease of 22.2% compared with the previous seven days. There were 1,888 deaths within 28 days of a positive test in the same period, increase of 2.4% compared with the previous seven days. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) show there have been 177,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. Hello, I’m Léonie Chao-Fong taking over from Jedidajah Otte to bring you all the latest global development on the coronavirus pandemic for the next few hours. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email. This from my colleague Jason Rodrigues on anti-vaccine protests in London today: The World Health Organization issued a statement on Saturday on the Omicron variant. In an updated press briefing containing further data and study results, the WHO said: Based on the currently available evidence, the overall risk related to Omicron remains very high. Omicron has a significant growth advantage over Delta, leading to rapid spread in the community with higher levels of incidence than previously seen in this pandemic. Despite a lower risk of severe disease and death following infection than previous SARS-CoV-2 variants, the very high levels of transmission nevertheless have resulted in significant increases in hospitalisation, continue to pose overwhelming demands on health care systems in most countries, and may lead to significant morbidity, particularly in vulnerable populations. The WHO said epidemiological trends continue to show “a decoupling” between recorded case numbers, hospital admissions and deaths, compared with previous waves driven by other variants, which is likely to be the result of a combination of Omicron being milder, and the fact the vaccines are more effective at protecting against serious illness than they are against infection. But the brief added: However, high levels of hospital and ICU admission are nevertheless being reported in most countries, given that levels of transmission are higher than ever seen before during the pandemic. Moreover, more data are needed to better understand how clinical markers of severity – such as the use of oxygen, mechanical ventilation, and number of deaths are associated with Omicron. This is particularly important given that current evidence about severity and hospitalisation has largely been shared from countries with high levels of population immunity, and there remains uncertainty about the severity of Omicron in populations with both lower vaccination coverage and lower prior exposure to other variants. A further five people who had previously tested positive for Covid-19 have died in Northern Ireland, the Department of Health has said. Another 3,476 confirmed cases of the virus have also been logged in the last 24-hour reporting period. Infections are on an overall upward trend in Romania, with 13,985 new cases reported on average each day. That’s 93% of the peak — the highest daily average reported on 20 October, according to the Reuters Covid-19 tracker. On Saturday, 19,371 new Covid cases were registered, 278 less than the previous day. On Friday, the country reported a record 19,649 new daily cases. Covid-19 vaccinations for children aged between 5 and 11 years are scheduled to start on 26 January, according to Valeriu Gheorghita, the coordinator of the national vaccination campaign. The government is trying to combat vaccine hesitancy in the population by posting personal accounts of people who have taken up the vaccine offer on social media. As of Friday, 7.9 million people out of a population of around 19 million have been fully vaccinated, according to the government’s vaccine task force. Hello, I’m Jedidajah Otte and am taking back over for the next few hours. If there’s anything you’d like to flag, you can message me on Twitter @JedySays or drop me an email. In the UK, vaccines have been administered in a vast array of locations, including sports stadiums, a nightclub, and even a hot tub. Describing how NHS teams “stop at nothing to make sure that our country is protected”, Dr Nikki Kanani, a GP and deputy lead for the NHS Covid vaccination programme, told reporters about a person with additional learning needs who was given a jab at home in a hot tub. Kanani said there had been “incredible stories” of people taking up a dose after being given “an approach that is just much more tailored for them”. She said that while most people were able to get vaccinated at their local pharmacy, at centre or by their general practice team, “for others it’s a little bit more complicated”. “I’m so proud of our teams, for example in Portsmouth where they’ve gone out and vaccinated people with quite complex health needs,” the GP said. “One individual was vaccinated at home in his hot tub because he has additional learning needs and it was a way of making sure that he felt safe and secure as he got his vaccination. Our teams stop at nothing to make sure that our country is protected.” In the week that the UK health secretary, Sajid Javid, told the nation that “we must learn to live with Covid in the same way we have to live with flu”, our science correspondent Hannah Devlin reports on the fears clinically vulnerable people feel. About 3.7 million people in England are classified as clinically extremely vulnerable, many of whom feel like a “forgotten minority” as the country axes plan B restrictions. Read the full report here: Greece has detected two cases of an offshoot of the Omicron variant in passengers arriving at Athens international airport. The travellers, who have the BA.2 sub-variant, are in isolation. The news comes as the country reported 20,507 Covid new cases, 108 deathsand 467 patients admitted to hospital with the virus. The BA.2 sub-variant, of which 426 cases have been sequenced in the UK, may have an “increased growth rate” over the earlier form of Omicron, officially designated as BA.1, according to UKHSA. The public health body stressed, however, that there is a “low level of certainty early in the emergence of a variant”. Hello, I’m Clea Skopeliti and I’m covering the blog while Jedidajah takes a break. Please do send any tips or coverage suggestions my way by Twitter DM or email. Thanks in advance. The deputy lead for England’s NHS Covid vaccination programme, Dr Nikki Kanani, said on Saturday that healthcare professionals have a duty to make sure they are protected against Covid-19. All NHS staff in England who have direct contact with patients must have had their first dose of a Covid vaccine by 3 February, and have had two jabs by 1 April, or risk losing their job at the end of March - a government policy unions fear will worsen the health service’s staffing crisis. Kanani was asked if the NHS could cope with the possibility of losing thousands of staff over mandatory vaccination. She told reporters: Mandatory vaccination is a government policy but as healthcare professionals we all have a duty to make sure that we are protected, to make sure that our colleagues and our patients are protected. I know that our teams will be doing everything they can to continue to have vaccine confidence building conversations and offering that all important vaccination to staff who are yet to have their first, second or their booster dose. Our NHS staff have been utterly incredible. The last 24 months have been the most difficult that any of us have ever experienced and they have worked through the pandemic, they’ve delivered the most incredible vaccination programme. I know some people are still trying to make that really important decision. Pressed on whether patients would suffer if the NHS were to lose staff over vaccine mandate, she said: As we’ve seen through the pandemic, and of course those days before the pandemic that we don’t even think of very often, our NHS continues to deliver. What I want to say is to our patients who are listening - we will keep looking after you. That’s what we do in the NHS. Our general practice teams, our pharmacy teams, our healthcare services. We’re here for you, so don’t ever worry. The NHS is open. The NHS is there for you. England’s public health body is investigating an offshoot of the Omicron variant known as BA.2 amid concerns that it may be even more contagious than the original. The Financial Times reported: The UK Health Security Agency said it was designating the Omicron offshoot a ‘variant under investigation’ because of “increasing numbers of BA.2 sequences identified both domestically and internationally”. Early analysis suggests the BA.2 sub-variant may have an “increased growth rate” over the earlier form of Omicron, officially designated as BA.1, according to UKHSA, which stressed that there is a “low level of certainty early in the emergence of a variant”. Moreover, BA.2 has not been named a ‘variant of concern’ — the highest risk ranking for new strains. About 426 cases of the Omicron offshoot have been sequenced in the UK, with the first found in early December. The daily average of reported Covid-19 infections in France is at its peak, with 320,068 newcases reported each day, according to Reuters. The country’s constitutional council approved strict new restrictions for unvaccinated people on Friday. The new law will exclude them from large parts of public life via a “vaccine pass” that will be introduced from Monday. People in France have to show proof of vaccination or recovery if they want to gain entry to hospitality venues, cultural sites and sporting events or use long-distance public transport. Other measures are to be gradually relaxed from February, however, because the French prime minister, Jean Castex, believes the country’s high vaccination rate will protect hospitals from becoming overwhelmed. Germany’s seven-day incidence rate has risen to a high of 772.7 infections per 100,000 people, up from 706.3. The Robert Koch Institute (RKI) reported 135,461 new infections on Saturday, an increase of 57,439 on the same day a week ago, when 78,022 positive tests were reported. It also reported a further 179 deaths, bringing the country’s total to 116,664. At least half of the population, or about 41.7 million people, had received a Covid booster shot and at least 75.4% had received at least one vaccine dose, the RKI said. At least 73.3% have been fully vaccinated, and 24.6% remain unvaccinated. The federal government has set a target for 80% of the population to receive at least one vaccine dose by the end of January. The Philippines recorded 30,552 new Covid-19 infections on Saturday, as well as 97 new fatalities, bringing the death toll to 53,406. The department of health said it was still too early to say whether Metro Manila could lower its Covid alert level from 3 to 2 next month, CNN Philippines reports. “I think it’s too early to declare and to say to people that we will shift or deescalate to alert level 2,” health undersecretary Maria Rosario Vergeire told a briefing on Saturday. Vergeire said she was still working with earlier projections that cases might peak by the end of the month or by the middle of February. Hong Kong health officials warned on Saturday of a significantly worsening Covid-19 outbreak as suspected infection numbers rose in a congested residential area. Health authorities said on Saturday they had detected at least 130 preliminary-positive Covid-19 cases and 26 confirmed cases at a public housing estate in the Kwai Chung district north of the Kowloon peninsula. On Friday, authorities ordered 2,700 residents of the housing block into an unprecedented 5-day lockdown. “It’s not easy for us to control the spread because we cannot trace all their whereabouts,” senior health department official Dr Chuang Shuk-kwan said, referring to the 2,700 residents as well as workers and visitors linked to the building at the centre of the outbreak. She urged people across the city to limit their social engagements and avoid large gatherings. Local media reports on Saturday said that officials were considering tighter city-wide restrictions but none have yet been confirmed. Earlier this week, officials announced traces of the virus had been found on 11 hamsters, and ordered the killing of more than 2,000 of the imported animals, including any pets bought since 22 December, causing a backlash in the population. Thousands of people have offered to hide or adopt unwanted hamsters, as local media was flooded with footage and images of crying children saying goodbye to their pets. Unlike many other cities, Hong Kong has maintained a “zero Covid” strategy focused on eliminating the disease, with schools and gyms shut, restaurants closing at 6 pm and air travel with many major hubs severed or severely disrupted. Poland reported a record 40,876 new daily infections on Saturday, the health ministry said, as the country’s fifth wave gathers pace. On Friday Poland logged a record high of 36,665 new infections, with at least 1,390 cases of the Omicron variant. Authorities have said the latest wave of the pandemic will drive case numbers to levels not yet seen in Poland, with estimates of the peak ranging from 60,000 to as many as 140,000 daily infections. Officials are expecting the number of cases to reach more than 50,000 a day next week, a number that could begin to put unsustainable strain on the health system. Prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki warned on Friday that the healthcare system will find itself under “unprecedented” pressure. “The fifth wave of the pandemic has become a fact,” Morawiecki said. “In recent days we’ve been seeing over 30,000 new [daily] infections. These numbers must be making an impression even on those who disregarded the pandemic.” About 57% of the 38 million strong population have been vaccinated, and circa 9 million people have received booster shots. Russia reported a new record number of confirmed daily Covid-19 infections on Saturday, the government coronavirus taskforce said. Daily new cases jumped to 57,212, from the previous record of 49,513 a day earlier, as the Omicron variant continues to spread. The taskforce also reported 681 deaths. Russia’s infections are now at about 85% of the country’s peak and rising, according to the Reuters Covid-19 tracker, with 34,378 new infections reported on average each day. An order for UK civil servants to return to work as soon as possible has more to do with deflecting attention from prime minister Boris Johnson’s own political troubles, the head of a trade union representing senior civil servants has claimed. Dave Penman, the FDA’s general secretary, said: All the evidence shows that across the economy, hybrid working is being embraced, delivering efficiencies for employers and flexibility for employees. Despite this, ministers are clinging to an ideology of presenteeism that demonstrates they are out of touch with how the world of work has changed since the pandemic began. The Cabinet Office said measures had been put in place in government buildings to reassure staff and allow the transition back to office working, including increased ventilation and improved cleaning routines. It added that there was no government requirement or recommendation for employers to limit capacity in the workplace. Taiwan’s government said on Saturday restrictions would be tightened after a rare surge in domestic transmission of the Omicron variant, saying it needed to act now to prevent being overwhelmed, even though overall numbers remain quite low. After months of no or few community infections, Taiwan has seen a small rise in local Covid-19 cases since the beginning of January, mainly linked to workers at the main international airport in the northern city of Taoyuan who were infected by arriving passengers, Reuters reports. On Friday evening the government announced 60 new cases at a factory near the airport after testing 1,000 workers. There have been no deaths and most of the cases have had only mild or no symptoms. In a statement, premier Su Tseng-chang said that, even though this outbreak has brought no serious illness, steps needed to be taken. “If the pandemic cannot be contained, it will still cause a burden on the medical system,” he said. New restrictions will include a ban on eating and drinking on public transport and limits on the number of people visiting temples, ahead of the week-long lunar new year holiday, which starts at the end of this month. Testing will be expanded to reach the largest number of possible contacts, said the health minister, Chen Shih-chung. “Of course we think this pandemic is threatening, so we must raise our vigilance,” he said. Taiwan has been highly successful at controlling the pandemic due to early and strict border checks and an effective tracing system. More than 70% of people in Taiwan have received two vaccine doses and booster shots are currently being rolled out, with about 15% of residents having received a third shot so far. UK government civil servants have been ordered to return to the office, with government departments told to rapidly get back to “full occupancy” after the lifting of plan B Covid-19 restrictions in England. The announcement on Friday night sets up a clash between the government and unions, who have warned against a “headlong rush” back to workplaces with coronavirus cases still high. Across the UK, 95,787 positive tests were reported on Friday. My colleague Ben Quinn has the full story. Ireland has taken a significant stride back to normality after the majority of pandemic-related curbs on society were lifted as of 6am Saturday – sooner than some had expected. The government announced the sweeping relaxations on Friday evening, with an 8pm hospitality curfew lifted, as well as the scrapping of Covid passes that previously had to be shown in order to enter hospitality, entertainment and leisure venues. Live events and sporting events can return to full-capacity audiences and guidance advising limits on household visits has been removed, while workers will return to offices on a staggered basis from Monday, Reuters reports. Only a small number of restrictions remain in place: Masks still have to be worn in public places such as shops, schools and on public transport, and self-isolation rules and the use of Covid passes for international travel continue to apply. Protective measures will remain in place in schools until at least the end of February, when they will be reviewed. The taoiseach, Micheál Martin, stressed the pandemic was not over but that the “emergency” phase had passed. “I want to be clear that the pandemic isn’t over – it will still require all of us to be vigilant,” he said on Friday. But he added: Spring is coming. I don’t know if I’ve ever looked forward to one as much as I’m looking forward to this one. Humans are social beings and we Irish are more social than most. As we look forward to this spring, we need to see each other again. We need to see each other smile. We need to sing again. As we navigate this new phase of Covid, it is time to be ourselves again. Hello everyone, I’m Jedidajah Otte and will be bringing you the latest developments in all things pandemic over the next few hours. If there’s anything you think is relevant for our coverage, you can message me on Twitter @JedySays or drop me an email. Tokyo on Saturday recorded 11,227 new daily Covid-19 infections, the highest daily tally for the fourth consecutive day amid a continued rapid spread of the Omicron variant. The local government has reinstated restrictions that are due to run until 13 February. On Friday, the number of severely ill Covid-19 patients in Japan reached 404, up by 117 from a day before, the health ministry said, as it issued fast-track approval for the Pfizer vaccine for children aged 5 to 11, with the government preparing to kick-start the rollout in March, the Japan Times reported.Officials in a Chinese province deliberately underreported or concealed 139 deaths from last year’s devastating flood disaster, the country’s central government has said, as authorities arrested some of those involved. Record-breaking rainstorms hit Henan province in central China between 17 and 23 July, overflowing reservoirs, breaching riverbanks, and overwhelming public transport systems and roads in major cities. In the city of Zhengzhou, more than 600mm of rain, equivalent almost to an average year, fell in just three days, flooding metro stations and a cross-city tunnel. At least 12 died in a Zhengzhou metro station after the tunnels flooded, with alarming footage on social media showing the water level inside carriages reaching passengers’ head-height. Another six were reported at the time to have died in a road tunnel where more than 100 cars were trapped and submerged. China’s highest government body, the state council, said it had reviewed an investigation into the disaster, and determined local and provincial officials and authorities to be “guilty of negligence and dereliction of duty, especially considering the casualties in the subway and the tunnel that were not supposed to take place”. Party and local officials in China often face punishment for actual and perceived failures, including being removed from their roles or in extreme cases, prosecution. Numerous officials have been sacked over Covid-19 outbreaks, and in June at least five officials were arrested after 21 runners died during the Gansu Ultramarathon. The Henan flood investigators lead was scathing in his assessment of local officials, who he accused of “seriously lacking risk awareness”, and having “paralysed thinking” when it came to heeding warnings of abnormally heavy rainfall. In the weeks following the floods the death toll sat at 99 for several days before officials announced a toll of 302 dead and 50 missing. But in a statement posted online late on Friday, the state council accused city officials of having “deliberately impeded and withheld reports of up to 139 cases”. The officials were supposed to make daily reports but had “concealed or delayed the reporting of those killed and missing in the disaster”, it said. The report gave an official final death toll of 398, with more than 95% occurring in the city of Zhengzhou. It did not give details of how many were new cases. In a separate news conference, investigation officials said the concealed cases included 75 in Zhengzhou city, 49 in the counties, and 15 in townships. The investigation lead said 23 people died in mudslides and flooding in Xingyang, and five in an explosion caused by the floods at Dengfeng power plant. Local party and government officials “did not truthfully report the real cause of death, and illegally used post-disaster reconstruction subsidy funds to compensate the families of the deceased”, the official said. “Although the disaster was triggered by extreme weather, many problems and deficiencies were exposed. The weaknesses also exist to varying degrees in many parts of the country, [the investigation] noted, urging close attention and solid deeds to rectify them.” Eight officials have been detained by police and another 89 disciplined. The flooding of the station and road tunnel were “liability accidents”, with the disaster exacerbated by lagging construction of urban drainage infrastructure and weak links in the emergency management, early warning and response systems. “They failed to take the primary responsibility in flood prevention and disaster relief, and seriously lacked risk awareness regarding extreme-weather disasters,” according to the investigators, who also pointed out problems such as the practices of formalities for formalities’ sake and bureaucratism.” The overflowing of the Guojiazui reservoir was a law-breaking incident, the report said, but did not provide details. The statement, posted in English on the state council’s website, is a rare admission of officials’ failure. In the aftermath of the disaster there was widespread suspicion the death toll was higher than reported, as residents posted of missing loved ones online and authorities blocked access to disaster sites, including for temporary memorials.Emma Thompson gives us a very personal, emotionally generous and intimate performance in this entertaining theatrical two-hander from screenwriter Katy Brand and director Sophie Hyde. Despite some moments of sentimentality and naivety, it is really watchable and conceived with a flair for commanding the audience’s attention. It’s not exactly right to call it a crowd-pleaser, but Brand – who has her own record in comedy writing and performance – has a comic’s sense of how and where to elicit an audience response. Thompson plays Nancy, a middle-aged widow and former RE teacher who after a lifetime of unsatisfying conjugal relations with just the one man (her late husband) has decided to pay for discreet afternoon sex in an upmarket Norwich hotel room. With her brisk and schoolteacherly need for education and self-betterment, Nancy feels that she needs to experience some more sex before her death, including the most important and climactic sexual experience of all. Thompson makes her a cousin of sorts to the woman who secretly cries in the bathroom in Love Actually, because Alan Rickman is cheating on her, and to the nurse who had sex with Jeff Goldblum in The Tall Guy. Daryl McCormack (Isaiah Jesus from TV’s Peaky Blinders), enigmatically plays the young man she has hired online who goes by “Leo Grande”. Until relatively recently, “escort” was the term used if you wanted to avoid the p-word, but Leo, of course, with un self-consciously polite professionalism, uses “sex worker”. Leo has the tolerant, smilingly indulgent manner of a therapist who has seen and heard it all, or a concierge in a cool boutique hotel who can procure anything you like as Nancy babblingly confesses to him her unhappiness, her disappointment with her children and with herself, and her one frustrated moment of sexual rapture on holiday in Greece when she was 20. She is torn between delaying or abandoning this whole absurd idea and the need to get on with the sex right now (“I can’t bear the suspense!”) And, in fact, the audience might share that impatience, as it is the depiction of bought sex itself which is going to test this movie, rather than lines of bittersweet dialogue. As for Leo, Nancy says: “You’re some sort of sex saint – are you real?” And again, we might well wonder the same thing. Just as the customer in the bought sex transaction is the one with the power and the capital, so Thompson’s character is the one with the wealth of backstory, and Leo sometimes seems blank, almost like a Stepfordian robot. We are waiting for Leo’s serenely trouble-free manner to crack, and of course crack it does, but the film refuses the traditional explanatory revelation of unhappiness, and shows us that some people selling sex can and do remain happy. The movie is at its strongest in showing us the eerie process of Nancy losing her inhibitions as she gets to be Leo’s regular: not her sexual inhibitions, but her personal inhibitions. Thompson shows how her miserable need to abase herself before Leo, her confessional wretchedness, evaporates as her bossy, conceited teacherly mannerisms rise to the surface. She becomes more confident and the unlovely reactionary side to her comes to the fore, allowing her id free rein – even declaring that what the younger generation needs is a good war to burn off all that excess energy. Of course, the thought experiment can’t be avoided: what if this was a middle-aged man with a younger female sex worker? What if it was Bill Nighy on screen with a not-as-famous female star? It naturally wouldn’t be the same; the tone would shift away from comedy, but that is because the power relations of gender affect the bought-sex experience, as they affect every other kind of experience. Perhaps Good Luck to You, Leo Grande does not aspire to a piercingly profound analysis of sex and the human condition. It is, however, an amusing, compassionate and humane drama acted and directed with terrific panache. Good Luck to You, Leo Grande is showing at the Sundance film festival and will be released later this yearTennis Australia’s chief executive, Craig Tiley, has dismissed suggestions that Serbian tennis star Novak Djokovic may sue the organisation and has claimed the world No 1 will be back at the Australian Open in 2023. Tiley has maintained a low profile since Djokovic was deported a week ago. However, on Sunday, he spoke to ABC TV and said Djokovic was not considering taking legal action against Tennis Australia over its role in the saga. “No,” he said when asked if Tennis Australia was being sued. “I mean there is going to be lots of reports on different things but we are in a position where we are focused on delivering an event right now and we will continue to deliver a great event.” The beleaguered chief executive also replied “Yes” when asked if Djokovic would be back in Australia for the 2023 tournament. “Obviously, I think he’s got to play out this year, but that will be his intention. At the end of the day, he’s the No 1 player in the world and he loves the Australian Open.” Use of the immigration minister’s power to cancel a visa – as happened in Djokovic’s case – comes with a three-year ban on re-entering Australia, except in compelling circumstances, such as compassionate or Australian national interest grounds. On Thursday, the Sun in the UK reported that Djokovic was considering suing the Australian government over his detention, arguing it amounted to ill-treatment. Tennis Australia and a board of medical experts connected with the Victorian state government granted Djokovic an exemption to participate in the tournament despite him not being vaccinated against Covid on the basis he had recently recovered from the virus. However, the federal government disagreed and border force cancelled Djokovic’s visa after he arrived at Melbourne airport on 5 January. The tennis star was forced into immigration detention while he challenged the decision in the courts – initially having a win in the federal circuit court – but he was ultimately deported last Sunday night after failing in his bid to overturn the minister’s decision. Speaking to the ABC on Sunday, Tiley refused to say why his organisation seemingly ignored letters from federal health authorities that clearly stated that “people who contracted Covid-19 within the past six months and seek to enter Australia from overseas and have not received two doses of an [TGA] approved … vaccine are not considered fully vaccinated”. Tiley declined to answer directly, but he suggested at the time decisions were being made about Djokovic’s participation, the Covid rules and conditions were frequently changing. “It’s important to know we have always tried to do the right thing … We were at the beginning of Omicron and that’s why we were constantly seeking clarity and there was a lot of complexity and contradiction of information before, after and there continues to be all the way through,” he said. Tiley implied the letters from the federal government in November 2021 did not paint a full picture of all the conversations Tennis Australia had with the commonwealth concerning unvaccinated players. “We tried to do the right thing … leading into the event were forever-changing conditions. You seek clarity, and one or two bits of communication doesn’t define all the amounts of communication that continued to go on leading into the event.” Despite being jeered by crowds at the Australian Open earlier this week, Tiley has stated that he has no intention of stepping down over the Djokovic deportation scandal. Tiley was asked if, after all his communications with the federal government, he was “shocked” when Djokovic was detained at the Melbourne airport and taken into immigration detention. “Yes. I think what we constantly sought was clarity because our goal is always to do the right thing,” he said. “To make sure that Victorians are safe.”“Jihad is for teenagers. Now I am too old.” It’s not exactly the answer you’d like to hear when asking a supposedly reformed fundamentalist if they have an interest in rejoining al-Qaida, but it’s better than nothing. And at least he’s being honest. The absence of absolutes is what’s most enriching in Meg Smaker’s new documentary, Jihad Rehab. The American film-maker had access to the Prince Mohammed Bin Nayef Center for Advice and Care in Saudi Arabia, where she followed the progress of a group of men released from the US military prison in Guantánamo Bay, some after nearly 15 years. What follows is a heady plunge into restorative justice, mind control, and cultural conditioning. This is a movie for intelligent people looking to have their preconceived notions challenged. The facility looks a lot more like a junior college than a prison, and in between interviews our subjects are shown using colored pencils during art therapy, learning about this new thing called Google, or listening to lectures about Freudian psychology at “interpersonal skills class”. An Islamic scholar explains, in specific terms, how al-Qaida misinterpreted the teachings of the faith. Eventually, these men will be set free. One former graduate named Khalid is shown as a success story. He has a family and a good business selling toy remote control cars. He tries not to dwell on his past as a bomb maker, and admits the deeds of his past do keep him up at night. His warm smile diminishes when he thinks about people jumping from the World Trade Center towers. There’s little implication that these are men falsely accused of their crimes. This is not Taxi to the Dark Side. The film does offer context, however, about what young men like this thought jihad was before they left their homes for Afghanistan. For them, it was joining a war they were told was just. They were not terrorists, they were soldiers. An exception is one member of the group, Ali, who had the misfortune of being the younger brother of Qasim al-Raymi, the head of al Qaida in Yemen. (Al-Raymi was killed by an American airstrike after the events of this film.) Ali was captured after time spent with his brother at a training facility at the age of 16. If his claims are to be believed, his entire incarceration was due to the US government looking for information about his brother, and he himself had never done anything. But for years at Guantánamo, he denied that they were even related. Wondering just how much to believe these men now isn’t just cynicism. Smaker does not whitewash one of the rehab’s failures, in which someone made it through the program essentially by lying through his teeth. As soon as he was released, he rejoined a terrorist cell. This proves to be the exception, though, thanks to some measures put in place. Graduates of the program need a family sponsor, whom they put at risk of arrest if they leave the country. (Arrest in Saudi Arabia, it bears repeating, is not usually a slap on the wrist.) Nadir, a former Osama bin Laden bodyguard, is vouched for by a cousin too young to have ever known him before Guantánamo. “They lost two buildings, we lost two countries,” he says about the 9/11 attacks with a shrug, and says he, too, felt the call to jihad when he was younger but his mother hid his passport. Circumstances change for everyone as Saudi Arabia’s political winds shift when Mohammad bin Salman assumes control in mid-2017. Release schedules are halted, then life is made difficult when work restrictions are placed on non-Saudi citizens. The graduates are trapped, as the rules prevent them from leaving, yet they cannot earn a living. Moreover, they were encouraged by their religious counselor to start a family as quickly as possible, so now there are mouths to feed. Smaker does not edit out the absolutely retrograde attitude towards women found even in this oasis of progressive criminal reform. “Women age faster than men,” they are taught. “Don’t choose one close to you in age, because in 10 to 20 years she won’t be able to take care of you and you’ll need to marry again.” When one of the subjects grows frustrated at Smaker’s questioning, he confronts her, shouting, “You should find a husband, a woman like you needs children!” Smaker keeps her cool. While Jihad Rehab has the goods in terms of subject matter and access, there are some aesthetic choices that don’t quite work. The movie doesn’t really start for 12 minutes. We’re forced to sit through a CNN-like montage that really had me worried about what I had gotten into. Then there is that bane of modern documentary, the animation sequence. It’s unnecessary and cliche. To any documentarians reading, remember that Frederick Wiseman never inserted psychedelic line drawings into his work. Let your subjects speak, and let your audience listen. That said, this movie is a victory, mostly because it will frustrate viewers who need everything spoonfed to them. Jihad Rehab is showing at the Sundance film festival and will be released later this yearA prominent Turkish TV journalist has been detained and could face imprisonment after being charged with insulting the country’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan. Police detained Sedef Kabaş at her home at 2am on Saturday and took her to a police station, before she faced court and was jailed pending a trial. The alleged insult was a proverb that Kabaş expressed both on an opposition television channel and her Twitter account. The proverb translates to: “When the ox comes to the palace, he does not become a king. But the palace becomes a barn.” “The honour of the presidency’s office is the honour of our country ... I condemn the vulgar insults made against our president and his office,” Fahrettin Altun, head of Turkey’s communications directorate and Erdoğan’s chief spokesman, said. Merdan Yanardağ, the chief editor of the Tele 1 channel, on which Kabaş made the comment, criticised her arrest. “Her detention overnight at 2am because of a proverb is unacceptable,” he said. “This stance is an attempt to intimidate journalists, the media and society.” The law on insulting the president carries a jail sentence of between one and four years. Last October, Europe’s top human rights court called on Turkey to change the legislation after ruling that a man’s detention under the law violated his freedom of expression. Thousands have been charged and sentenced over the crime of insulting Erdoğan in the seven years since he moved from being prime minister to president. With ReutersThe wash-up of the wash-out? Australia lead 4-2 on points. England either need to win the Test, or draw the Test and win the ODIs 2-1. Australia would keep the trophy with a Test win. Here’s hoping both teams put aside the caginess of their recent encounters and go for it. That’s it from us. Test time on Thursday. See ya. And that, I’m afraid, is that. There will be no result. Would you like to know the last thing I got wrong? Forgot about the half hour time difference to Adelaide. So, it’s currently 15:37 where I am, but 15:07 in Adelaide. Anyway, since they would need to be playing by 15:37, and they need half an hour to prepare the field once it stops raining, and it has not stopped raining, the match has been called. Wrong time, location, weather, just as well they didn’t play any actual cricket because the scores would have been a disaster. Gary Sobers would have scored a nine from the minus second ball of Mae West’s 23rd over. From the fog to the rain, Andrew in Adelaide writes in. “I find it odd, the 15:37 cut off. (By the way is the cut off really 4 minutes later than yesterdays game? Because it got under way?) I don’t know why they can’t go on further given the match hasn’t started. Assume it’s because we can’t clash with the BBL. God forbid we are allowed to choose which game to watch. Very frustrated, had been looking forward to going to these games. Hope you feel better!” Thanks Andrew. You made me worried I had got the time wrong, along with the city and the wind direction, but 15:37 was what we were told by CA yesterday, and again today. I don’t think it’s because of other TV scheduling, it’s probably more to do with only keeping the players ready, or the ground available, or staff in place, for a certain number of hours. Like you can’t ask players to be ready at 10am and not play until 10pm. But having a 2pm match start at 6pm doesn’t seem crazy. We wait that long in Test cricket all the time. May be to do with floodlights too. Only having dispensation to turn them on for a certain number of hours per week or month, hence these being scheduled as day games where Thursday’s match was at night? “Not just you, mate,” says Damian Clarke of the fog. “I just discovered that earlier I put my shoes out and polished the cat.” We have 33 minutes until abandonment. No XIs were announced because the toss was not held, which means that no one gets a match added to their career tallies today. If they have the toss but don’t bowl a ball, those picked have still technically played a match. It is definitely north to south. Even I know that top to bottom on a map is north to south. We have the good oil right from the source now, David Crock. “Keen Final Word listener here. I’m a meteorologist with BoM and am on duty today (albeit emailing in my personal capacity). Unsurprisingly your take on the radar is spot on, can’t see any play happening today. One point though - the rain is coming from the north. Very tropical and very very unusual for Adelaide at this time of year - desperately unlucky for CA to schedule three games there and have two washed out. Can confirm the forecast for Adelaide is spot on today.” I thought I wrote north to south? Not having a good day today. I’m doing the OBO from my covid couch, and it seems that the brain-fog thing is spot on. The radar is still crawling. There’s nothing further north of this current mass. If we were playing a night match we would be fine. I’m not sure why fixtures can’t be more flexible around rain. Did you know that Idris Elba makes music? I did not, until it popped up on the radio about a month ago. The guy who is and will always be Stringer Bell from The Wire has been releasing some horn-heavy awright geezer jams. This is apropos of nothing except that I’ve been playing this to death lately. Personally, as you would have gathered, I am most interested in the Test match. But the three one-dayers will be very significant just ahead of the ODI World Cup. We haven’t had one for the women since 2017, which seems a lifetime ago. The current one was supposed to happen a year ago but got postponed. Now the host country, New Zealand, is starting to blow up with covid for the first time, and will still have a ten-day quarantine for arrivals in trying to stave that off. The latest from over there: Adrian Armstrong has sent me a very considerate email. “Don’t feel too embarrassed, Geoff. Could look much worse. The last time someone forgot that a game was in Adelaide, he left out Wood and Leach.” Touché. The TV is just replaying the first match, which has had a good workout this weekend since it was played. What would a washout mean for the series? A points tally of 4-2, which for England would be like winning one and losing one after that opening thrashing. Not disastrous then. The Test match is worth four points for a win, then there are three ODIs worth two points each. Australia hold the trophy and would thus retain it if scores are level. Can’t see us getting any play today. We have an hour and a quarter left to spare, and this is the rain coming from south to north. And here are some quite special reflections from bowler Megan Schutt on almost a year away from the Australian team as she and her partner brought their very premature daughter into the world. What do we have for you in the meantime? Here is Raf’s report on the first match, which it must be said was a doozy. The Adelaide radar is a horrorshow. Giant banks of multicoloured wet stuff. It is dry in Canberra, dry in Melbourne, mostly dry in Sydney and Brisbane, and a lovely sunny day where I am in Hobart. Sigh. Anyway, let’s talk about Canberra. Got a Test match there starting on Thursday. A daytime one, too, where most women’s Tests lately have been day-nighters. So it will be good to see the red ball in action. I’ll be there for the Guardian. It also means two Tests for Australia in the space of four months, which should not need to be notable, but currently it is. Hopefully last September’s Test against India will mean more Tests against other touring teams in summers to come. What do you know! The forecast for ADELAIDE is awful. Dross. Horrible. Up to 25mm of rain with 90% likelihood, and the chance of it clearing in the late afternoon. Cut-off time for this match is 3:37pm, so a fat lot of good late afternoon will do us. Well, I can tell you why the forecast is wrong. It’s because I’ve been thinking about going to Canberra for the Test match this week, and I forgot that this match was in Adelaide. That’s smart. There’s nothing on the radar, a few tiny flecks of cloud acne on the face of New South Wales. But somehow it is still managing to rain in Canberra. Stand by. In fact, the BOM forecast still does look fine. Mostly sunny, 5% chance of some rain. But that rain is currently happening over Manuka Oval. Hello, cricket nuffs. It is already time for game three of the T20 component of this multiformat Ashes series. The first match saw England make a very good score, then Australia pulverise it in reply. The second match yesterday was a washout in what is otherwise supposed to be a fairly dry week in Canberra. The forecast for today looks fine. Or so I thought... Not so for Tayla Vlaeminck though. Australia’s fastest woman missed a lot of cricket starting in 2020 with a stress fracture in her foot. Now after a few matches back it has gone again. Awful news for her, with another missed World Cup coming up. England need to find something in her absence today, otherwise they’ll be looking at a 5-1 points tally and a series already slipping away.Margaret (Sundance stalwart Rebecca Hall) has her life in careful order. Her sleek apartment, high-powered job, chic power suits, reliable fuck buddy – it’s all precisely crafted and, most importantly, controlled. In the opening scene, she’s doling out advice on how to deal with a toxic boyfriend to an intern impressed by her wisdom and composure. She heads home to take care of her teenage daughter. But there are slight cracks. Her married paramour is a little too interested, her daughter a little too smothered. So when a sinister figure from her past crash-lands into her life, those cracks start to deepen and Margaret starts to unravel. The figure is David (a menacing Tim Roth), the very sight of whom makes Margaret panic. He is someone to be feared, although in writer-director Andrew Semans’ bumpy thriller, the hows and whys are initially kept in the shadows. We know she wants him gone and we know she wants her daughter to stay well away but it takes until around 35 minutes in for us to know why. Why is there a tooth in her daughter’s purse? Why is she dreaming of a charred baby? The grimy details are best left secret for maximum enjoyment of the film, but David was a lover, 22 years prior, when Margaret was still a teenager. He wielded an unusual, chilling power over her and now he’s back to see if she can still be kept under his spell. When it’s working, there’s something horribly effective about Resurrection, a horror-tinged thriller that tries doubling as a drama about the long-term effects of abuse. David was able to trap an 18-year-old Margaret in a sadistic relationship, making her do things she would have otherwise balked at, creating a fragile yet intoxicating delusion where real world rules had no place. Years later, having distanced herself from that trauma, Margaret is sucked back into that headspace, a horrifying return to a dangerous place, a nightmare she woke from now seeping into her adult life. Margaret hasn’t been able to fully process what really happened (she hasn’t told a single person about it) and with David trying to control her once again she’s a maelstrom of anger and untapped violence while, chillingly, still vulnerable to David’s unhinged charm. There’s something Haneke-like about the first half, far less opaque for sure but similarly chilly. There are also echoes of Yorgos Lanthimos’s The Killing of a Sacred Deer. Hall, as one would expect, sells the hell out of this, bristling with fury and gripped by a fear not just aimed at David but at herself and what she might be capable of doing. It’s yet another top-of-her-game turn (a scene of her uncontrollably crying alone is truly shattering) but like her last Sundance thriller, the supernatural mystery The Night House, Hall gives more then she gets in return, a performance in a league far too high for Semans’ jumbled script to reach. The plot falls apart faster than Hall’s character and post-reveal we’re lost in a repetitive spiral, Semans unable to build on a grim foundation. The intriguingly unpacked psychology of the first half unravels in overly simplistic terms, a character study falling apart as it transforms into a midnight movie. It has the feeling of a short film stretched beyond its limit, with all that early tension dissipating, and while there’s certainly something jolting about the gonzo violence in the finale, it’s otherwise ineffectual. Semans chooses to end on a surreal, ambiguous note, but it’s one that feels less daring and more down to a lack of better ideas. Hall yet again is supreme, the film, yet again, less so. Resurrection is showing at the Sundance film festival with a release date yet to be announcedThe gen-Z demographic who use TikTok may be too young to remember a time before smartphones, but one of the most popular fashion trends on the app harks back to a bygone era. Opera gloves – as worn by screen stars such as Marilyn Monroe, Audrey Hepburn and Rita Hayworth – are taking off. Videos with the hashtag have had 275,000 views on TikTok. According to a study carried out by Clothes2Order, that represents a Google search increase of 84% in the second half of 2021. The surging interest in a clothing item that would once have been worn to an elite cultural event, the opera, has been repurposed over the years and is now being sported by popular musicians and actors. Adele, Olivia Rodrigo and Cardi B and Megan Thee Stallion have worn them in videos, while Julia Fox and Euphoria’s Sydney Sweeney have worn them to events. The red carpet at the Fashion Awards in December saw attenders get behind the trend – Demi Moore, Alexa Chung and Kristen McMenamy wore opera gloves. Beyoncé, meanwhile, has made them something of a signature. At the Grammys last year, she sported leather opera gloves with matching dress. Opera gloves are on the catwalk too – at brands ranging from Valentino to Marc Jacobs, Fendi and Richard Quinn. More accessible labels, often aimed at a younger demographic, are also selling them. Heaven by Marc Jacobs, typically a collection inspired by 1990s club kids, sells dresses with gloves. Kai Collective, a brand established in London in 2016 by fashion blogger Fisayo Longe, has its popular Gaia gloves for £45. And Miscreants, set up by 29-year-old Central Saint Martins graduate Lillie Hand in 2019, has designs using velvet, feathers and bows, worn by women ranging from singer Lizzo to Joan Collins. In 2022’s iteration of this look, gloves are paired with dresses, made in matching prints. When Hand launched Miscreants, the first design was the Cupid little black dress and matching gloves. “Since then, a lot of magazines would just request the gloves,” she says. “We built on that, did detachable bows and puffs and the feathers, and it’s just got a bit out of control.” Hand believes the popularity on the red carpet has had its impact on the trend: “They’re so fashionable at the moment. And obviously every time you see a red carpet then celebrities are mainly wearing gloves. I think they’re elegant, they’re classy.” It’s this classiness – a nod to the glamour of Hollywood’s golden age – which gives them a big tick. While gloves have been worn by women for hundreds of years, opera gloves were particularly fashionable in the 1950s. Not only were they worn to the opera, but also by movie stars, and debutantes at their coming out ball and a young Princess Margaret. “I have an affinity with 50s and 60s couture and gloves are so integral to this look,” says designer Richard Quinn. “They are so elegant … it’s an interesting way to extend and finish the silhouette.” Boxsets such as The Crown and Bridgerton have also probably had their part to play in these gloves becoming popular. “They are borderline costume,” says Hand. “Since I’ve started Miscreants, I’ve noticed everybody likes to dress up.” Hand is fond of dressing up – and praises opera gloves for their adaptability, a surefire plus point for a generation not known for its attention span. “They complete the outfit,” she says. “And if you want to dress down, you can just take them off, put them in your bag.”Perth has registered a record sixth consecutive day over 40C as the heatwave in Western Australia continued on Sunday ahead of an expected cool change on Monday. Perth reached 40.1C about midday on Sunday, marking the 11th day above 40C this summer. Perth’s previous record for total summer days over 40C was seven days in 2015-16. When Perth reached 40C on Friday for a fourth consecutive day it matched the previous record sequence reached in the WA capital on three previous occasions, including last Christmas. Luke Huntington, duty forecaster at the Bureau of Meteorology in WA, said it had been “particularly hot all along the west coast” with Geraldton recording five days over 43C from Tuesday and Carnarvon reaching 45C. Huntington told Guardian Australia there was “definitely a cool change coming through for tomorrow, we’re back down to 33C [in Perth] tomorrow”. “It looks like cooler temperatures throughout the week, around the low 30s, but it looks like the heat returns next weekend, with tops near 40 again.” “Perth’s summer [heatwaves] are typically caused by a heat trough, which usually forms down the west coast, and when it’s offshore it brings down the hot hair through inland parts, then when it moves inland it brings cooler sea breezes. “What’s unusual about this event is the trough has remained offshore for multiple days, bringing that hot air down. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Normally we’d only see that trough hanging around for two or three days. For some reason, which we’re not too sure about yet, that trough has been hanging off the coast for at least four or five days.” Last week a temperature of 50.7C was recorded at Onslow in WA’s Pilbara region, matching the hottest temperature ever recorded in Australia, according to the preliminary data. Two other sites notched 50C-plus temperatures, a level only previously reported three times on standardised equipment. On Friday, Robert Lawry, a senior hydrologist at the bureau’s WA office, said February is typically Perth’s hottest month. The previous periods with seven 40C days in Perth between November and March came in 2006-07, 2015-16 and 2019-20, a tally already exceeded this summer. “There’s a pretty obvious trend there,” Lawry said. “They’ve all happened in the last 20 years.” The odds of enduring very hot temperatures have already increased substantially as a result of climate change, he said, adding, “this kind of thing is what you can expect to happen more frequently”. The bureau’s forecast for the Victorian capital is for a week of days reaching 30C or more. Sydney, though, is in for a continuation of its mostly muggy and damp days, with humidity levels well above the norm for January.In 19th-century Macedonia, a witch roams the hills. She’s a ghoulish cautionary tale told to children, referred to as the wolf-eateress. But one day, to a new mother in an isolated house, she’s suddenly very real, hovering above the baby, thirsty for fresh blood. The woman pleads, begs for a deal. If the witch returns when her daughter is 16, she can take her then. The witch agrees, but as a sign of their bargain cuts the baby’s tongue, rendering her incapable of speech. It’s a bold, attention-securing first scene, writer-director Goran Stolevski taking one of many big swings in a one-of-a-kind debut, arresting not just because of its horrific act of violence against a baby (it is mercifully not explicit) but of its calm, matter-of-fact nature. In Stolevski’s vividly wrought world, the supernatural is an accepted part of life. It’s feared and demonised, yes, but whenever it crashes into scene, it’s not met with great shock, more an inevitable sigh. It comes for us all. The desperate mother feigns a loss, that the witch has taken her child, allowing her to hide the baby in a cave, a sacred place she believes will be safe. The child grows up feral, afraid but curious, until one day, the witch finds and takes her. She gives her the spit, which in the world of the film is a conversion, given just once in a witch’s lifetime, making the child immortal as well, able to switch bodies when she meets someone she wants to inhabit. And so begins a fascinating journey, a life in the bodies of others. There are vague shades of Jonathan Glazer’s Under the Skin and, in his less self-indulgent, less recent films, the work of Terrence Malick. But Stolevski’s film is confidently of his own creation. Most of the dialogue is Macedonian narration, the fractured speech of someone figuring out how to be, in awe of nature while weighed down by a mounting disappointment in humanity, in how women are manhandled and sexualised, a stranger able to look at how unjust such an accepted and normalised patriarchy might then seem. It’s a deft and thrilling conceit, experiencing the highs and lows of life through different people. Stolevski, in a film that feels less like a debut and more a late-stage magnum opus, has found an ingenious vessel to make profound observations on gender, sex and being. The bodies allow for an international cast – Swedish Noomi Rapace, Australian Alice Englert, Portugese Carloto Cotta and Macedonian Sara Klimoska – each sharing an ever-learning wonder and a physical awkwardness, an incredible feat of collective and consistent acting. Experiencing life as a man provides an illuminating lesson, his odd behaviour laughed off by others or blamed on the evils of women while sex is meant to be pleasurable and controlled. As a woman, life is based more on violence and subjugation and sex is to be tolerated (she’s told not to relish the act). But the film is not steeped in oppressive darkness, it’s a tale of growing strength and unwavering endurance and how to find joy in a life that many might tell you is without it. With just short films under his belt before this, Stolevski is operating at a higher, more assured level than most with a great deal more experience. As a director, he’s as thrilled by the specifics of nature and human interaction as his protagonist, picking out the curious small things and suddenly making them that feel that much bigger, cracking open this world for us all. As a writer, he’s capable of remarkable insight and empathy, shown most effectively in the late-stage reveal of a harrowing backstory for the wolf-eateress, a woman destroyed by male expectation and judgment. His film toys with fairy tale fantasy and gruesome body horror – there are plenty of torn innards on display – but he has ultimately created something indefinable, gloriously so, like nothing we’ve really ever seen before and like nothing we’re likely to see again. You Won’t Be Alone is showing at the Sundance film festival and will be in cinemas on 1 AprilNew South Wales and Victoria have announced near-identical plans to slow the spread of Covid as students return to classrooms next week with both states relying on rapid antigen tests (RATs) in the first month. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, and the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, outlined their state plans on Sunday acknowledging they had collaborated so the two biggest jurisdictions were in sync. The leaders agreed that getting students back into the classroom after two years of disrupted learning was a priority despite the Omicron wave sweeping across Australia. Perrottet said that some students had spent a quarter of their schooling at home. “What is most important about this approach is that it allows students to enjoy all aspects of their schooling in a safe and sensible way,” he said. Here we outline how the NSW and Victoria plans are similar, where they differ, and what we are still waiting to learn. What is the same? Twice-weekly testing with RATs Both states will provide staff and students with enough rapid antigen tests to facilitate twice-weekly surveillance testing during the first four weeks of term one. In NSW, Perrottet announced the state government would provide more than 12m RATs to over 3,150 government and non-government schools and also early childhood centre staff. Schools should receive the first 6m tests by Wednesday ready to be distributed to parents. In Victoria, Andrews said a total 14m RATs would be delivered across the coming weeks. He said 6.6m tests will be at school by the time classes start back next week. In contrast to NSW, Andrews said that there will also be enough RATs to allow students and staff at specialist schools to test for the virus every day to better protect medically vulnerable children against severe illness. Andrews warned that there will be cases in schools but he said surveillance testing was about “finding as many cases as we can and shutting down those chains of transmission”. “We have to get schools back. Once they get back, given how much Omicron is in the community, there will be cases,” the Victorian premier said. No contact tracing Schools will no longer close in NSW or Victoria if a student tests positive for the virus – and there will be no contact tracing for students or staff. The Victorian deputy premier, James Merlino, told reporters “the approach in schools and kindergartens will be in line with any communicable disease” – a sentiment echoed by his NSW counterparts. Parents of children who test positive for Covid in NSW or Victoria will need to keep the child at home, let the school know, and report the case to their state health authority. It will then be up to schools to contact other parents to let them know there has been a positive case in the school community and to monitor their child for symptoms. In both NSW and Victoria anyone who tests positive to Covid must isolate for seven days. The NSW chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, appeared to step beyond her government’s official advice, warning parents not to send their symptomatic children to school even if they have tested negative for Covid-19 on a rapid antigen test. “Even if they have a negative test on the first day, please keep them home and do a repeat test. Only send them back if there is an alternate diagnosis,” she said on Sunday. School events Both states on Sunday suggested that school events like assemblies, sport and excursions will be allowed to go ahead with Covid-safe plans. How do the NSW and Victoria plans differ? Mandatory masks Masks will be mandatory for high school staff and students in both states. The two states differ, though, when it comes to masks in primary school. In Victoria, masks will also be mandatory for students in grade three and above and highly recommended for those in prep, grade one and grade two. In NSW masks will just be recommended for primary school students. Booster shots for teachers A third Covid vaccine dose will be compulsory for school staff in Victoria. Merlino announced on Sunday that Victorian school and early childhood staff will be required to get a booster shot by 25 February or within three months and two weeks of their second jab. Merlino said he thought the workforce would “enthusiastically respond” to the new mandate given that 99.7% of staff were double-vaccinated by the end of term four in 2021. In NSW, Perrottet said last week that state education department school-based staff would be required to have a booster shot. But a spokesperson for the education minister, Sarah Mitchell, told the Guardian on Sunday the government was still working with NSW Health to update the health orders. They noted staff would be given sufficient time to comply with the changes. Air purifiers and outdoor learning Both state governments are upping the number of air purifiers in schools. The NSW state government will distribute about 20,000 air purifiers to schools while Victoria is providing 51,000. Merlino said the Victorian government was focused on providing purifiers to high-risk settings with poor ventilation, like music rooms, staff rooms and indoor canteens. He didn’t shy away from flagging that “no other jurisdiction is rolling out our purifiers as we are here in Victoria”. Merlino said that some classes could be moved outdoors, especially during the warmer months. He said more than 1,800 schools applied for a government shade cloth grant, noting that construction had already begun at more than 300 schools. What are we still in the dark about? Staffing arrangements Both state governments flagged that staff shortages would be one of the biggest challenges when students returned to the classroom, as teachers test positive for the virus or need to stay home to care for cases or close contacts. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning State leaders said that, in addition to schools’ casual teaching workforces, they would draw upon retired teaching staff, final-year teaching students at university, departmental staff, and school principals and vice-principals to keep classrooms open. Merlino said that “remote learning is an absolute last resort” and classrooms would only close down due to staff shortages “for the shortest period of time [and] only localised to particular schools”. Will this be enough? The president of the NSW Teachers’ Association, Angelo Gavrielatos, said the state government should be doing more to protect staff as they returned to school. “With respect to rapid antigen testing, we support the use of those tests twice a week in what is described as a surveillance approach,” Gavrielatos said, but he questioned whether more RATs could be needed for additional testing each week. Gavrielatos also argued that the NSW government should make mask-wearing a requirement for anyone in schools in indoor settings. He said the teachers’ association would push for the provision of high-quality masks such as P2 masks. And he warned against forcing staff to return to work if they were close contacts. “Any suggestion that staff would be directed to return to work when they are close contacts is quite frankly beyond comprehension because all that will do is increase risk rather than mitigate against risk,” he said. “It is not practical because those staff that are close contacts … will invariably be caring for other members of their household. These are not practical [measures] and quite frankly not supported.” Both NSW and Victoria will allow teachers to attend school even if they are close contacts of a known case so long as they produce a daily negative RAT. What are other states doing? We are yet to hear if other states are modifying their back-to-school plans in light of the Omicron variant and high rates of community transmission. The Queensland health minister, Yvette D’Ath, on Sunday ruled out rapid antigen testing school students twice a week. Queensland has delayed term one by a fortnight. D’Ath said there was no national health advice for twice-weekly RATs and it was “not a comfortable test at the best of times”. Rapid test supplies were also in short supply in Queensland, the minister said. “We believe that those tests are best focused in the areas where we need them the most, such as ... being able to get hold of them for critical essential workers, aged care and health.”Are there no tactics to which a disgraced and unpopular prime minister will not sink in his desperate attempt to cling on against the odds? For Boris Johnson, it would seem not. In the last week, there have been further revelations about the underhand tactics his whips have deployed to keep MPs loyal: threats of placing hostile stories about their private lives in the press or of withdrawing planned funding to the detriment of their constituents. Meanwhile, the government has pushed out story after story to try to distract from critical headlines; policymaking has become no more than an instrument to try to save Johnson’s skin, regardless of the consequences. Just over a decade ago, the parliamentary expenses scandal exposed the gulf between what MPs thought was acceptable and what the public was willing to accept. Too many parliamentarians saw the manipulation of expenses loopholes as compensation for their public office; voters saw it as greed and corruption. The row that has erupted over the parliamentary whipping exposes a similar dynamic. Allies of the prime minister and Westminster stalwarts argue putting pressure on MPs to express support or vote with the government is just part of the rough and tumble of politics. But voters quite rightly do not expect a government to extract loyalty from its backbenchers by threatening constituency funding or warning that if they rebel there will be nasty stories in the press. Christian Wakeford, the Conservative MP for Bury South who defected to Labour last week, claimed he was threatened with the withdrawal of funding for a new school in his constituency if he did not vote with the government against summer holiday meals for pupils from low-income families. The Conservative backbencher William Wragg has revealed that colleagues have come to him reporting that the whips had attempted to blackmail them into continuing to support Johnson; he will be meeting the Metropolitan police to discuss these allegations. Chris Bryant, the Labour chair of the Commons standards committee, says he has heard MPs alleging that Johnson himself has been involved in this blackmail. At best, this is political corruption, at worst, criminal conduct. There urgently needs to be an independent inquiry into these allegations. But such an endeavour is vanishingly unlikely from a government whose main focus at the moment is avoiding accountability for the culture of boozy parties that has ended up with the prime minister himself being accused of breaking lockdown laws and of misleading parliament. Everything Johnson and his government are now doing is driven by panic and narrow political interests. Nothing is sacred, everything is fair game. The distraction techniques over the last week, dubbed by his allies as “Operation Red Meat”, have involved the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, launching a politically motivated attack on the BBC, unilaterally announcing a two-year funding freeze and implying that the licence fee would be abolished altogether in 2027, from which she later rowed back. The BBC is a vital national institution that has already made significant cutbacks; it cannot afford a funding cut. The home secretary, Priti Patel, has announced that the armed forces would take charge of operations to limit the number of asylum seekers trying to cross the Channel, in a move the defence select committee chair has described as “rushed” and a massive distraction for the armed forces. Yet another country – this time Ghana – has been forced to call out the government’s false claims that it is in talks with it to process migrants offshore, a move that would anyway probably contradict international law. Meanwhile, the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, aimed for the front pages with his announcement he would be clamping down on excess train announcements, to the bewilderment of people affected by far more pressing transport issues across the country. The longer this corrupt and hypocritical government limps on, the greater the risk it does long-term damage to public trust in the institutions of democracy. How can citizens trust a government to act in their interest while it wheels out ludicrous announcements that serve no purpose other than attempting to bolster a prime minister mired in crisis after crisis? Nowhere is this true more than with Covid. During an ongoing national emergency, it is critical the public trusts the government to take decisions for the right reasons, based on evidence rather than its desire to capture the news cycle. It is extremely good news that Omicron infection rates are falling. But is the government dropping plan B measures – including the compulsory wearing of masks – this week because the data indicates this is appropriate or for the purposes of generating a feelgood news story? The cynicism Johnson is embedding in the electorate will not evaporate with the end of his premiership. Johnson may last another month; he may last another year. But he is prime minister of this country in name alone: despite winning a large majority just two years ago, his authority has leached away entirely as a result of his incompetence and lack of integrity. The longer the Conservative party props him up, the more he undermines the notion of standards in public life.• A recipe for pork and crab dumplings to celebrate lunar new year was illustrated with a photograph that showed a sheet of joss paper next to the dish. Such paper is burned for the dead at funerals and in other rituals in China and other parts of Asia. We apologise for this cultural error and would also like to clarify that chef Ching-He Huang, who created the recipe, was not involved in the mistake (Over the moon, 16 January, Food Monthly, p34). • Many readers noted that a Speedy crossword clue – US WWII general, later President (8) – called for a solution that erred in both spelling and length (“No 1,372”, 16 January, p59). While solvers wanted, correctly, to write “Eisenhower”, the grid was calling for “Isenhour”. The online version of the clue, 6 down, has been replaced. • A profile of Antony Jenkins referred to him as chief executive of 10x Future Technologies. The company is now known as 10x Banking (16 January, p50). • We said the hotel No 1 by Guesthouse was opening in York later this month; in fact, its doors opened in December (Making an entrance, 9 January, Magazine, p35). • A picture caption misdescribed Democrat Stacey Abrams as “now governor of Georgia”. Abrams, who is running for governor in 2022, lost her 2018 bid to Republican Brian Kemp (How did he do? Biden one year on, 9 January, New Review, p8). • Homophone corner: “These are voters who leant their vote to the Conservatives in 2019 and hoped to see a ‘levelled-up’ country.” (The end?, 16 January, p29). Other recently amended articles include: England’s north-south divide is deepening, says new report Trail of African bling reveals 50,000-year-old social network Archaeology’s sexual revolution Bambi: cute, lovable, vulnerable ... or a dark parable of antisemitic terror? How antivirals provide hope to vulnerable Covid patients Write to the Readers’ Editor, the Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736The words “garden village” give rise in me to feelings of helplessness and despair. This was certainly the case after reading the article “Uproar in the garden of England as homes plan swallows up villages” (News). Stuck on to the south of Carlisle, a so-called garden village comprising 10,000 houses will be built in the near future. The destruction of agricultural land, woodland areas and other aspects of the rural Cumbrian landscape is apparently of no importance. Also of little importance appears to be the fact that within Carlisle there are 1,000 empty houses. In the nearby market town of Wigton, more than 100 empty houses are quietly mouldering. If this is the situation in Cumbria, it is probably the same dismal picture all over the UK – decaying empty buildings and brownfield sites put to no good use. Many years ago, I lived in Kent. As a schoolgirl, I and a close friend spent happy hours cycling in the countryside, and one of our favourite haunts was a steep hill near Westerham. In the distance we could see Chartwell, Churchill’s country pile. I wonder what he would think of the urbanisation of the garden of England. It might have brought on one of his bouts of depression. Alison Thompson Thursby, Cumbria Why does Gareth Rubin assume the planned houses in Kent will be a bad thing? Please don’t listen to the nimbys. No one wants more high-rise flats but if we build traditional houses with decent gardens, the birds, bees and insects will be fine. Just plant trees and lavender. Or even weeds; bees love dandelions. Angela Singer Cambridge Short shrift Re “Catholics who aren’t religious” (Letters): 20-odd years ago, when Clare Short was secretary of state for international relations, she went on a fact-finding mission to former Yugoslavia, where she met groups of “ethnic Muslims”. On her return, she said that she’d discovered from that encounter that she was an “ethnic Catholic”. Pam Lunn Kenilworth, Warwickshire Plan for a fairer society The Institute for Public Policy Research report highlighting the worsening north/south divide and the inequality of public investments in the two regions draws attention to how public investments affect land value and therefore land wealth, which is concentrated in the ownership of a few (“Levelling up? No… figures show divide is widening”, News). Economists and politicians have enough evidence to show how good public investment in transport, education, healthcare, green spaces etc makes areas more desirable for homes and businesses to locate, pushing up land values. Given that taxpayers from all over the UK pay for public investments, why don’t taxpayers all over the UK share equally in the economic benefits such investments bring about? If our distorted and unfair tax system were changed to one based on returning all land and other natural resource wealth to the public purse, then we could have equality and fairness in society and a sustainable source of funding for maintaining and developing our public services and an economy that makes us use our land and other natural resources sparingly helping provide a clean environment to all. Heather Wetzel Hanworth, London House design is child’s play The inspiration for the Red House in Dorset is not CFA Voysey or Louis Kahn, it is Bayko, the British construction toy popular in the 1940s and 50s (Architecture, the New Review). The pitched roof, arched entrance, curved bay windows and brick panels will be unmistakable to anyone who created model buildings using Bayko’s red, white and green Bakelite pieces. John Cottrell London NW1 Prison no place for pregnancy The appalling case of a baby stillborn in a prison toilet shows it is high time we followed the lead of other countries that have had the common sense to pass legislation preventing imprisonment of pregnant women (“Trauma of jailing pregnant women puts babies at risk, study warns”, News). The Swiss Criminal Code allows a “departure from the rules governing the execution of sentences in the favour of an inmate in the event of pregnancy”. Swedish law allows sentence postponement when a female inmate is pregnant, the duration of which is determined by what is considered to be reasonable. Even in China, the law allows for a woman sentenced to imprisonment to temporarily serve her sentence outside prison while pregnant. Prison is not, and will never be, a safe place for pregnant women. Inmate healthcare is evidently a grey area in UK legislation and when the NHS, responsible for the provision of healthcare in detained settings, last published a report summarising strategic directives for improving healthcare in the justice system, pregnancy was not even mentioned. Emilie McRae Trowbridge, Wiltshire Arts and the man Where will it all end – do we have to remove Picasso’s work from public view because he was a deeply unpleasant man (“Sometimes a statue is indefensible – the BBC should get rid of Eric Gill”, Comment)? Human beings are often nasty, messy, contradictory, complicated, wonderful beings. Often within the same person. We have to be able to separate these qualities and appreciate that which is of great value while rejecting that which is unacceptable. Without diminishing either. Kris Watson London N8 The residents of one of the apartment buildings on Bellway Homes’ Printworks development in Reading might want to consider renaming their building. All three are named for popular typefaces: Lucida and Helvetica are fine; the other one is Perpetua, a beautiful typeface designed by Eric Gill. Pauline Caldwell Derby Take back control? No chance Louisa Young claims the heart and penis are the only human organs that move other than under voluntary control (“Hindu gods, Aztec rites, Blondie hits… why the heart is humanity’s eternal symbol”, Focus). Has she never seen an episode of Call the Midwife, all of which portray the ability of the uterus to move of its own accord? Also, our intestines and other organs shift our food along the alimentary canal with little regard for our wishes. Finally, the skin, has the ability to – quite literally – make our hair stand on end. As in other aspects of life, there are limits to how much one can take back control. Tim Forcer SouthamptonPort of Leith Lind &amp; Lime Gin (£34.95, masterofmalt.com; craft365.co.uk) It’s Burns Night on Tuesday, which, for drinks columns like this, is usually an excuse to roll out the whisky barrel. There’s a simple reason for that: Scotch is far and away the most successful Scottish food and drink product, and its sheer scale dwarfs the rest of the Scottish drinks industry. According to the Scotch Whisky Association, Scotch accounted for 75% of Scotland’s (and 21% of the UK’s) food and drink exports in 2021, even if a combination of Brexit and (now rescinded) US tariffs have seen it lose more than £1bn worth of exports since 2019 (taking the figure for 2021 down to £3.8bn from £4.9bn in 2019). Still, the dominance of whisky does rather invite the question that a (Scottish) friend of mine asked me after my last whisky-monopolised contribution to the pre-Burns Night drinks column genre: don’t the Scots have any other drinks to offer? A question that he followed up the next time I saw him with a glass of G&amp;T using Edinburgh’s gloriously pure, critussy Lime &amp; Lind gin as a base. Swannay Brewery Orkney Porter (£3.70, swannaybrewery.com) My friend’s liquid punchline was only slightly undermined by the fact Lime &amp; Lind is part of an exciting ongoing project helping to revive Edinburgh’s whisky heritage which includes the construction of a striking multi-storey (“vertical”) distillery on the waterfront in Leith, and which is due to finally open after a series of logistical and Covid-inspired delays, sometime over the summer. Scotland has more than its fair share of other genuinely distinctive, high-quality gins, from the enormously successful original Scottish craft gin Hendrick’s produced in Ayrshire (£29, 70cl, Tesco) to the brisk, crisply herbal-aromatic, subtly Sugar Kelp-infused, Isle of Harris Gin (£40, 70cl, harrisdistillery.com). And although I don’t think the location of a brewery is anything like as important in shaping a beer’s flavour as the location of a vineyard is in shaping a wine’s (or a distillery is for whisky or gin for that matter), Scottish craft-brewing does seem to me particularly creative. It’s certainly responsible for a high proportion of my favourite beers, such as Swannay Brewery’s darkly alluring, 9% abv classic Orkney Porter. M&amp;S 12 Year Old Highland Single Malt Scotch Whisky (from £31.50, Marks &amp; Spencer, ocado.com) Beer has an obvious affinity with whisky, with that key trio of ingredients: water, barley and yeast. And some of the best and most distinctive Scottish beers make the most of this connection, using used Scotch whisky barrels to impart a little whisky-like rounded complexity and flavour. First brewed in 2003, Innis &amp; Gunn’s The Original (£2, Morrisons), a golden ale made with three different malts that is aged in single malt whisky casks, is wonderfully suave, creamy, and laced with vanilla but brightly refreshing, too, an 6.6% abv brew that would work superbly with a scallops first course at any Burn’s Feast. For the haggis, meanwhile, I might switch to the richer, darker, roasted mocha intensity of Harviestoun’s 8% abv Ola Dubh 12 Year Old Whisky Aged (£4, 33cl, as part of a case of three bottles, harviestoun.com), before finishing off with at least one dram of whisky: M&amp;S’s superb value, silky Highland bottling, perhaps, or a full peaty-smoky hit of Islay’s Bruichladdich Port Charlotte 10 Year Old Whisky (£52, Waitrose). Follow David Williams on Twitter @DaveydaibachBayside Social, 1 Beach Parade, Worthing BN11 2FG (01903 867050; baysidesocial.co.uk). Small plates £4-£13, desserts £7-£8, wines from £21 English seaside towns off-season are often said to be romantic places of sweet desolation and benign neglect. There is nothing romantic about Worthing today. Instead, my relationship with the town feels hotly dysfunctional, like it’s strapped me to the wall bars and is calling me filthy names. A wolf of a gale attempts to strip the clothes off my back, the rain slaps me about the chops and, beyond the beach, an angry sea seems to merge with a sky the colour of the bags beneath my eyes after too many late nights. I came to Worthing for lunch; instead, I am now seeking refuge. I find it courtesy of a handsome wood and glass pavilion with the kind of sturdy bifold doors that the middle classes perv over when they’re getting their kitchens done. I know this because I am that perv. I’ve got those doors. The restaurant is tucked in among sharp new apartment blocks and looks out defiantly at the wind-blasted Channel. Once in here we feel as if we have become spectators on the elements, rather than its victims. It is a good place to be. Bayside Social is the second restaurant from 2018 amateur MasterChef winner Kenny Tutt, a former banker who ran away to join the circus. He has clearly decided just one ring won’t do. The online menu at his first place, Pitch, located further into his home town, is a grown-up affair offering confited salmon with aerated hollandaise for £10 and local venison with pommes Anna for £22. It is clearly a serious restaurant; the sort an amateur changing career to become a professional uses to make a statement of intent. This new venture, which opened last September, is the confident, relaxed second child of a team that now knows what it’s doing. This sort of multifunctional operation, which has to be many things to many people at many different times of day, is harder to pull off than a traditional restaurant. It’s all about flexibility. Ahead of my visit, for example, I become mildly obsessed with browsing the breakfast menu: the shakshuka baked eggs for £8, the full English with its “old English breed” sausages, the three ways with eggs benedict and the option to add Ramsay black pudding or “homestyle” potatoes. I probably would add potatoes to my breakfast. That feels like me. The general all-day menu is a modish parade of small plates priced at between £6 and £8. Only the few dishes involving showy ingredients, like scallops and beef, nudge into double figures. Outside the weather is a cacophony of blues and gunmetal greys; inside it is all riotous colour and wake-me-up flavours. The menu is pleasingly fish-heavy, as it should be this close to the sea. After all, if the doors were open you could lob a Riedel glass from your table and get it in the surf. A greaseless stack of white fish tempura, so vaguely named because the fish involved might change depending on the available catch, is today made with haddock. It’s bound in a bright yellow lacy batter. On the side is a cheerfully rough and ready tartare, which is exceptionally light on binding mayonnaise and big on all the chopped gherkins and capers. The fish cookery, as with almost everything we try, is on point. Slabs of salty smoked haddock arrive on a foamy hollandaise, and glazed with a toasted layer of tart cheddar. It is lunchtime, but it feels like the table has been invaded by a moment from an old-fashioned high tea. Then we’re off to the northern shores of the Med, courtesy of a piece of hake, the skin crisply roasted, the flesh pearly white, laid across a heap of a white bean cassoulet with salty nuggets of chorizo. There is a bowl of fat king prawns, so fresh they squeak a little beneath the teeth, in a steamy lake of garlic butter spiked with Aleppo chilli. On the side there is a hard crusted piece of olive-studded focaccia, which softens quickly in the deep swamp of melted dairy. They make their own sausages here. The cumin-spiked lamb merguez have a dense, sticky quality, and come on a mess of stewed chickpeas dressed with the ludicrously vivid pink of quick pickled onion ribbons. A small dollop of labneh, or strained yoghurt, helps lubricate everything. It is early in January and pigs in blankets are still on the menu. I order them out of some misplaced wistfulness. They come with an overly sweet Cumberland sauce that, in the oven heat, has started to set and attempts to glue my teeth together. I know I will be picking bits of this out of my molars all the way up the train line home. It really is the only thing I can find to quibble over. No worries. There is a plate of their crunchy and vivid long-stem broccoli in a miso dressing. This has the double benefit of making you feel like you are a good person who believes in the way of the vegetable, while also dislodging lumps of a cumberland sauce which has gone far beyond soft ball stage, and is now auditioning for a role as a denture adhesive. Florets of caramelised cauliflower rest on a thick purée of darkly roasted onion. Given my whine about the cumberland sauce, it is obtuse of me to complain now that the pear tarte tatin is a little light on caramel stickiness, but only people who are desperate to please, cleave to notions of consistency. I won’t ever be one of those. I am however very taken by a Black Forest Eton mess, the bright purple cream given acidic vigour from black cherry. It is big on meringue and there are squares of a cherry kirsch jelly. After all that has gone before we do not need to finish it. We finish it. At the end there is a deep, dark-roasted espresso with none of the acidic notes the young people seem to like these days. God is in the detail and the detail has been fully attended to. Looking about the room I can suddenly see how it will be in summer: all those doors thrown open to let in the light sea breezes and the breath of saline. It will be a place of louche afternoons and sunshine. For now, though, the afternoon light is draining away and the wind is still cracking its cheeks. We must step outside. To be honest, I’d much rather stay in here and just start all over again. News bites Chef Nathan Outlaw, who closed his flagship restaurant at the height of the pandemic and opened the more casual Outlaw’s New Road in Cornwall’s Port Isaac, is expanding. He and his wife Rachel have bought the Stargazy Inn, a well-known pub with rooms boasting great views out over the coast, also in Port Isaac. ‘I’ve been gazing at the property from our restaurant Outlaw’s New Road, just a stone’s throw away, dreaming that one day we could get our hands on this property,’ Outlaw told Cornwall Live. ‘And now we have the keys.’ At outlaws.co.uk. In other expansion news, KFC has announced plans to open 500 new restaurants across the UK, a massive expansion from its existing 900 outlets. A lot of the growth will, they say, be through the opening of drive-throughs. Because what this country really needs now is more fried chicken. A grateful nation rejoices. Visit kfc.co.uk. Friends and neighbours of Sugarcane, a Caribbean restaurant on the Wandsworth Road, south London, have launched a fundraiser after it was broken into two weeks ago. Windows and shutters were smashed, and cash, equipment and stock were stolen. While insurance has covered some of it, owner Chef T is still down thousands of pounds which he does not have and without support will have to close. You’ll find the fundraiser here. Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1The first part of a three-week course in ‘making dreams happen’ in the 21 March 1993 issue of the Observer Magazine (‘The science of success’) had an odd cover with gases bubbling up containing various luminaries, suggesting rather more ephemeral success – though perhaps a comment on Anita Roddick’s ‘natural’ Body Shop products. Still, in ‘the quest for fulfilment’, even two of the best managed companies in the post-war years – IBM and GM – had recently announced the ‘two biggest annual losses in corporate history’, so who knew any more about the solidity of success? ‘In the 80s, popular work scientists and their followers often admired people who excelled in making it happen,’ wrote Richard Askwith. ‘One bestseller of the period with a revealing title was Wess Roberts’s The Leadership Secrets of Attila the Hun… modern ideals include Donald Trump… and Margaret Thatcher.’ Though the latter only figuratively skewered their enemies. ‘In the 1990s, jobs are scarce and precarious, the world is changing at an unprecedented rate and you need to be resilient, flexible and capable of adjusting your sights at short notice,’ said headhunter Yvonne Sarch. ‘The old concept of career ladders to be climbed no longer applies.’ All too true. But I’m not sure Carol Kennedy sold the work of America’s ‘leading business evangelist’, Tom Peters, and his new book, Liberation Management. ‘Its basic message, buried in its 800-plus crowded pages, is that soft industry is superseding lumpy objects.’ One also swerves to avoid ad manager Winston Fletcher. ‘I make as much extra time as possible for work. I never go on a journey without a writing pad and a calculator; and I have a reading light above the bath, because I know I like lazing in it and can put the time to good use by reading business documents.’ How about putting the time having a bath to good use by… having a bath? That’ll be £16.99 please.The question I had a very intense two-year affair with someone who, like me, had long been married. Eighteen months in, I left my wife, feeling sure my affair partner was the love of my life, and in the hope it might lead to us being together. This led to the loss of my home and much of my social network, and the need to change jobs. My affair partner decided to stay in her marriage, citing the wellbeing of her children. She wanted to keep the relationship with me going indefinitely in secret. This rapidly became unbearable to me and I have now cut off all contact, which was not her wish. She was evasive about whether she intended, or even wanted, to leave her marriage and be with me openly. Her final message to me expressed that this was now her intention, but that she could give no sense of a timescale. I have told my wife absolutely everything and she has been phenomenally sane. She is offering to have me home, for a trial period, with a view to mutual kindness, leading to either reconciliation or a better parting. There was much of value in our shared life. I know that the rational thing to do is to assume my affair partner will never be able to be with me, but I still love her and think of her with hope. I have never felt the way I feel when in her presence with anyone else. Every day, a part of me wants to reach out and tell her this, for the millionth time, to try to win her. I obsess about it. Another part of me wants to have no contact. My life is stuck. Philippa’s answer “I wouldn’t want to belong to a club that would have me as a member,” said Groucho Marx. What is the pull of a potential partner who is not committing to you? What is this about? Did you have to work hard to get the approval of a parent? Did a teacher you had a crush on withhold praise? Have you had a pattern of falling for unavailable lovers, those who lived abroad, or were already married? I want you to think about your longing. At the moment, you are your longing, your longing is you, you are it. Take a step back from it. Look at it in a detached way. You’ve told me: “In my whole life, I have never felt the way I feel when in her presence.” And I’m tempted to prompt: “What about your mother when you were two?” Now this might sound far-fetched, but look at the way a toddler wants their parent. Notice the clinging, the desperation, the longing: it’s all there. I’m guessing you may be haunted by an inner ghost of that baby or toddler who longed and longed and sometimes had the ecstasy of being momentarily held, in an intermittent way that reinforced the longing and made you long all the more. The trouble with what is familiar in this way is that it feels right. Sometimes people say love feels like “coming home”, like coming back to what is familiar, from a time even before words could explain that familiarity. You learned how to long – like a sort of default mood for you – before you knew any words. The love you have with your lover sounds like a “falling in love” type of love. The type we see in films where you are swept up in a passive way: it happens to you. Very much, really, like it happens to a baby or a toddler, they don’t do anything, they fall into longing. But the love your wife is showing you? Wow! That is a different sort of love altogether. That isn’t passive, that is love as a verb, that is love as an action, that is the sort of steady, committed, available, consistent kindness that, had you experienced it as a toddler, I don’t think you’d be in this situation now. That is probably the love you need, rather than the one you think you want. What would I advise you to do? Go home and develop the appreciation for your available (at least for the moment; she probably has her limits) kind wife into something deeper. Not the heady obsessional, no-one-has-had-a-love-like-ours craziness that you had for your lover, not that raging sea, but a steady lake than runs deeper than you could have ever imagined. And that old, old scar that your lover picked into a scab will heal and – more than heal – will become memory upon memory of love in action, rather than love that falls down a familiar hole again. Don’t fall into the longing-trap, be loving. It’s better, far better in the long run and leads to something more sustainable. Short answer: be interested, not in your lover, but in the way you long for someone who won’t prioritise you. Find out about that part of you. Find a narrative for how that part came into being. Second, appreciate what you do have. If what I’ve said has any resonance for you, follow it up. If it all seems like double-Dutch, don’t worry, keep seeking help until you find what you need. You may also find a therapist who uses attachment theory useful, too (welldoing.org). If you have a question, send a brief email to askphilippa@observer.co.ukFor the last nine years, Sam Quinones has been studying the changing face of drug use, sales and addiction in the United States. In his new book The Least of Us: True Tales of America and Hope in the Time of Fentanyl and Meth, he tracks the explosion of synthetic drugs that has hit the streets of America, increasing the danger of drug use and making addictive chemical substances far cheaper and more plentiful than ever before. He finds that the days when drug production required land and agriculture are gone. Now drugs are being manufactured from toxic chemicals in vast quantities by Mexican traffickers and introduced to users by slipping them into the supply of other substances, like heroin and cocaine. The Guardian spoke with Quinones about the origins and dangers of synthetic drugs and his theories about the intersection between drug use and homelessness. The conversation has been edited and condensed for clarity. In your 2015 book, Dreamland, you explored how the opioid addiction crisis took hold in the small towns of America, through pain pills marketed by drug companies and overprescribed by doctors. How have opioids changed since then? The opioid epidemic is probably a misnomer by now. It’s actually an epidemic of addiction. The supply is no longer coming from doctors as much. Now you are finding the drugs that the Mexican trafficking world produces – primarily fentanyl and methamphetamines – everywhere. And that is due to the switch traffickers have made towards synthetic drugs. These drugs do not require a plant to produce – just chemicals. These are extraordinarily dangerous drugs. Fentanyl is the deadliest drug we’ve ever known on the streets. And meth has the capabilities of truly turning people mentally ill. These drugs are now all over the country and cheaper and more prevalent than ever before. How does fentanyl fit into the record number of overdoses we’re seeing in the US? Fentanyl is responsible for over 70% of overdoses in the US. The thing about fentanyl, which is very appealing to the drug trafficking world, is that it is so potent. A very small amount will make you a lot of money. One kilo of fentanyl can be cut and turned into 50 kilos of saleable product on the street. But, because it’s so potent, it also can kill people very, very quickly. A few small specks, similar to a few grains of salt, can make you high and a little bit more than that will kill you. A fentanyl high lasts for a short period of time compared to heroin. So people who are addicted have to use it several times a day. And every time they use, they run the risk of getting a mix far, far more potent than they can handle. Which means you’re essentially playing Russian roulette several times a day. How did we end up with so much fentanyl being sold on the streets? Traffickers are making a drug that they never even knew about 15 years ago. When it first arrived in the US, it was coming in the mail from chemical companies in China. They were making it and sending it to buyers who ordered it on the internet. That has ended because China put in place regulations allowing only a few companies to make fentanyl. But companies still make the ingredients for fentanyl and they ship those to Mexico, where traffickers have figured out how to make fentanyl. They have been shipping it up here in quantities that boggle the mind. How did this get to drug users? Were they seeking fentanyl? At first, it was mixed into heroin. They called it heroin, but increasingly it was almost all fentanyl. In later years, street-level dealers began mixing fentanyl into cocaine and methamphetamine as well. It’s a market expansion tool. When you put fentanyl into cocaine, in fairly short order that user will become a fentanyl addict. That addict has to use every day to keep the dope sickness and withdrawals away. Whereas a cocaine user would buy from you every few days or every weekend, this customer has to buy from you every single day. But, of course, you run the risk of killing some of your customers by doing that, because they don’t have tolerances that prepare them for fentanyl. Your book also looked at some devastating changes in the way methamphetamine is being manufactured. Tell me about that. For a lot of years methamphetamine was made with a chemical called ephedrine. Ephedrine is a decongestant found in Sudafed pills. It comes from the ephedra plant. The Mexican drug trafficking world industrialized that process and made methamphetamines with it through the 90s and the 2000s. That drug created a very euphoric feeling; it was a party drug. Finally, in 2008, the Mexican government said only a few companies can possess ephedra and significantly reduced the amount of importation of the chemical. Once the government did that, the trafficking world in Mexico had to find a new way to produce meth. And they found a different way. There are a lot of chemicals. It stinks. It’s complicated. It has one benefit over ephedrine and that is that you can make the precursor many different ways with lots of different legal, industrial, toxic chemicals. The name of this precursor is phenyl-2-propanone, which is commonly known as P2P. With this new method, the government can really never crack down on your meth production the way they did with ephedrine. There are dozens of ways of making it, apparently. What sorts of chemicals are they using? All sorts of industrial, toxic chemicals, like lye and hydrochloric acid. There’s a long, long list of things that can be used. But none of these are chemicals you want to put into your body. They’re used for tanning, perfumes, racing fuels. How did this new formulation of meth change the effects of the drug? First of all, the reformulation allows the mass distribution of methamphetamine unlike we’ve ever seen before. So it’s now all across the country, from LA to Vermont, including regions like New England where it never existed really before in large quantities. Along the way though, what I found is that it is accompanied by rapid onset of severe symptoms of schizophrenia, particularly hallucinations. There is incoherent babbling. There’s an extraordinary degree of paranoia. It’s very intense, so you think everybody’s out to get you. No longer is it a party drug. It’s more of a sinister drug, where you kind of turn inward. How does that affect people’s lives? You believe this changed version of meth is connected to homelessness, right? What happens is people very quickly become homeless. As this form of meth has marched across the country, we have also seen an enormous increase in mental illness and in homelessness, particularly the encampments that we now have in so many towns across the country. I believe the tent encampments are connected intimately with this kind of methamphetamine. Certainly nobody on this form of meth wants to be in a homeless shelter. Because they’re kind of paranoid and scared of everybody. And so people feel a tent is a little pod where you can be alone away from this nasty world. And I believe it’s all connected. Have other experts confirmed this? There have been no neuroscientific studies on this. So what exactly is happening? I don’t know. Is it because the meth has some new formulation or some new kind of chemical in it? Or, on the other hand, is it simply the fact that it’s so much more potent and so cheap and people are using lots of it? I don’t know. What I’m giving you is the street reporting, from talking to people who have worked in this world most of their professional lives, people who have been addicted to it and people now in recovery. Can you tell me about Eric Barrera, the former meth addict you met who first highlighted these changes for you? He had been using methamphetamines since the early 2000s, when Mexican traffickers were almost entirely producing meth using ephedrine. He said he would party all night long and would want to jabber away with everyone. Then, he said, in 2009, everything changed. There was no more of that party euphoria. One night he used methamphetamines and he became scarily paranoid. At his girlfriend’s house, he began stabbing the walls with a butcher knife thinking she was keeping a man inside the walls. He then very quickly became homeless. Up to that point, he had held a job, he had a car and an apartment. Then all of a sudden everything just kind of disintegrates and he ends up on the street. When I met him, he had been sober for years and was a homeless outreach coordinator for vets. He said, “I don’t know what’s causing this, but I can tell you that every encampment I go through, I see people in the same condition of mental degradation that I went through.” 2009 is exactly the year when the Mexican trafficking world began to switch away from ephedrine meth and toward P2P meth. So I began asking people who worked in the world of methamphetamines what they were seeing. The story is always the same. This stuff arrives and, very quickly, people begin to lose all bearings and the homeless population expands. Have you gotten any pushback on this theory from those who work with the homeless? Sure. People want to blame high housing costs for homelessness. They feel that, if you say drugs are the reason for homelessness, then that stigmatizes people who are homeless. I’m not sure I buy that at all. But I found the increases in homelessness happening in areas where housing costs are very high, like Los Angeles, but also in areas where there are no rising costs and where they’ve never had any homelessness, like, for example, the town of Clarksburg, West Virginia.When animal rights activist Matt Johnson last made national news, he was in disguise. He appeared on Fox Business in December 2020, sporting a buzz cut and button-down (much different from his usual casual attire) and posed as the CEO of Smithfield Foods. The pork giant he claimed to be representing had factory farms that were “petri dishes for new diseases”, he told the news anchor. After the segment went viral online, Fox realized their mistake: “It appears we have been punked,” host Maria Bartiromo announced, apologizing to Smithfield, which called the interview “a complete hoax”. Johnson’s antics, and his seeming lack of fear of the consequences, have made him a formidable opponent of the meat industry. But while the Fox incident offered a moment of levity, today, Johnson makes the news for something far more serious. He has just been let off for criminal charges that could have sent him to prison for up to eight years. After conducting an undercover exposé of conditions at the pork company Iowa Select Farms in May 2020, his actions put him on the line for burglary and planting recording devices. Another charge, for trespassing at a food operation (an offense created by an Iowa ag-gag law), was added in 2021. While these specific charges against Johnson can’t be brought again, they may not be his last. His work as an organizer with the animal rights group Direct Action Everywhere (DxE) involves high-profile, high-risk actions like secretly recording factory farms and rescuing animals. Since farm animals are legally property and have no rights and almost no protection from suffering, removing them is usually treated as burglary, no different from stealing jewelry or someone’s wallet. In the last decade, many state “ag-gag” laws have sought to further criminalize such activism. The conditions that brought Johnson, an Iowa native now based in California, to Iowa Select Farms facilities were particularly cruel, according to DxE – and the outrage that followed his exposé suggests the public were similarly alarmed. As Covid was tearing through US slaughterhouses, Johnson had been tipped off by an Iowa Select truck driver about conditions at the company’s facilities. Across the meat industry, workers were falling ill, meatpacking capacity was significantly reduced, and farms were overloaded with animals and looking for ways to dispose of them. Johnson was made aware of a practice called “ventilation shutdown”, being used by Iowa Select to mass exterminate pigs: the animals were packed into sealed barns and essentially cooked to death by heaters and steam generators. In undercover footage captured by Johnson in May 2020, which was published by the Intercept, the pigs can be heard shrieking in distress. These revelations immediately made headlines and sparked a PR crisis for Iowa Select, which stopped practicing ventilation shutdown after it was brought to light – a rare and solid win for animal rights activists. “Matt’s investigation of ventilation shutdown is probably the most important [factory farm] investigation in more than a decade,” said Justin Marceau, an animal law scholar and professor at the University of Denver. A surprise in the courts Prosecutions of activists such as Johnson have been on the rise in recent years. Last month, Wayne Hsiung, the DxE co-founder who for years has had criminal charges against him pending across multiple states, was convicted for the first time of two felonies in North Carolina for removing a sick goat from a farm. But on Wednesday, the day before Johnson’s trial, all charges against him were dismissed, an outcome that surprised reporters and activists alike. An earlier set of charges pertaining to Johnson’s ventilation shutdown investigation in Iowa had already been dismissed in January 2021, a few days before trial, because Iowa Select Farms didn’t want to testify. The charges dismissed this week, which included Johnson’s rescue of a sick two-week-old piglet whom he named Gilly, was the second case involving his activity at Iowa Select facilities. The case’s prosecutor, Joe Corrow, Wright county assistant attorney, on Tuesday filed to dismiss the charges “in the interest of justice”, a vague legal phrase that doesn’t provide much insight into his reasoning. “It’s basically a catch-all to say ‘Yeah, we don’t think we should go forward any more,’” said Adam Junaid, one of Johnson’s attorneys. The motion to dismiss came 15 minutes before a hearing on news media recording of the trial, which is usually permitted in Iowa, was supposed to begin. Neither Corrow nor Iowa Select Farms responded to multiple requests for comment for this story. Johnson’s was one of the most highly anticipated farm animal rights cases in recent history, and the outcome is undoubtedly a victory for DxE, a group that since 2013 has been taking animals from factory farms and daring law enforcement to come after them – a practice they call “open rescue”. That has sparked debate over whether activists have the “right to rescue” animals from suffering. “We are setting a precedent that rescuing animals from situations where they’re in distress is the right thing to do. It’s not a crime,” said Johnson, speaking after the charges were dismissed. But Johnson had hoped to make it to trial. Some might question the wisdom of inviting criminal convictions, but for DxE, breaking laws in order to change them is part of the point. “I think when people see activist repression, it’s actually very positive for movements because you get that sympathy, you get that attention, and people see you as someone who’s suffering unjustly,” said DxE lead organizer Almira Tanner. “And then of course there’s the opportunities for concrete legal victories.” Marceau, the animal law scholar, believes there’s value in pushing unjust animal treatment laws to trial. If a jury votes to acquit in such a case, he said, that would be a bad outcome from the state’s perspective – making prosecutors reluctant to bring similar cases to trial, and opening up space for activists to do more rescues. But it’s a high-risk strategy. “Prison is terrible,” Marceau said. Alongside the personal suffering, he wonders whether the incarceration of prominent activists such as Johnson could damage the morale of the movement. Even if an activist has a sympathetic case, the jury aren’t certain to hear it. At Hsiung’s North Carolina trial, for example, the judge blocked most testimony on the health and suffering of the goat he had rescued. In Johnson’s case, the state had filed a motion arguing that showing ventilation shutdown would “appeal to the jury’s sympathies and arouse their sense of horror, and only serve to confuse the issues”. Johnson did not want his case to be dropped. He had hoped to use the trial to try to persuade a jury that he was right to expose Iowa Select’s atrocities, create a precedent for the right to rescue suffering animals, and challenge the constitutionality of the ag-gag law he was charged under. Even a guilty verdict, he said, would help the movement. “I’m very at peace with the fact that sacrifice of this sort is going to be necessary,” he said before charges were dropped. He’d spent the last few weeks with his family in Iowa, preparing for the possibility of going to prison. “Not really,” Johnson said when asked if he was relieved that he wouldn’t be locked up after the prosecutor moved to dismiss the case. His legal team then filed an objection to the dismissal, arguing that Johnson should be able to address the allegations against him and “to have the ‘right to rescue’ tested in a court of law”. At a final hearing on Wednesday, the judge seemed confused that Johnson was fighting for the right to risk prison. “The court cannot force the state to go to trial,” he concluded, before dismissing the case.What can possibly explain Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema’s decision to sink voting rights protections? Why did they create a false narrative that the legislation had to be “bipartisan” when everyone, themselves included, knew bipartisanship was impossible? Why did they say they couldn’t support changing Senate filibuster rules when only last month they voted for an exception to the filibuster that allowed debt ceiling legislation to pass with only Democratic votes? Why did they co-sponsor voting rights legislation and then vote to kill the very same legislation? Why did Manchin vote for the “talking filibuster” in 2011 yet vote against it now? Part of the answer to all these questions can be found in the giant wads of corporate cash flowing into their campaign coffers. But if you want the whole answer, you need also to look at the single biggest factor affecting almost all national politicians I’ve dealt with: ego. Manchin’s and Sinema’s are now among the biggest. Before February of last year, almost no one outside West Virginia had heard of Manchin and almost no one outside Arizona (and probably few within it) had ever heard of Sinema. Now, they’re notorious. They’re Washington celebrities. Their photos grace every major news outlet in America. This sort of attention is addictive. Once it seeps into the bloodstream, it becomes an all-consuming force. I’ve known politicians who have become permanently and irrevocably intoxicated. I’m not talking simply about power, although that’s certainly part of it. I’m talking about narcissism – the primal force driving so much of modern America but whose essence is concentrated in certain places such as Wall Street, Hollywood and the United States Senate. Once addicted, the pathologically narcissistic politician can become petty in the extreme, taking every slight as a deep personal insult. I’m told Manchin asked Joe Biden’s staff not to blame him for the delay of Build Back Better and was then infuriated when Biden suggested Manchin bore some of the responsibility. I’m also told that if Biden wants to restart negotiations with Manchin on Build Back Better, he’s got to rename it because Manchin is so angry he won’t vote for anything going by that name. The Senate is not the world’s greatest deliberative body but it is the world’s greatest stew of egos battling for attention. Every senator believes he or she has what it takes to be president. Most believe they’re far more competent than whoever occupies the Oval Office. Yet out of 100 senators, only a handful are chosen for interviews on the Sunday talk shows and very few get a realistic shot at the presidency. The result is intense competition for attention. Again and again, I’ve watched worthy legislation sink because particular senators didn’t feel they were getting enough credit, or enough personal attention from a president, or insufficient press attention, or unwanted press attention, or that another senator (sometimes from the same party) was getting too much attention. Several people on the Hill who have watched Sinema at close range since she became a senator tell me she relished all the attention she got when she gave her very theatrical thumbs down to increasing the minimum wage, and since then has thrilled at her national celebrity as a spoiler. Biden prides himself on having been a member of the senatorial “club” for many years before ascending to the presidency and argued during the 2020 campaign that this familiarity would give him an advantage in dealing with his former colleagues. But it may be working against him. Senators don’t want clubby familiarity from a president. They want a president to shine the national spotlight on them. Some senators get so whacky in the national spotlight that they can’t function without it. Trump had that effect on Republicans. Before Trump, Lindsey Graham was almost a normal human being. Then Trump directed a huge amp of national attention Graham’s way, transmogrifying the senator into a bizarro creature who’d say anything Trump wanted to keep the attention coming. Not all senators are egomaniacs, of course. Most lie on an ego spectrum ranging from mildly inflated to pathological. Manchin and Sinema are near the extreme. Once they got a taste of the national spotlight, they couldn’t let go. They must have figured that the only way they could keep the spotlight focused on themselves was by threatening to do what they finally did last week: shafting American democracy. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a Guardian US columnist. His newsletter is at robertreich.substack.comThe surge in cases of the Omicron variant has not only swamped US hospitals with record numbers of patients with Covid-19, it has also caused frightening moments and major challenges for people seeking treatment for other problems. Less-urgent procedures have been put on hold. Emergency room waits are stretching hours longer than usual. In California, Mat Gleason said he wheeled his 92-year-old father, Eugene, into a Los Angeles-area emergency room last week for a transfusion to treat a blood disorder. It should have taken seven to 10 hours, Gleason said, but his dad was there for 48. He said his father called after 10 hours, asking for a blanket. “He told me later, ‘I just assumed they forgot about me,’” Gleason, 57, told the Associated Press. “And yet he wasn’t the only person in that room. There were dozens.” Gleason added: “I’m not begrudging the hospital at all. They did a great job.” An average of more than 144,000 people were in hospital in the US with Covid as of Tuesday, the highest level on record, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Hospitals in states such as New York and Connecticut that experienced early Omicron surges are starting to see an easing of the load but many others are overwhelmed. An independent project by the University of Minnesota shows Covid patients taking up an overwhelming majority of beds in some communities. In Jefferson, West Virginia; Orange, Indiana; Columbia, Pennsylvania; and Pender, North Carolina, Covid patients account for more than 70% of all hospital admissions. Vaccines appear to be holding up well. A study released on Friday by the CDC showed the Pfizer and Moderna shots provided 94% protection against urgent care and hospital visits for people with a booster dose. Data published on Thursday by the CDC showed unvaccinated people between 50 and 64 years old were 44 times more likely to be hospitalized compared with people fully vaccinated and with a booster dose. The figure rose to 49 times more likely to be hospitalized if the unvaccinated were older than 65. At a White House briefing, the CDC chief, Rochelle Walensky, said: “The data here show the protection provided by vaccines and the importance of being up to date on your Covid-19 vaccination – which, for tens of millions of Americans, means getting your booster dose.” Hospitals say Covid patients aren’t as sick as those during the last surge, which was caused by the Delta variant. Many are being admitted for reasons other than Covid-19 and incidentally testing positive. But Rick Pollack, chief executive and president of the American Hospital Association, said the surge has had a widespread effect on the availability of care for non-Covid problems. More people are in hospital while a high number of healthcare workers are out with Covid themselves, worsening staffing shortages that existed before the pandemic. As of Wednesday, Pollack told the AP, about 23% of US hospitals were reporting critical staff shortages. Many people are unable or unwilling to seek care for symptoms that do not seem like emergencies, Pollack added, saying that had led to delays in diagnosing conditions such as diabetes or high blood pressure that get worse the longer they go untreated. Dr Claudia Fegan, chief medical officer for Cook county in Chicago, said some people, particularly older patients, have been avoiding checkups and routine care out of fear of Covid. As a result, “the patients we’re seeing now are much sicker”, she said, citing cases of advanced heart failure and cancer that might have been diagnosed earlier. Mike Bawden, a 59-year-old marketing consultant with a history of blood clots in his lungs, told the AP he couldn’t get an appointment to see his doctor in Davenport, Iowa, because his coughing symptoms were too similar to those for Covid-19. After nearly two weeks, Bawden went to a walk-in clinic, which sent him to an emergency room. He said he waited almost six hours in the overflowing ER. A scan showed clots in his lungs and he was prescribed blood thinners. If not for the surge, Bawden said, he would have had a scan earlier at a doctor’s office. “It’s always so easy to Monday morning quarterback the ER, but everyone was really nice – even the other patients,” Bawden said. “I think it’s important for folks to realize that nobody’s the villain.” A Genesis spokesperson said: “We are not exempt from the challenges medical centers across the United States are experiencing because of significant impact from Covid. We urge individuals to get vaccinated.”Trigger Point 9pm, ITV With Jed Mercurio pulling the production strings, this six-part thriller about a terrorist summer campaign was always going to be compared to Line of Duty. All the ingredients are there: Vicky McClure as gutsy bomb disposal officer Lana Washington, police jargon constantly shouted through walkie-talkies, and a tension that is cut with well-paced jumpy moments. Then there’s Lana’s work buddy, Joel Nutkins (Adrian Lester), with whom she has all the banter. But it still makes for exciting and – at one point or another in the series – explosive, television. Hollie Richardson The Green Planet 7pm, BBC One The glorious visual spectacle of David Attenborough’s look at plant life continues, with a sumptuous rendering of flora’s adaptation to the seasons. Green shoots appear through black, fire-scorched earth, delicate ice flowers blossom and seeds float away on parachutes. You know what to expect by now – although we defy you not to still be wowed by it. Alexi Duggins Good Karma Hospital 8pm, ITV The Kerala-set drama starring Amanda Redman as a formidable head doctor and Neil Morrissey as a beach-bum barman returns for a fourth season. Recently heartbroken medic Ruby (Amrita Acharia) finds herself caught up in a dangerous viral outbreak while newly arrived surgeon Samir (Harki Bhambra) tries to acclimatise. Graeme Virtue The Tourist 9pm, BBC One Confusion continues and Jamie “the Man” Dornan is in big demand this week, with a face from the past popping up. Lashings of nudity and the promise of an easy way to make some fast cash emerge as more of his out-of-sync memories resurface. Plus, while Ethan moans about eating a halloumi platter alone, Helen needs police help. Hannah Verdier The Caribbean With Andi and Miquita 9pm, BBC Two Charismatic mother and daughter team Andi and Miquita Oliver set out on an adventure to retrace their Caribbean heritage in this vibrant yet often emotional two-part series. Expect plenty of infectious laughter, tearful realisations, enlightening local storytelling – and even a “punch in the gut” DNA test result. First up, the Olivers explore Antigua and Barbuda. HR Sue Perkins’ Big American Road Trip 9pm, Channel 4 It’s the second leg of the road trip, this time taking the new (albeit temporary) nomad Perkins through Colorado into the Rocky Mountains. She meets a couple with a toddler in tow and a woman who shares videos about the reality of campervan life. Then, it’s time for an annual festival in the Colorado desert. Are you feeling inspired yet? HR Film choices The Man Who Fell to Earth, 1.05am, Talking Pictures TV David Bowie’s otherworldly musical personas and mannered acting style made him an ideal lead for this seminal 1976 sci-fi. His alien, Thomas Jerome Newton, comes to Earth in disguise with a plan to save his dying planet. But in Nicolas Roeg’s fractured tale, he finds powerful interests – and his own weaknesses – conspiring against him. A woozy melancholy infuses the film, in the lives of the people Newton touches, his addictions to booze and television, and even in his love for Candy Clark’s waitress Mary-Lou. Simon Wardell The Souvenir, 10pm, BBC Two With part two just out in cinemas, here’s an opportunity to catch the challenging first tranche of Joanna Hogg’s semi-autobiographical coming-of-age drama. Honor Swinton Byrne plays Julie, a 24-year-old film student whose privileged upbringing has left her all at sea in terms of her creative voice and the authenticity of her work. Then she meets Foreign Office official Tony (an effortlessly toffish Tom Burke) and is seduced by his air of confidence and louche mystery. But his gaslighting of her and slowly revealed dark secrets begin to sour their relationship. SW The Souvenir, 10pm, BBC Two With part two just out in cinemas, here’s an opportunity to catch the challenging first tranche of Joanna Hogg’s semi-autobiographical coming-of-age drama. Honor Swinton Byrne plays Julie, a 24-year-old film student whose privileged upbringing has left her all at sea in terms of her creative voice and the authenticity of her work. Then she meets Foreign Office official Tony (an effortlessly toffish Tom Burke) and is seduced by his air of confidence and louche mystery. But his gaslighting of her and slowly revealed dark secrets begin to sour their relationship. SW Fantastic Mr Fox, 2pm, Channel 4 This is Roald Dahl, certainly, but as filtered through the lens of Wes Anderson it’s a curious beast. In a children’s animated adventure about an egotistical fox (voiced by George Clooney) and his long-running battle with three human farmers we find Anderson’s typically smart dialogue and passive-aggressive characters. There’s enough quick comedy, colourful spectacle and Dahlian viciousness for the kids, but this is really one for the grownups in the room. SW Live sport Women’s Super League Football: Brighton v Chelsea 12.15pm, BBC Two. From Broadfield Stadium. Premier League Football: Crystal Palace v Liverpool 1pm, Sky Sports Main Event. From Selhurst Park. Premier League Football: Chelsea v Tottenham 4pm, Sky Sports Main Event. From Stamford Bridge. Women’s Super League Football: Man City v Arsenal 7.30pm, Sky Sports Premier League From Manchester City Academy Stadium.The term “rogue male”, denoting a rampaging bull elephant, is also used figuratively to describe a dangerously out-of-control, cold-hearted loner. It may be that Vladimir Putin has a cuddly side. If so, it’s well-hidden. Russia’s president fits the rogue male profile to a T – unscrupulous, vicious, cunning, and ever ready to trample on other people and countries. Much recent effort has been expended trying to understand and explain Putin’s motives in threatening a wider war in Ukraine. Does he hope to restore past Soviet glories or crush Kyiv’s pro-western trajectory? Is it about his historical legacy or his need for a repeat electoral “Crimea bounce”? Such theories carry weight, but they all miss the essential point. Putin is and always has been an unpleasant, smirking, devious, KGB-trained thug whose main aim in life, besides retaining power, is to weaken and divide the western democracies. His attitude, resembling a vendetta, is as emotional as it is rational. Ukraine is but his latest solo sabotage operation. If he gets his way there, his one-man mission to create an updated Russian sphere of influence bordered by puppet states will accelerate. Next stop, the Baltic republics, the Balkans, or an increasingly politically isolated Poland. The rogue male phenomenon is brilliantly explored in Geoffrey Household’s eponymous 1939 novel, in which a solitary huntsman sets out to assassinate an un-named European dictator, presumed to be Adolf Hitler – one rogue male tracking down another. The book amplifies one of history’s great might-have-beens: whether, with the Nazi leader dead, war could have been averted. No one, as far as can be known, is planning to assassinate Putin to prevent war in Ukraine – and all good liberals would surely condemn so heinous an idea. Regrettably, he himself has exhibited no such scruples when silencing critics and opponents over the past 20 years. The late Alexander Litvinenko, Anna Politkovskaya and Boris Nemtsov are three among many. So the question now is how to treat the chronic RMS (rogue male syndrome) from which Putin evidently suffers. Just think about it. Almost single-handed, he has whipped up the biggest east-west confrontation of the post-Soviet era. Who sent troops to the border? Who is waving ultimatums at Nato? Who now hints at deploying nuclear weapons in “rogue states” Venezuela and Cuba, and plays footsie with Iran? It’s Putin. As panicked western leaders scramble like Spitfire pilots (but without the same determination), a slight air of exaggeration and theatrical hype persists around Russian actions. Putin is certainly enjoying western discomfort. He’s already made significant geopolitical gains. But is he really serious about all-out invasion? Despite much Kremlin tub-thumping, there’s scant enthusiasm among the Russian public for a ground war in Ukraine – no great patriotic, nationalist surge, only fatalistic acceptance. It’s obvious, too, that no western leader wants to lock horns (or tusks) over Ukraine, any more than in Crimea in 2014. EU disunity over what to do, typified by Germany’s fractious coalition and the way Brussels has let itself be bypassed, is embarrassing but telling. For all its tough words, Nato also hangs back. As for US president Joe Biden, he pledged to end wars, not engage in new ones. Last week’s excruciating “minor incursion” gaffe left his aides counting marbles. Ukrainians, naturally, are against being invaded again. Their leaders are successfully leveraging the crisis to obtain greater security assistance and weaponry from the US and Britain. Ukraine’s defence minister, Oleksii Reznikov, wants sanctions on Russia imposed immediately. But like western Europe, Kyiv’s strong preference is clear: no more war. The same goes for Poland, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, understandably worried that, if push comes to shove, Nato’s protective shield may not be all it’s cracked up to be. In Taiwan, they fret that a Ukraine invasion will create a precedent. But Xi Jinping, China’s president, is a more subtle adversary. He doesn’t want war with the west, either – not yet, anyway. Russia’s worries over Nato’s intentions and future membership for Ukraine, Moldova and Georgia are not baseless. But they are overcooked. If war comes, it will accentuate the pro-western trends in the old “near abroad” Putin so dislikes. As the US secretary of state, Anthony Blinken, noted in Berlin last week, there is genuine western willingness to address Russian concerns. It’s plain, in sum, that almost no one, Moscow hawks and Donbas militia headbangers aside, wants an escalating conflict. It’s plain, too, that if it happens, Ukraine will go down as one man’s war, provoked, prosecuted and publicly owned by Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin. The west is complicit in this crisis. Its leaders have known what kind of man Putin is since the brutal second Chechen war. He invaded Georgia in 2008 and seized Crimea in 2014. He’s overseen chemical weapons atrocities in Syria, hostile cyber operations in Europe, pernicious anti-democratic election meddling, and multiple murders and poisonings. Yet they continue, for the most part, to treat him as a normal leader. Whether or not he ultimately attacks Ukraine again, directly or indirectly, Putin is a proven, ongoing global menace. He went rogue years ago. His behaviour grows steadily more threatening. So what kind of elephant trap would snare him? How to tie him down? Start now by declaring Putin an international pariah. Launch multiple universal jurisdiction prosecutions over his alleged complicity in overseas assassinations, war crimes, and crimes against humanity. Sanction his cronies. Go after his money. Limit diplomatic contacts. Find alternative energy suppliers. Help democrats such as Alexei Navalny rid Russia of him. In short, freeze him out. The world has been here before, many times. One screwed-up little man must not be allowed to start a war no one wants. Message to Putin from peaceful, law-abiding people everywhere: rogue off!At first light the first woodpecker comes. And then the female pheasant. With or without her fat comic mate. Feeding under the feeders. I always overfill and scatter nuts and seed around for ground-feeding birds. Crush a few more fat balls to be sure. They are a pair, the woodpeckers, the exhilarating flash of scarlet, of black and white wing. Comfortable hanging from the feeders at any angle. Furious beaks battering the seed. Happy to share with smaller birds just not with each other at the same time. There is almost every type of tit here in the Danish woodland, multiple finches, sparrows, bramblings, nuthatch… all happily coexisting on the feed. The only bullies are the blackbirds. Even the jays appear mostly well behaved. Some of the smallest birds favour hiding in the low forsythia, making raids together. Sometimes finding comfort in numbers. Other times, happy to swarm the quieter feeders. Peeling sheets of bark hang off the host Himalayan birch, like swooning handkerchiefs in the days before pocket tissues. I work by the floor-length windows, binoculars and bird books close by, before the nice neighbour brings his chainsaw to help clear some of the raggedy bird-sown cherries, too big and widespread now in the quiet, shadier spot. We save the trunks for firewood and take the skinny branches to the locality’s slow-compost bins. The lilac will be happier with more light. We trim the hornbeam hedge. The woodpeckers come a dozen times a day, stocking up. Only one morning reaches 0C. We fill feeders and split bags of seed and nuts and spread them liberally for when we are away. Spare food and fat is thin on the ground. The wintering pine martin had nested in a new sack in the cupboard when we arrived. Settled snug in a ball of insulating fibre and sunflower seed. He will be more active when we leave. He lives here more than us. Allan Jenkins’s Plot 29 (4th Estate, £9.99) is out now. Order it for £8.49 from guardianbookshop.comAll right, time for us to sign off now. Here is what we learned today: New South Wales and Victoria have announced near-identical plans to slow the spread of Covid as students return to classrooms next week with both states relying on rapid antigen tests (RATs) in the first month. NSW teachers federation president Angelo Gavrielatos said the government should have gone further by mandating primary school students also wear masks in the classroom, and opposed the government’s plan to have teachers who are asymptomatic close contacts return to work. WA is on high alert after the number of daily local cases jumped to 24, with the health minister conceding they are unlikely to eliminate Omicron in the state. NSW records 20,324 new Covid-19 cases, 34 deaths. Victoria records 13,091 new Covid-19 cases, 14 deaths. Perth clocked its sixth consecutive day of temperatures over 40C. Jacinda Ardern cancelled all weddings, including her own as Omicron arrives in the country, warning that case numbers will soon shoot into the thousands. That’s all for now, have a lovely evening everyone and I will see you bright and early tomorrow morning. Country Liberal senator, Sam McMahon, has confirmed reports in the News Corp tabloids that she has been approached to defect to the Liberal Democrats. McMahon lost preselection to Jacinta Price, meaning she will likely exit the Senate after the next election. In a statement, McMahon confirmed the approach and didn’t rule out defecting: A former CLP president has made the allegation that I met with representatives of the Liberal Democrats. I have been open and on the record about being approached by many parties to run for them. It should not be surprising that most of the minor parties see tremendous value in an experienced Senator. This would be a major headache for Scott Morrison, who already faces two government senators (Alex Antic and Gerard Rennick) and One Nation refusing to vote for government legislation in the Senate. Australian Winter Olympics chef de mission Geoff Lipshut has no security or safety concerns for athletes in Beijing next month, with the team not taking any special precautions such as burner phones, reports Melissa Woods from AAP. Lipshut felt the Olympics would be one of “safest places in the world” for athletes. While Australia joined the United States, Great Britain and several allies in announcing they would not send dignitaries to the Games as a protest against human rights abuses by the Communist Party regime, Lipshut didn’t expect any issues for athletes. I think our first aerial team went there in 2003 or 2004 and we’ve been going back every year since and there haven’t been any issues... During the Olympic Games, I would expect the IOC to have done a lot of work and...the old saying is if you want to be in the safest place in the world, you should be an athlete in the Olympic Games. I really think there’ll be less risk than normal.” Lipshut said the team were being “careful” and would encourage athletes to access the internet from the village. Several delegations have urged anyone headed to Beijing to take “burner” phones instead of their personal devices because of concerns their personal information could be compromised. Aerial skier Danielle Scott didn’t feel she need to be overly cautious and wouldn’t be taking a replacement device. No I don’t think I’ll be going excessively cautious... It’s just maybe not doing anything financial or you know, risky things that you wouldn’t do anywhere around the world. The surge of Omicron has also played havoc with the National Hockey League citing uncertainty caused by the pandemic to hold back all of its players from the Olympic tournament. American broadcaster NBC also said it wouldn’t send announcing teams to China, citing the same virus concerns. All athletes, officials and journalists must complete rigorous testing and stay within a “closed loop” that takes in competition venues and accommodation. Organisers announced that no spectators, including local Chinese, would be at events. The Australian athletes will start arriving in Beijing this week. Interpreting services have faced increasing challenges in New South Wales during the Omicron wave, with patients struggling to access the service and long hold times on phone lines increasing the pressure. Health workers and community advocates have described a system strained by the demands of the pandemic, especially when visitations are limited or restricted, leaving many elderly patients in the dark. Amy*, an interpreter for NSW Health who asked to remain anonymous, said the system has long been under strain and the pandemic has only exacerbated long-term issues. “It’s been grossly underfunded,” she said. “There’s just way too much demand for the amount of staff actually employed. Fifteen people are doing the job of 50 people.” You can read the full report below: Perth has now recorded another blistering hot day, after the mercury peaked over 40C for the sixth consecutive day. They are now only one day off the area’s all-time record of seven 40C+ days in a row. However, much to the relief of those in the city, they are unlikely to reach this as a cool change is expected to hit tomorrow. WA health minister Amber-Jade Sanderson has conceded that Omicron has well and truly entered the state and can’t be eliminated, as case numbers jump to 24 today. She heralded a move to a “suppression” strategy instead. I think it’s clear that we’re not going to eliminate Omicron, it’s now about how we suppress and manage Omicron ... That’s our intention as a government and certainly, that’s the advice of the chief health officer. He was very clear that it can’t be eliminated because it’s so transmissible. She urged everyone in the Perth, Peel and South-West regions to up their testing numbers. It’s a bit of a wake-up call for the broader community as well that we do have Covid in our community now and we really need to see those testing numbers higher ... These testing numbers are not high enough. The better the testing numbers, the more confidence we have that positive cases are accounted for and they are in quarantine. After recording 24 local Covid-19 cases, WA authorities have urged everyone in the Perth, Peel and South West region to get tested for Covid-19 if they are experiencing even the mildest of symptoms. This advice applies even if you haven’t visited any of the exposure sites listed on the health department website. A man has surrendered himself to police after another man died following an assault in a remote Northern Territory community, AAP reports. Officers were called to the community in central Australia on Saturday. Two men, aged 18 and 19, were in a fight when the younger man allegedly assaulted the other with an edged weapon, police said. The 18-year-old later surrendered himself to detectives who went to the remote community to investigate. Police arrested the man and are questioning him. Federal Labor’s health spokesman Mark Butler has told reporters in Adelaide that he is concerned only 25% of five to 11-year-olds have received their first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, a week before school beings, AAP reports. GPs say they simply can’t get enough doses to deal with the number of kids they have on their books. Many GPs say the doses they’ve ordered simply aren’t even turning up. Also worth nothing that there are still no Covid-19 cases in WA hospitals. Western Australia’s numbers have been released for today, and as always they seem to be from an entirely different world from the rest of Australia. (There is still a reason to distinguish locally transmitted cases for one!) The state has recorded 24 local cases and two related to interstate or international travel. There is a by-election coming up in the NSW state electorate of Strathfield, due to the former opposition leader Jodi McKay stepping down. And a new candidate has now come out of the woodwork, none other than the former Sydney Morning Herald columnist Elizabeth Farrelly. The paper and Farrelly parted way after she allegedly “failed to disclose that she had registered as a candidate for the Labor Party in the Strathfield local government elections”, although she notes that she didn’t truly intend on running and did not feel there was any conflict of interest. She labelled the paper’s response as “grossly disproportionate”. Now she has made a full foray into the political area, this time running as an independent, promising that she would demand a royal commission into the Sydney property development industry if elected. Here’s what she has to say in her statement today: Governments have lost their way. They have forgotten that they are meant to work for the common good. The major parties presume it’s business as usual but, if that means more of the same, then it’s time for a change... For fifteen years I have watched the city I love ravaged by shonky development and greedy government. Every year, more public assets are sold off, public parks whittled away and majestic trees cut down for more motorways and skyscrapers thrown up without local services or amenities. People in Strathfield are living with noise and pollution from the motorways, ugly overdevelopment, destruction of heritage, the privatisation of public space and apartment buildings that don’t allow rubbish trucks... If elected, I will demand a Royal Commission into the Property Development Industry. I will oppose overdevelopment and the noise and pollution of destructive major roads. I will strive to make climate a central concern. Perth has recorded a record fifth consecutive day over 40C as the Western Australian heatwave is expected to continue on Sunday before a cool change on Monday. On Saturday, Perth reached 41.1C, the 10th day above 40C this summer, marking another record that could be extended on Sunday with temperatures expected to reach 39C or 40C. Perth’s previous record for total summer days over 40C was seven days in 2015-16. When Perth reached 40C on Friday for a fourth consecutive day it matched the previous record sequence reached in the WA capital on three previous occasions, including last Christmas. You can read the full report below: Watch out those around the Warrego and Georgia rivers in Queensland, there is a minor flood warning now in place for those areas. Tennis Australia’s chief executive, Craig Tiley, has dismissed suggestions that Serbian tennis star Novak Djokovic may sue the organisation and has claimed the world No 1 will be back at the Australian Open in 2023. Tiley has maintained a low profile since Djokovic was deported a week ago. However, on Sunday, he spoke to ABC TV and said Djokovic was not considering taking legal action against Tennis Australia over its role in the saga. “No,” he said when asked if Tennis Australia was being sued. “I mean there is going to be lots of reports on different things but we are in a position where we are focused on delivering an event right now and we will continue to deliver a great event.” You can read the full story (by me) below: If you happen to be reading the blog while lying on the beach in Sorrento, firstly, I am very jealous of you, and secondly, BEWARE! There are four sharks currently circling the pier. Check out this drone footage of them: The former premier of South Australia and former high commissioner to the UK, Mike Rann has taken the recent announcement, that some weddings in New Zealand will be paused due to Omicron, to slam the UK prime minister’s pandemic response. Meanwhile, Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath ruled out rapid antigen testing for school students twice a week after the NSW government announced a plan to do so, AAP reports. She said there was no national health advice to do so, it was “not a comfortable test at the best of times” and rapid test supplies were limited in Queensland. We believe that those tests are best focused in the areas where we need them the most, such as ...being able to get hold of them for critical essential workers, aged care, health. The definition of “critical essential worker” will be broadened in Queensland to allow more workers who are quarantining as close contacts to go to work, with certain conditions. It will now include workers in telecommunications, broadcasting and journalism, private and public aged care and the disability sector. The guidelines will depend on workers agreeing to leave quarantine, she said, as some may be caring for sick family members. D’Ath said it’s best practice for companies to test workers daily and it will be expected when more RATs arrive in the state. Queensland’s Covid-19 hospitalisations and deaths are getting harder to accurately record as authorities reveal that private hospital virus patients haven’t been included in its figures. Chief health officer John Gerrard said there were 863 patients being treated for Covid-19 in hospital and another 47 in intensive care and 17 people on ventilators, AAP reports. He said while the number of hospitalisations had dropped over 24 hours, it didn’t indicate a downward trend yet. That’s substantially lower than our projections for the total number of inpatients we’re expecting... So I think there’s a lot more to come. The CHO said it was becoming more difficult to distinguish which patients were in hospital because of Covid-19 and which patients had been admitted to hospital for other reasons but tested positive for the virus. He admitted that almost everyone who died after testing positive was being recorded as a virus death. Unless it’s very clear, very, very clear that someone has died from a completely unrelated cause... We had a young person who died in a motor vehicle accident for example, about a week or two ago, who just happened to swab positive in the post mortem ... and clearly ... Covid wasn’t the cause. Hospitalisations will rise in coming days as authorities add the data from private hospitals to the daily figures for the first time. Gerrard said more patients in private facilities were testing positive and public hospitals had started transferring some stable Covid-19 patients to private hospitals. South Australia has just published their daily case numbers, and the state has recorded no deaths and 2,062 new infections. While the overall hospitalisation rate in the state has increased by two to 278, the number of patients in the ICU has decreased by 13, now sitting at just 24. Omicron has breached New Zealand’s borders and started spreading in the community, Jacinda Ardern has said, meaning the entire country will be placed on the highest level of restrictions. The outbreak has also forced the prime minister to cancel her wedding to Clarke Gayford, which was due to take place in the coming weeks at Gisborne on the North Island’s eastern coast. Ardern said on Sunday the country would try to slow the spread of Omicron but it was expected New Zealand would reach 1,000 cases a day in the coming weeks and thousands a day after that. New Zealand has not previously reported that level of infection. “I know hearing these sorts of case numbers will sound deeply concerning for people to hear,” Ardern said. “We’ll do everything that we can to slow the spread and reduce the number of cases we experience as a nation.” You can read the full report below: The opposition leader has been asked what he would have done differently if he were PM to make sure that RATs were readily available to all Australians. Albanese says domestic production would have been the way to go: I have been approached by a company that have offered the government rapid antigen tests at $3, $4 including freight from overseas, and they aren’t able to do a deal with the government. The fact is we should have been manufacturing rapid antigen tests here in Australia. Why is it that that wasn’t put in place? We were told about 18 months ago now that we would be reducing mRNA vaccines here in Australia in nine to 12 months. That was to industry ministers 18 months ago and we are still not producing them here. Why is it that Australian produced rapid antigen test are being exported overseas rather than used here because the federal government said it wasn’t interested in purchasing them? We have just seen in the last fortnight the government finally stepped up to purchase rapid antigen test because of urgent and unforeseen circumstances. Well, they were warned so many months ago that that wasn’t the case and yet the prime minister still won’t concede that any mistakes have been made which is why those same mistakes keep being repeated over and over again from a prime minister whose focus is always just on the 24-hour media cycle, always on the photo opportunity, never and actually doing his job. Albanese has now moved on to chatting about the high rates of inflation in Australia. (TL;DR “It’s the Liberal’s fault and Labor will fix it.”) Australians are really struggling with the cost of living. The truth is under this government, it is the first government in modern times in which wages aren’t keeping up with the cost of living. The first government of any political persuasion where that has been the case. The government predicts that over the next four years, real wages will decline. That is, people will be worse off. In addition to that, you have childcare costs which have been soaring. You have costs of healthcare, costs in so many areas, that are leading to more pressure on family budgets. That is why Labor has a plan. We have a plan for cheaper childcare, housing affordability, a plan to lift real wages and to support permanent work. We have a plan for more secure work with rising wages, dealing with living standards by having cheaper childcare and addressing cost of living issues. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese says it is a “real concern” that Australia is now considered to be a Covid danger zone by the EU, with an international warning now in place about travelling down under. This is a real concern but not surprising given our infection rates are so high. Our infection rates are so high because there wasn’t the preparedness. One of the reasons why the rollout of the booster is so slow compared to with European countries is because the rollout of the original vaccine was so slow and so when they finally announced a bring forward of the gap between the second shot and the booster shot after Greg Hunt said it was irresponsible to have that just one day beforehand, then they could only do it for four months originally, not three months, because of the supply issues. It has consistently been a problem of supply. That is leading to Australia having very high infection rates. The past week has been Australia’s deadliest of this pandemic and the prime minister has dismissed all of this. This is just his usual complacent way, “It is not a race, nothing to see here, I am not responsible”, is his approach to leadership. This morning the Greens launched its new schooling plan while speaking in the marginal seat of Griffith in Queensland. Greens leader Adam Bandt said: The federal government should be making sure classrooms are as safe as they can be for teachers, staff and students, but instead, they have dropped the ball. If one single student or teacher ends up in hospital as a result of poor ventilation in their classrooms, Scott Morrison will have to answer for it. There should be air filters and monitors in every classroom in the country. If the government can find billions of dollars during the pandemic, to give to big corporations and billionaires who didn’t need it, then Scott Morrison can find $224m to put air filters and monitors in every classroom in the country so that students and teachers are as safe as they can be. Scott Morrison has been very keen to get everyone back to work and back into classrooms as quickly as possible, but he’s had no regard for safety. Gavrielatos also slammed the slow rollout of vaccinations for primary school-aged children. It is highly regrettable that the vaccination rollout for five to 12-year-olds didn’t start until 10 January and the start was also bumpy. In October last year, we called on the federal government in order to ensure the efficient and successful rollout of the five to 11-year-olds and yet again it has failed as it has in many other instances. NSW teachers federation president Angelo Gavrielatos says the government should have gone further by mandating primary school students also wear masks in the classroom. In terms of mask wearing, the government has advised that masks will be required – surgical masks will be required by all teachers and all staff and high school students and strongly recommended for primary-aged students. We believe the government should have gone further, making mask wearing a requirement for all in our schools in indoor settings, and certainly, we were advocating that the mask used should be the high-quality mask, the P2 masks. He also strongly opposed the suggestion that teachers who are close contacts should continue to work if they are asymptomatic. Any suggestion that staff would be directed to return to work when they are close contacts is quite frankly beyond comprehension because all that will do is increase risk rather than mitigate against risk. The other thing of course is it is not practical because those staff that are close contacts – recognising the redefinition of close contact that mainly being of one household – the staff that are deemed close contacts will invariably be caring for other members of their household. These are not practical and quite frankly not supported as we are about mitigating risk. Okay, so we just got that big news about the NSW back-to-school plan. Now it’s time to hear from the NSW teaching federation’s president, Angelo Gavrielatos, for his reaction. It seems that the federation is broadly supportive of the measures but wish the government had gone further with some safety measures. Today the government has announced its return-to-schools plan. It has announced a number of measures, a number of risk mitigation strategies. We will clearly be monitoring the implementation of those measures and importantly the effectiveness of those measures with a view to seeking urgent adjustments and improvements should they be required in order to offer the greatest amount of protection available to our students, our staff and their families. This is not the start to the school year anyone wished for, and as I said, there will be regrettably disruption associated with the commencement of the school year, noting the experiences from other jurisdictions overseas where absences have been high due to infection rates, in many cases rendering schools non-operational. These are difficult times, and we will be doing everything we can, as we have since the beginning of Covid and the pandemic nearly two years ago, to ensure the health and safety of students, staff and their families. Despite the prime minister stating earlier in the week that he would attempt to get states to agree to ditch daily rapid antigen testing requirements for many workplaces, it seems that Queensland has no intention of doing so. Health minister Yvette D’Ath says that disability support staff will be required to test frequently to ensure those they are caring for remain safe. We know that they have a really critical job, especially when they’re caring for vulnerable people with very significant disabilities in their homes. This worker may be the only person that they see. Without them coming and helping with their care, then they will not get that care. So, it is really important, but we need to balance their safety and make sure that those very, very vulnerable people in their homes are not put at risk by taking the virus into that home. So that’s why they will need to undertake this more frequent testing. I also want to say it is the government’s view that best practice is that where you are a close contact, and a critical essential worker and we are allowing you to come back into the workplace and you’re consenting to come back into the workplace, that where employers can, they should be testing daily because that is best practice. D’Ath: I can report that we have 863 patients with Covid in our hospitals, 47 of those are in ICU, 33 non-ventilated and 14 ventilated. I do want to say that is a slight decline and we welcome that decline in our public hospitals, but we are starting to move some of our Covid-positive patients in the private hospital system, and we will start reporting on the Covid patients in private hospitals in the next few days. Let’s listen in to the Queensland press conference, where health minister Yvette D’Ath was speaking a short time ago. She confirmed that at least one of the state’s recent deaths was a person in their 30s. I do sadly have to report another 10 deaths in the last 24 hours. The age of those individuals range from their 30s to their 90s, and I just want to again pass on our condolences. This is not easy, knowing that people are going to lose their lives from this virus, what it does is reinforce the importance of getting vaccinated and getting your booster. Finally, we also have the ACT’s numbers. Luckily they have not recorded any deaths but did clock 694 new infections. Hospitalisations have risen by four to 67, and there are now three people in ICU (up from one yesterday). While the Victorian press conference was going on, Queensland has also released their Covid-19 numbers. Sadly 10 more people infected with Covid-19 have died in the last 24 hours, with the state reporting 11,947 new infections. The state’s hospitalisation number now sits at 863 which is a decrease of 21 from yesterday, with 43 in ICU (down by nine). Good afternoon everyone, it’s Matilda Boseley here with you and Tasmania has just released their daily Covid numbers. They have recorded another 625 new Covid-19 infections and no deaths. There are now 39 people in hospital, an increase of eight from yesterday, with three in ICU. The presser is finished. And with that, I will hand over the blog to my amazing colleague, Matilda Boseley! Andrews also suggested that national cabinet will mandate the third Covid-19 dose soon. Out of respect that is a national process – I think that will happen soon. The data is so compelling that it is not two and an optional – it is three. It is a three-dose project. Once that is normalised as a national level, we can file that into the vaccinated economy and the way it works now. Again in the interests of safety, in the interests of less cases rather than more. In the interests of less people in hospital and hopefully me being here every day speaking about less not more tragedy. Andrews was also asked about Novak Djokovic, and Tennis Australia CEO Craig Tiley’s comments on ABC News this morning. Andrews said he hadn’t seen the comments yet, but that “at the end of the day my position is really clear: if you want to come here, get vaccinated”. Rafa[el Nadal] had it right: it could have been all alright if he had just got vaccinated. Mr Tiley and all of his team, I wish them well as they enter the second week. This is a major event. It is the biggest thing in tennis in the first quarter of every year. Melbourne, London, New York, Paris, we are all connected by some things, one of them is grand slam tennis. This tournament is bigger than any one person. There is one person who thought he was bigger. But the tournament is happening without him. A journalist asked Victorian premier Daniel Andrews when elective surgeries will return, citing calls from surgeons. Andrews: Those calls are monitored by the experts every day, and as soon as we can ... feel that it is safe and that we have significant capacity to resume services, that is exactly what we will do. I would make the point with the greatest respect to a surgical community that they do one part of the work, they have got to be supported by teams of people. It is very rare there would be such a surgeon providing care to a patient. Even a day procedure ... there other members of the team and those other members of the team, as well as surgeons well, are very high need at the moment, we are employing all sorts of people in different ways. But we have significant pressure in the system and that is principally because thousands of thousands of staff had to make a phone call to the supervisor to say, I’ve got it, I can’t come in I have got to start to look after my child who is not well, all those Covid realities, when you have thousands of people who cannot report to work, that puts pressure on the system. Okay, Merlino has clarified the rules around mask wearing. He says that mask rules will remain as they were last term: students from grade three and above will be required to wear a mask indoors. Staff are required to wear a mask, other than when they are communicating or teaching in front of a classroom where a mask may impede their ability to teach, but [in that case] they can choose to continue to wear a mask. So the mask wearing arrangements are the same as term four, for grade three and above, it is a requirement. For prep, one and two it is recommended but we obviously understand the common sense challenge of the very little ones wearing a mask. Merlino is also asked about the definition of close contact in a classroom setting. Will students have to isolate if they learn that someone in their class has tested positive for the virus? Merlino: So the definition of primary close contact is household or household-like, so given that change to our broader settings across Victoria, the approach in schools and kindergartens will be in line with any communicable disease. If a child is positive, the requirement on the parent or the carer is to notify public health, and also to notify the child’s school or kindergarten or childcare centre, and the school will contact other parents and say ‘there has been a positive case, look out for symptoms’... That is how we approach any communicable disease. He says that what may be challenging is staff who get sick or need to isolate, and that some classrooms or schools may need to move to remote learning as a last resort. That is why we have the support in place to minimise the impact as much as we can. There will be certain schools, some schools might be just a few staff away, other schools will be significantly impacted by staff shortages. Over the short period of time. So that is why we will be utilising casual relief teachers. We have a job opportunity pool, we are calling on retired teachers and inactive teachers, staff, administration staff, final year students, so that there is a pool of staff that can be allocated to a particular school where there is a challenge. There may be a very last option, remote learning for a school for the shortest period possible. But in terms of lockdowns, remote learning, the commitment we gave to the people of Victoria was to get vaccinated and we can move on from broad-based lockdowns, broad-based remote learning in our schools. Deputy premier James Merlino is asked what will happen if the rapid antigen tests run out? Merlino says the state government has 14m rapid antigen tests, which he says is enough to ensure every student and staff member in school or early childhood education has access to tests every week, for the first four weeks. He adds that the state also has enough tests for ... “teachers who are close contacts, but [have] no symptoms, so that they can come back to school as exempt critical workers by undertaking a rapid test every day for five days.” We have moved on to questions. Andrews is asked whether there is any modelling about how many cases will emerge from schools reopening? Andrews says it’s “a bit challenging for us to know”. ... We have so many kids, and so many people across the board who have this, but present with very mild symptoms or perhaps no symptoms. Unlike others, or unlike other times in the pandemic when we didn’t have 93-94% of the community having had two doses and a growing number of people having a third, we have a lot more people who are asymptomatic or not enough symptoms to register to prompt a test ... There will be hundreds of thousands of families that will be connected now. Having school back on day one of term one is absolutely critical, it is what we said we would do and that is what we are delivering. It will be difficult and there will be challenges and not all will be smooth, but the benefits of that far outweigh any other policy approach, we cannot have kids at home anymore, because Victorians have got vaccinated. Third doses help us even more to remain protected. That is why we are out here almost every day, dozens of times asking, and indeed requiring some Victorians to be third dose protected. Merlino also talked about what will happen if a student tests positive for Covid-19. Parents will need to inform the school, and a message will go out to other parents and carers that there has been a positive case, so look out the symptoms. Parents will also need to report the case to the department of health. Merlino says they will be taking “exactly the same approach as with any other communicable disease. I want to make this point really clearly”. In line with the discussion, the principles of national cabinet, schools are first open ...That means that remote learning is an absolute last resort ... If there are staff shortages, [and need to close down, it will be for] the shortest period of time, only localised to particular schools. So schools are back to face-to-face learning and that is where it will stay. Finally, when it is time to isolate, we will continue to provide our suite of online resources for students in prep right through. The way that we usually support students, if they have got glandular fever, if they are away for a significant period of time, there will be tasks that they are to complete, they will be supported by the school. Merlino said that schools will at first deal with staff shortages internally through casual staff, or by combining classrooms temporarily. But he said that the state also has “a pool of staff outside of the school ready and willing and able to support a school who are having staffing challenges”. So retired or inactive teachers, support staff members, admin staff, final year university students, we will have a pool of people ready, willing and able to support schools if they are having those challenges. Merlino talked about other features of the state’s back-to-school plan. By the start of term one, 51,000 air purifiers will be in place in schools across the state, particularly focused on high risk settings. So things like music rooms, staff rooms, indoor canteens, six bays, rooms where there are, where there is poor ventilation. It will not be every single room, in every single school, but it will be 51,000. No other jurisdiction is rolling out our purifiers as we are here in Victoria. More than 1,800 schools have applied for a shade sail [funding], because we are encouraging, of course, outdoor learning, as much as practicable, particularly in these warmer months, as we start term one. We have got sail construction already under way at more than 300 of these schools... But it doesn’t sound as though Victoria will make masks mandatory in the classroom, in contrast New South Wales. Here’s what Merlino said: I can also announce we are delivering 30m surgical masks to schools in the first four weeks of term, with 5.8m surgical masks delivered in the first week. That includes N95 masks, children sized surgical masks as well as adult sized surgical masks. They will be recommended and available at the school. Of course, children can continue to work off masks, but we are recommending the use of surgical masks and we are providing those two schools. Merlino says that staff must receive a third dose of a Covid-19 vaccine by 25 February, or within three months and two weeks of receiving their second dose, if they are not yet eligible. This is an important part of our back-to-school plan. In terms of mandatory staff vaccinations, more than 99.7% of staff were double dosed by the end of term four. So I have got every confidence that staff will enthusiastically respond to the third dose vaccine mandate. Deputy premier James Merlino is providing more detail about Victoria’s back-to-school plan. He says that 14m tests will be delivered to schools and early childhood centres, with 6.6m ready for the first week of school. He says that they recommend primary and secondary school students and staff, as well as early childhood education and care staff, test at home twice a week. He adds that students and staff at specialist schools will be provided with enough rapid antigen tests to test at home five times a week, because those students are more medically vulnerable. The Victorian government will also require mandating third doses for the teachers and staff. Andrews talks about why third-dose vaccinations and health measures are important: Doherty modelling has also confirmed for us, not only is a third dose important, but surveillance testing plays a part. Not in eliminating cases, not getting down to zero, but putting downward pressure on the number of positive cases, both at schools and in school communities and in the broader Victorian community. And what I think everyone watching and listening knows, every Victorian, the less cases we have, the less people finish up in hospital. [With Omicron] we are not seeing quite as many people in intensive care, and if you just look at those numbers, people might scratch their head and think, well, why is this such a challenge? When you’ve got more than a thousand people that are in general ward beds, and they are still very unwell, they are just not critically unwell, but does put enormous pressure on the health system. Every hospitalisation, whether it is in intensive care on the general ward bed, if we can all play our power to avoid any more hospital admissions, to avoid all the, all that pressure, that can be avoided... Andrews says that students will be returning back to the classroom on day one, term one. Students will be required to undertake twice-weekly rapid antigen tests to help detect cases for the first four weeks of school. He says they won’t be able to detect every case necessarily, “given the amount of transmission that is in the community”, but it’s about “finding as many cases as we can and shutting down those chains of transmission”. More than 50,000 air purifiers are also being provided to schools. Premier Andrews says that Victoria and New South Wales will have almost identical back-to-school plans. This brings the total number of active cases to 5,336. There are 67 people in hospital with Covid-19. Andrews says that 26,581 booster doses were administered in state hubs yesterday, the biggest Saturday so far. He says that 1.6 million Victorians have gotten their booster so far, and there are 170,000 appointments available over the next 30 days. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews is speaking to reporters about the state’s back-to-school plan. One reporter asked what will happen if 20 or 30% of parents choose to keep their children at home, due to fears around them contracting the virus. Mitchell: Obviously I think today’s announcement and particularly the specifics about rapid antigen test, I think that’ll give parents comfort and confidence in terms of what we have available in our school communities, to keep children safe. Mitchell said that she feels confident about sending her own children to school. She added that the state saw similar school attendance rates at the end of last term compared to previous years. That indicates to me that biological parents are happy to have the children back in school, they appreciate and understand the measures we have in place. But if any parent has a concern, talk to your school, get an understanding of what the measures are in place in your particular school community, use the rapid antigen tests that will be provided to you, and obviously we expect to see our attendance rates high in line with where we were at the end of last year as well. NSW education minister was asked about whether the state is prepared for teaching staff shortages, in case teachers contract the virus or become close contacts and are required to stay home. Mitchell said that they will be drawing upon retired teachers, final year university students, departmental staff with teaching experience, and principals and vice principals. So, in terms of our final year university students and our retired teachers, we already know that we have a pool of about a thousand staff we can draw on to fill those gaps, and I anticipate those numbers will increase over the coming days in the lead up to school. We have hundreds of departmental staff who are themselves experienced teachers. We have a workforce within a bureaucracy that we can should we need to have them back in the classroom ... So if you need to call on any of our admin department staff to fill any gaps, they are available as well. We have lots of different opportunities and options available for schools, but it will be very localised... We also have many teachers who are working but maybe in a non-teaching role, so you might have a deputy or an assistant principal who is not on a class but can be allocated to a class for a period of time to fill any gaps, so there are several layers of contingency in place ready to go to support schools if they should be impacted in terms of Covid and their staff. Mitchell said that the plan is to require students to do two rapid tests a week for the first four weeks of the term, and then reassess the situation, adding that “we have more supplies available if this is something we need to continue with and we can do that”. Mitchell reiterated that when a student tests positive, two things will happen: they will need to report the case to NSW Health via the Service NSW app, and they will need to let the school know. The most important thing is, we are minimising the disruption and not having school closures due to Covid anymore, we are moving much more in line with what we are seeing in community settings. That is important and it is important for continuity of education and also important because we have done it in line with New South Wales Health and experts to make sure that we have Covid-safe schools and also keeping the score say. A reporter asks whether parents will be told if someone in their child’s class, who they spent more than four hours with, tests positive for the virus? Mitchell: Parents will be advised in terms of if there is a positive case in their child’s cohort. That is important because obviously what we are seeing is, yes, you have children together in the classroom but for instance, out on the playground, you may have all of kindergarten ... There will be sufficient information going out to parents, they will know what has happened in our school, they will also know that they need to monitor the symptoms and continue to test the children. Okay, it’s time for questions. One journalist asked what will happen to the other staff and students if another student in the classroom tests positive for Covid-19. If they have spent more than four hours together, will the other students and staff be considered close contacts and required to isolate? Education minister Sarah Mitchell said no. We are moving away from contact tracing and closing schools because of positive cases. If there is a positive case, the teacher or student does test positive to Covid either through being picked up, we want the rapid antigen tests where provided or there are PCR or other circumstances, they will need to let the school know, parents will know, you will be told as a parent that there is Covid in your school community... You will know it Covid is in your child’s school, we will ask you to monitor the symptoms, and we will ask you to use the rapid antigen test kits that have been provided to you. This is a change from how we had the school settings last year. It really is about moving the school in line with a community setting, recognising that the schools have lots of action measures in place ... vaccination in adults, we have minimal mixing and mingling. Mitchell says that the NSW government will be providing rapid antigen testing kits for staff in early childhood services to use twice a week. It is about keeping those centres open for our families and children. Mitchell reiterates that high school staff and students will need to wear masks indoors. The minister adds that “we will recommend that our primary school students wear masks as well, and again, we have distributed more than 8m surgical masks to schools for this purpose.” Mitchell says that many activities will be able to go ahead, such as music, sport, assemblies, excursions and camps, “in a Covid smart way, based on appropriate risk settings, parental consent and some of the measures, again, that our school communities and families are familiar with.” She says that parents or family members will be allowed to come for the first day of kindergarten. NSW education minister Sarah Mitchell adds that they will no longer be closing schools when there is a positive Covid-19 case in the community. The state will also no longer be conducting contact tracing in schools anymore. We are really moving schools in line with what we see in community settings. But parents and carers and family members will be notified if there is Covid in your school community, so again you can monitor for symptoms and your children and make sure you are using those rapid antigen tests that we have provided twice a week. NSW education minister Sarah Mitchell is giving more information about rapid antigen tests for students. Mitchell says that more than 6m RAT tests will be distributed to schools by Tuesday night, ahead of students’ return on 1 February. She said that schools will be in touch with parents to organise the pick up of these tests. All staff and students will be required to take a test before the first day back to school, and will then need to do twice-weekly surveillance tests for the first four weeks of term. If students test positive, they will need to let their principal know, and also report the positive test via the NSW Health app. Perrottet says that the state vaccination hubs are currently administering around 10,000 booster shots per day, but has the capacity to do around 250,000 per week. Perrottet says the state government is currently distributing rapid antigen tests (RATs) to 3,000 schools across the state, as well as early childhood education and childhood centres. Schools will be provided with two rapid antigen tests per student per week, as well as tests for teachers. Masks will be mandated for secondary school teachers and students, and will be highly recommended for students in year 3 and above. Perrottet says that “we will also be having the same provision such as class cohort and, in addition to that, limiting visits to the school, and also ensuring Covid-safe plans for excursions and music and the like.” Perrottet starts by talking about why it’s so important to get kids back to the classroom, “not just from an educational perspective, but from a mental health and social outcome perspective”. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet is speaking to reporters about the state’s back-to-school plan. Anthony Albanese has done a press conference in Melbourne with Labor’s candidate for Chisholm, Carina Garland, at which he has criticised the Morrison government’s handling of procuring rapid antigen tests and the vaccine rollout. Albanese said government failures had caused “supermarket shelves that don’t have food, childcare centres closing”, aged care centres where Australians can’t see their loved ones, and “anxiety” in the lead up to schools reopening because parents aren’t sure they can get their children vaccinated in time”. He said Scott Morrison “should give guarantee of at least one shot [for kids] before they go back to school”. Asked what more the government could have done to secure RATs, Albanese said they “could’ve purchased them”, citing a company prepared to sell them for $4 per test that hasn’t been “able to do a deal with the government”. He said: We should have been manufacturing RATs here in Australia. Why wasn’t that put in place? We were told 18 months ago we would be producing mRNA vaccines in 9-12 months. Two industry ministers and 18 months ago, and we’re still not producing them. Australia’s RATs are being exported overseas, because the federal government said it wasn’t interested in purchasing them. Now they’re purchasing RATs through contracts citing ‘urgent and unforeseen circumstances’ when they were warned [to buy them] months ago. Albanese also took aim at the Coalition over the cost of living, stating this the first government in modern times where wages have not kept up with prices, with real wages expected to fall over the next four years. Last week, a prominent member of the Liberals’ right faction, Tim James, snared the safe New South Wales state seat of Willoughby replacing the former Liberal premier Gladys Berejiklian, a leading moderate, in the lower north shore Sydney. No one saw it coming. Anne Davies writes that James’s preselection shows the growing influence of the hard right in the state. Read the full story here: Just a reminder that we expect to hear from NSW premier Dominic Perrottet at a press conference at 10am, where he will discuss the state’s return to school plan. He will be joined by minister for education and early learning Sarah Mitchell and NSW chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant, among others. A search and rescue operation will resume for a fisherman missing since the early hours of Saturday after he was thrown from a boat along with another man and a dog on Sydney’s North Harbour, AAP reports. The men, aged 25 and 49, launched their 3.5-metre runabout from Northbridge about 9pm on Friday before running into rough seas and capsizing about 3am on Saturday. They clung to the boat before the 49-year-old man drifted away. The younger man was spotted by a local fisherman in the water near Dobroyd Head at Balgowlah Heights shortly before 5am. He was rescued by surf lifesavers on jet skis and taken to Little Manly Beach where he told police their boat flipped with his friend and a dog also on board. The dog was found alive at nearby Cave Beach about 10.30am after the boat’s fuel tank and rubber mats were earlier recovered about 3.7km off the coast. The older man, who has no fixed address and is living in a camper van on the north shore, had not been found as of Sunday morning after an air, sea and land search was halted overnight. A NSW police spokesperson said the search will resume later on Sunday morning. Let’s take a closer look at those numbers that have just come out of NSW and Victoria. First up, in NSW 2,712 people are in hospital with Covid-19, and 34 people have sadly died. This is an increase on 30 Covid-19 related deaths recorded in the state yesterday. In Victoria, 1,002 people in hospital have the virus, and 14 people with the virus have also tragically died. The state recorded 20 Covid-related deaths yesterday. Around 31% of Victorians over the age of 18, and 32.8% of people in NSW, have received their booster shots. Tennis Australia CEO Craig Tiley denied reports that Novak Djokovic is suing his organisation. He also unilaterally declared on ABC News this morning that Djokovic will be returning to Australia next year to attend the Australian Open. Obviously I think he’s got to play out this year but that will be his intention. At the end of the day he’s the No 1 player in the world and he loves the Australian Open. Murphy: What you are saying is that you didn’t have the clarity from the federal government. Can I take from that you were shocked when Novak was stopped at the airport and shocked by what happened after? Tiley: Yes, I think what we constantly sought was clarity. Because our goal is always to do the right thing. Make sure Victorians are safe. We have been through a tough time in the past year. We didn’t want to put an event on that was going to ever compromise that safety. We currently are doing that today. And will continue to do that ... in this case it was so much complexity and so much contradiction, and even confusion leading into the event we constantly sought that clarity. And we will do the same thing over and over again. Tennis Australia boss Craig Tiley is speaking with ABC’s sports reporter Catherine Murphy about the Novak Djokovic saga. Murphy pointed to letters from the federal government addressed to Tennis Australia which said that prior infection with Covid-19 wouldn’t be grounds for a medical exemption to travel and play in Australia unvaccinated. Murphy asks Tiley what changed to make Tennis Australia think the exemption would be valid. Tiley: I think again it’s important to know we have always tried to do the right thing. And the environment, the changing environment and even seeing it today, even just in the past week since things have changed in relation to the response to the pandemic. We were at the beginning of Omicron and that’s why we were constantly seeking clarity and there was a lot of complexity and contradiction of information before, after and it continues to be all the way through ... Anthony Field (Blue Wiggle) is up on ABC Breakfast talking about the band’s shock Triple J Hottest 100 win. He said that the band were planning on doing a faithful cover of Tame Impala’s Elephant, but ended up deciding to mash it up with their original Fruit Salad. And Nick Webb and Natalie Waller from ABC music were kind of advising because this is all new area to me ... And they said, it sounds like a cover band. You have to throw something in that says Wiggles. I thought ‘Okay, let’s throw Fruit Salad’. It has a great riff and we swung it. Walking around Darling Harbour yesterday, people were coming up to me, all ages coming up to go, mate we voted for you. We are so happy for you. It just felt great. I don’t know why, and will never happen again. Asked whether he followed the Hottest 100 every year, Anthony laughed and said: No. I am 60 years old. Even when it started I wasn’t listening. It is the last year. Last year. Which was quite incredible. My daughter was having a party for one, because it is lockdown, and then that was the first time I heard about it. And I said next year I will party with you with this thing. And then who knew what was going to happen. In case you missed it, The Wiggles (yes, the famed children’s band) took out first place on the Triple J Hottest 100 yesterday with their version of Tame Impala’s Elephant. The Wiggles performed the cover last year for the station’s Like a Version series last year. It’s the first time that a Like a Version has won the Hottest 100. The Wiggles’ cover did blow up last year. The song hit 1.3m plays on Spotify, over 3m views on YouTube, and was shared on TikTok. The band beat out huge international pop stars who were tipped to win, like The Kid Laroi and Olivia Rodrigo, and local favourites like Gang of Youths. Stay by The Kid Laroi and Justin Bieber took out the number two spot on the chart, making The Kid Laroi the highest placing Indigenous artist on the Hottest 100. Anthony Field (Blue Wiggle) told Triple J that it was “one of the biggest things that has ever happened to us”, adding it was up there with the band’s Madison Square Garden performance. It’s Justine Landis-Hanley here, ready to bring you the news today, Sunday 23 January. Let’s dive straight in: The NSW government will announce that students and staff at government and non-government schools will need to complete rapid antigen tests (RATs) twice a week during the first four weeks of term one. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, will discuss how the strategy will be implemented in a press conference due at 10am this morning. A spokesperson for the premier told Guardian Australia about 6m RATs are being sent to NSW schools ahead of the start of term. The Victorian government could also outline its plan to help staff and students return to school as the Omicron variant continues to sweep across the nation. AAP notes that Victorian public and low-fee independent schools have been promised 51,000 air purifiers prior to classes resuming with 10,000 still yet to be provided. A state government spokesperson said improving ventilation with a $190m package would reduce the virus’s spread when students return to classrooms. “We are on track to have 51,000 air purifiers to schools for day one of term one 2022 with about 2,000 being delivered each day,” they said. Victoria’s schools blueprint could also be announced on Sunday, the national newswire reports.I used to mask my horror when people told me they washed their hair with “any old thing”. These days, I am more relaxed. Not because it’s less alarming, but because this pedestrian approach is so prevalent, and part of me gets it. Hair washing is, let’s be honest, a perfunctory necessity. And we achieve this with an equally perfunctory commodity, aka soap. But really, if you care a jot about the stuff that sprouts from your hair follicles, what you wash your hair with is important. Because washing your hair is so much more than cleaning. It can make the difference between hair that feels and looks more brusque than a bad temper and hair that brims with health and hydration, even in the depths of winter. A good shampoo is about reducing breakage, promoting scalp health and stimulating growth (Barbara Sturm, Augustinus Bader), maintaining colour (Kérastase), fighting pollution (Christophe Robin) creating body and volume (Philip Kingsley), and springy coils as opposed to frizzy ones (Pattern, Charlotte Mensah, Living Proof). Every so often, if you can’t be bothered to wash your hair, a decent dry shampoo (Davines) will give your hairstyle new life (until you really need that wash). Of course, this won’t wash on every hair – dry shampoo and Afro hair do not make good bedfellows. So this is not for everyone. But a good co-wash is. Function of Beauty’s version – a rich, cleansing conditioner that cleans and moisturises hair – is customised to your preferences. So there we are. Hair washing. Anything but basic. 1. Kérastase Chroma Absolu Bain Respect £22.40, kerastase.co.uk 2. Christophe Robin Purifying Shampoo £29, christopherobin.co.uk 3. Davines More Inside Dry Shampoo £23, uk.davines.com 4. Charlotte Mensah Manketti Oil Shampoo £24, libertylondon.com 5. Dr Barbara Sturm Anti Fall Shampoo £50, net-a-porter.com 6. Augustinus Bader The Shampoo £40, augustinusbader.com 7. Pattern Hydrating Shampoo £17, patternbeauty.com 8. Living Proof Curl Shampoo £31, cultbeauty.co.uk 9. Philip Kingsley Body Building Weightless Shampoo £18.45, feelunique.com 10. Function of Beauty Co-Wash £19, functionofbeauty.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFettoTalks about the Ukraine crisis between senior US and Russian diplomats, held in Geneva at the end of last week, appear to have calmed tensions, at least for now. The situation on Ukraine’s land and sea borders, where Moscow has amassed troops and powerful military assets, remains grave. But alarmist predictions of imminent, large-scale conflict have proved wide of the mark. The dogged insistence of Antony Blinken, the US secretary of state, on pursuing diplomatic means to address Russia’s security concerns clearly made an impression on his notoriously intransigent opposite number, Sergei Lavrov. Russia’s foreign minister said the talks had been “constructive and useful” and agreed to continue them this week. This may turn out to be a temporary reprieve. All the noxious factors that precipitated this crisis remain in play. President Vladimir Putin’s overarching aim is to undermine agreed, post-Soviet security structures in Europe and recreate a sphere of influence beyond Russia’s borders. He is desperate to stop Ukraine becoming a successful, fully independent, pro-western democracy whose example puts his corrupt, oppressive regime to shame. To this end he wants Nato, in effect, to withdraw from countries on Russia’s western periphery that joined the alliance after the Soviet collapse. His list has now expanded to include Romania and Bulgaria as well as Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland. He is also demanding written pledges that Nato will never invite Ukraine, Georgia or Moldova to join and that the allies will pull back troops and defensive missile systems from eastern Europe. The western democracies have stated plainly that they will not accept such blackmail. Yet, sadly, that is where consensus ends. There is no agreement, and much discord, about what to do if Russia does attack Ukraine, either directly by land, sea and air or indirectly, using asymmetric warfare methods, covert ops, special forces and “technical” countermeasures. European leaders jointly bear responsibility for this lamentable state of affairs, which emboldens Putin. The performance of the US president, Joe Biden, has been less than totally impressive. He made a dangerous gaffe last week when he implied a “minor incursion” by Russia might be tolerated. But overall he has been admirably firm in resisting Russian pressure and seeking de-escalation. Not so the European democracies, which have no joined-up policy at all. The German coalition is split between the Greens, who, for example, want to scrap the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia, and pro-Moscow Social Democrats. In France, a huge gap is opening up between President Emmanuel Macron’s bold ideas about EU “strategic autonomy”, propounded again at a chaotic European parliament session in Strasbourg last week, and the reality of EU feuding, impotence and irrelevance. Given he is deeply distrusted and disliked in many EU countries, it is unclear how Boris Johnson’s vow to knock European heads together and take charge of a united front to deter Putin, outlined in extraordinary Downing Street weekend briefings, can work. This sudden lurch into Churchillian war-fighting mode looks suspiciously like another attempt to distract attention from “partygate”. By exploiting international tensions in this way, Johnson and his Thatcher-imitating foreign secretary, Liz Truss, who has been missing in action so far, may only make matters worse. The Ukraine standoff, having reached this extreme pitch, will not be resolved quickly. Even though few people actually want it, a conflict could be triggered accidentally. Hopefully, US diplomatic efforts will succeed – because a bypassed Europe, ignored by Russia and patronised by America, appears unable to help itself. Whether or not Putin ultimately gets his way or his war, Europe has already lost.Sunday mornings? Our three-month-old boy is up at 6.30am and our eight-year-old son loves to jump in our bed. I’m a lounger, but I’m very conscious that Sunday is a day to spend with family. Sundays growing up? My mother was a minister, so Sunday mornings were quite an event, getting eight kids ready to go to church. There is a particular smell of black hair being straightened with a hot comb heated on the fire in the kitchen that reminds me of all my sisters getting ready for Sunday school. Sunday lunch? We’re savage carnivores, so my family loves my herb-crust roast beef and curried salmon. I compete with my wife over barbecued pork ribs. She’s from Taganrog in Russia and her mother sent her some interesting spice, but she won’t tell me what it is. Sunday music? We do a lot of Stevie Wonder, Curtis Mayfield, John Coltrane. I’ve been listening to a lot of piano players – Gerald Clayton, Kenny Barron. I’m a fan of the very soulful classical artists. Sunday exercise? We don’t like structure, so we may play a game of smacking the tennis ball over the tree, or swinging a golf club or cricket bat. I haven’t busted any windows yet. We like to play checkers and chess and cheat. It’s a family thing, to take something and deconstruct it. Sunday chores? Especially during Covid, we didn’t have anybody coming to clean. So I do the mopping and vacuuming. Then there’s the things you forget about: how do you get the dust off of the top of the curtains? Somebody has to do it. Last thing Sunday night? I prefer to fall asleep accidentally. I’ll often be watching the BBC in a hotel room and will get a bang on the wall at 3am: ‘Turn the damn TV off.’ When I’m home, there’s a lot of me falling asleep in front of the TV, or on my office floor listening to records. I get in trouble with my wife. She says: ‘Why do you sleep like a bumpsh’ – which means a homeless person in Russian – ‘in your own house?’ Gregory Porter’s latest album, Still Rising, is out nowTennis Australia maintains Peng Shuai’s safety is its “primary concern” despite asking fans at Melbourne Park to remove T-shirts and a banner bearing the words “Where is Peng Shuai?” Australian Open players have continued to express concern for the wellbeing of the Chinese tennis player who in early November accused a senior Chinese official of sexual assault. But tournament officials have confiscated material they deemed to contain political statements. This weekend, Brisbane activist Drew Pavlou posted a video to Twitter showing spectators being approached by security and then Victoria police. The footage featured Max Mok, a pro-democracy campaigner from Hong Kong who recently announced his intention to contest the Melbourne marginal seat of Chisholm in this year’s federal election, and a fellow spectator in conversation with a member of TA security who confiscated a banner. The security officer also asked the pair to remove their T-shirts which featured a photo of Peng on the front below the word “Wanted”. “Where is Peng Shuai?” was printed on the back of the T-shirt. Mok queried the reason for the confiscations, and a police officer was called to explain that the material was in breach of TA’s policy banning political statements. “I’m not saying you can’t have those views, but Tennis Australia sets the rules here,” the police officer said. TA on Sunday confirmed that was the case. “Under our ticket conditions of entry we don’t allow clothing, banners or signs that are commercial or political,” a Tennis Australia spokesperson told Guardian Australia. “Peng Shuai’s safety is our primary concern. We continue to work with the WTA and global tennis community to seek more clarity on her situation and will do everything we can to ensure her wellbeing.” TA has had little to say on Peng who disappeared from public life for almost three months after her Weibo post in which she accused the former vice-premier Zhang Gaoli of alleged sexual assault. It was swiftly deleted from China’s heavily censored internet. The Australian governing body has found itself in an uncomfortable balancing act given one of the Australian Open’s major commercial partners is Chinese premium liquor brand Guojiao 1573. In contrast, the Women’s Tennis Association has held firm on its stance that it will not hold any tournaments in China in 2022. Its chairman and chief executive, Steve Simon, said it was putting “principles ahead of profit”, meaning the WTA was prepared to sacrifice a significant portion of its annual revenue, which comes from dealings with the global superpower. Pavlou tweeted that he “tried to reason with police over the phone” and in the footage, officers are seen speaking with somebody on speakerphone. Pavlou has since set up a fundraising page to raise money to print more T-shirts to be handed out for free during the women’s final. The page, which had raised $6,800 in 24 hours, pledged to “raise as much noise and hell about it as possible”. “Sadly Tennis Australia has not taken such a firm stance in favour of human rights and basic standards of justice,” it states. “In fact, Tennis Australia called police on human rights activists at the 2022 Australian Open for simply wearing shirts asking the same question Naomi Osaka, Serena Williams and fans the world over have asked: ‘Where is Peng Shuai?’” Osaka reiterated that stance last week before her Open exit, saying she was “proud” of the way the issue had been handled by the WTA. “If I was in her position, I would want people to care for me, too,” Osaka said. “I imagine myself in her shoes and, in that way, it’s a little bit scary. But you want to lend your voice and you want people to ask the questions.” Victoria Azarenka, a member of the WTA players council, said it had not heard from Peng directly. “There hasn’t been that much development in terms of contact with Peng Shuai even though from our side we will continue to make any and all efforts to make sure that she is safe, she feels comfortable,” Azarenka said. “Hopefully we will get to hear from her personally at some point. I think that’s the goal, the main goal right now.” Ash Barty was also asked about the situation and said “we’re all looking out for her safety”. “We all hope that she’s well,” the Australian world No 1 said. “We hope that she’s doing OK. Hopefully it’s not too long until we see her back out here.”Way back in the mid-1960s, during a quiet summer, a former journalist turned public relations man persuaded the chairman of a public company to conduct a search for the Loch Ness monster. Quiet summers used to be known in Fleet Street as the “silly season”. One day, the PR man responsible for what was essentially a publicity stunt was called into the chairman’s office. The chairman, a retired general, was in a state of panic. “What on earth are we going to do if we find the monster?” he said. “It’s all right, sir, no need to worry. There is no monster.” I am reminded of this episode by the way those Brexiters who have not already admitted their gross disservice to a once-admired nation have been arguing that the government should do more to promote the advantages of Brexit. They have a slight problem: just as there is no Loch Ness monster, there are no advantages to Brexit. Brexit is an unmitigated disaster, and the damage is getting worse. I fear that Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer, so impressive in his forensic demolition of prime minister (still!) Boris Johnson during PMQs, is living in cloud cuckoo land if he really believes that “there’s no case for rejoining [the EU], so we have to make it work”. There is every case for rejoining the EU: the only question is how much economic and social damage will have to accrue before reality dawns. Reality takes time to dawn; but when it does, it does so in spades. Tories have been tying themselves in knots over when and how to give the prime minister his marching orders. But the voters have not. For far too long they gave Johnson the benefit of the doubt – I am still reeling from the shock of hearing a distinguished establishment figure saying before Christmas: “I am beginning to warm to Boris.” But this Falstaffian joker has finally been rumbled: the respondents to recent polls have, in effect, taken on the role of Henry V in Shakespeare’s Henry IV, Part Two in addressing Falstaff: “I know thee not, old man. Fall to thy prayers/How ill white hairs become a fool and jester.” So far the damage caused by Brexit has been shrouded by the understandable obsession with Covid. However, it is well described in an important survey by Jonty Bloom in the current issue of the New European: “The UK is forcing self-inflicted defeats upon its exporters, service and manufacturing sectors and economy, time and time again, with no victories to offset the losses.” He quotes the economist Adam Posen describing Brexit as “a trade war, but a war the UK has declared on itself”. During the first year of Brexit, Bloom writes, faced with the proliferation of red tape that cropped up not because of Brussels but owing to the departure from Brussels, “a fifth of small British businesses” decided exporting to the EU was not worth the candle. Now, “food and drink exports to the EU have fallen by a quarter since 2019”. And according to the Centre for European Reform, UK goods trade is almost 16% lower than it would have been without the “sovereignty” of Brexit. As one of my favourite Roman poets, Juvenal, wrote: “Difficile est saturam non scribere” (it is hard not to write satire). The complexity of Brexit rules of origin regulations for trade is such that exporters needed an extra year to attempt to cope with documentary requirements – some 300m extra customs declarations are to be required when the postponed rules start applying. In order to administer this nonsense, some 50,000 extra customs officials are needed. This is wholly unproductive. With the advent of the European single market in 1993, the removal of customs controls produced huge gains in productivity. We are now in a world of unproductive time-wasting – all part of the 4%-plus loss of annual income and output that is the inevitable result of Brexit. As the disillusioned former Tory chief secretary to the Treasury and justice minister David Gauke writes in the current New Statesman: “The reality is that Brexit means … putting up taxes because the economy is smaller than it otherwise would have been, erecting trade barriers and imposing new regulatory burdens on business.” Gauke adds that “the increasing tendency is to blame Johnson’s big state instincts for this predictable turn of events”. The trouble is that Johnson packed the cabinet that is now conspiring against him with Brexiters. Whether or not David Davis was in Brutus mood urging Johnson “in the name of God” to go, let us beware the words of the Third Citizen in Julius Caesar: “I fear there will a worse come in his place.” Wake up, Sir Keir, and please attack Brexit for what it is!In 1903, the African American comedic team of Bert Williams and George Walker appeared at Buckingham Palace, in celebration of the ninth birthday of the grandson of King Edward VII. To acclaim, they reprised their Broadway hit, In Dahomey. The musical play featured the cake walk, which became a dance sensation, and a madcap plot set in Boston, Florida and the African nation now famed for royal bronzes plundered by imperialists. What, one wonders, did their audience know of Dahomey’s more sinister legacy? “Of all our studies,” said Malcolm X, “history is best qualified to reward our research.” In our uncertain times, Ben Raines’s perceptive new book, The Last Slave Ship: The True Story of How Clotilda Was Found, Her Descendants, and an Extraordinary Reckoning, is a welcome and affecting history lesson. This story from long ago puts into context what the new spate of lawlessness in the US is all about. Raines tells a tale of racism and greed. Anyone who imagines that attempting to circumvent democracy is a new thing has forgotten the civil war. Raines begins in 1860, 50 years after the Atlantic slave trade was outlawed. That was when a sleek, custom-built schooner, the Clotilda, returned to Mobile, Alabama, from Dahomey, which nowadays is known as Benin. Chartered by a planter and riverboat captain, Timothy Meaher, the Clotilda carried a valuable cargo: 110 young black captives. Meaher had made a thousand-dollar bet with passengers at the captain’s table. He could pull off the caper of bringing a boatload of enslaved Africans to Mobile – a capital offense – without consequence. Spoiler alert! He did. For many, one suspects, the most enlightening part of this sad saga occurs at the start. Some who have heard of the direct involvement of Africans in the Atlantic slave trade have suspected apologists’ propaganda. True, as with today’s drug trade, without a lucrative market among Arabs, Europeans and Americans, slavery would have collapsed much sooner. But there is no exaggerating the extent to which the rulers of Dahomey were involved in capturing fellow Africans for both enslavement and sacrifice. Its victims are estimated in the hundreds of thousands. Meaher and his accomplices decided it was prudent to destroy the evidence. In Mobile, William Foster, the captain who carried out the venture, set the Clotilda ablaze and scuttled her. Soon to resign from US law enforcement to join the Confederacy, the gang’s prosecutors probably knew where the vessel lay. But with plausible deniability, they maintained there was no evidence criminality had occurred. Five years later, at civil war’s close, the Africans hit on a stratagem to restore their dignity. They determined to acquire land and establish a realm of their own. They called it Africatown. Predictably, their leader was rebuffed by their captor. “Thou fool,” Meaher is said to have shouted. “Thinkest thou that I would give you property upon property? You do not belong to me now … I owe you nothing.” The group of 30 ex-captives continued to toil in the cotton fields, on Meaher’s boats and at his saw mill. Saving most of what they earned, they bought land from Meaher. Collectively, they built solid if meager houses. They built a church and a school. In much the same terms as whites disdained them, African Americans ridiculed and ostracized the Clotilda captives and their offspring. They denounced them as ignorant, savage and ape-like. It’s little wonder their descendants came to lose the language of their ancestors and often to deny their heritage too. Once a highway and bridge connected Africatown to Mobile, three miles across the bay, more and more American-born Black people moved there. By the 1920s, when the Harlem Renaissance writer Zora Neale Hurston came to document the Africans, there were small houses for black factory workers. Black-owned businesses arose too: movie theaters, grocery stores, barber shops, beauty parlors. By the 1950s, the population was 13,000. In the Jim Crow south, such autonomy was largely illusory. Unincorporated, unprotected by zoning or environmental regulations, Africatown was prey to exploitation. Privately held African property proved no match to eminent domain. Relative prosperity was no compensation for those employed by toxic factories, prey to chronic illness. Just like that, the boom times went away. Factories closed and rather than pay taxes for sewer connections the Meahers destroyed houses after evicting tenants. In 1967, Augustine Meaher explained his position: renters couldn’t afford water bills on top of $4 monthly rent. “Besides, people have lived perfectly healthily and happy for years without running water and sewers … He don’t need garbage service … He don’t need a bathtub … Wouldn’t know how to use it.” Timothy Meaher’s grandson also said his company might keep a few houses for the old “darkies who work for us” but with pensions from the government, “you can’t get them to work as hard any more.” Construction of an even bigger bridge, which destroyed the last of the original houses, presaged wholesale abandonment. With the population down to 3,000, crime, crack and despair pervaded. Now only the cemetery and the chimney of one of the founder’s houses survive. However, the raising of the Clotilda, three years ago, has sparked an Africatown renaissance. The “discovery” refuted the lies of whites who maintained that the capture and displacement of 110 Africans never happened. Still fabulously rich, the Meahers of Mobile are as yet unrepentant. Or at least they are silent. Mike Foster is not. As a direct descendant of Meaher’s agent and the captain of the Clotilda, news of the ship’s discovery roused him. Meeting Lorna Gail Woods, Joycelyn Davis, Darron Paterson, Garry Lumbers and two other members of the Clotilda Descendants Association, he offered an apology. The heirs of Africatown stress that as they want reconciliation, so does Foster. And that they’ll achieve it. The Last Slave Ship is published in the US by Simon &amp; SchusterThe brainchild of Fendi’s womenswear artistic director Kim Jones and Vogue photographer Nikolai von Bismarck, The Fendi Set is an exploration of the locations, landscapes and landmarks synonymous with the set, casting the starry model lineup from Jones’s first Fendi couture show in Paris – entitled From Bloomsbury to Borghese and including Kate and Lila Moss, Demi Moore, and Christy Turlington – as the collective’s 21st-century counterparts. Much like the work of their muses, the year-long project required a multi-disciplinary and fastidious approach. “There were all these incredible links,” enthuses von Bismarck who, along with a tight team that included Darren Clark at the Charleston Trust (the modernist Sussex HQ of the group), spent the best part of 2021 deep diving, uncovering letters in the New York Library to Virginia Woolf from her sister Vanessa Bell when the latter was staying at Rome’s Hotel de Russie; discovering Duncan Grant had a studio in Via Margutta; and finding that Woolf’s marbling for her books was the same as that at the Villa Borghese. Armed with artefacts and information, he started to compile the 230-page tome shooting said objects, subjects and poignant spaces using film and finishes that would capture an aged ethereality to match both Jones’s couture collection and many of the masterpieces to emerge from the set, such as Woolf’s Orlando. “We spent months sourcing [vintage] Polaroid from Japan, New York and Holland, which was high risk because sometimes they just came out white,” he laughs, and shot models on a large 10-8 camera, “The ones when you have the sheet over your head and so the subject has to stay still for 10 seconds. I’m not sure that Lila had ever worked with a 10-8 camera before with a Polaroid coming out of it – but Christy knew exactly what she was doing!” Meanwhile, he sourced a fabled French printer “who takes a week to print one photograph with a special technique where he mixes the pigment with sawdust” to achieve a depth of texture to the images. Prefaced by Tilda Swinton, the resulting book is a mixed-media tome complete and the feeling of a prized family album, a sentiment von Bismarck notes as a common denominator between the world of the set and Jones’s approach. “Kim loves building his own family and having those people around him; like the set, he is all about collaboration and I really like the collaborative spirit of it all.” The Fendi Set by Nikolai von Bismarck, Kim Jones and Dr Mark Hussey (Rizzoli, £97.50) is published in the UK on 25 January, Virginia Woolf’s birthdaySamantha Power, who covered the Bosnian war as a journalist in her 20s, returned to the country this week as head of the US Agency for International Development (USAid), offering American support for independent journalists. Power is the highest-ranking US official to visit Bosnia since Joe Biden in 2009, when he was vice-president. Her trip was aimed at showing Biden administration support for Bosnia’s territorial integrity and the 1995 Dayton peace agreement at a time when both are under threat from a resurgent Serb push for partition. On Friday, Power met all three members of the country’s tripartite presidency, including the secessionist Bosnian Serb leader, Milorad Dodik, who has threatened to withdraw Serbs from the national army, judiciary and tax system this year. Power said she stressed the “danger of secessionist rhetoric and actions” and told the leaders every young Bosnian she had met had told her “they are finding it harder and harder to see a future for themselves in a country facing so much corruption and division”. About 170,000 Bosnians, out of total population of 3 million, left the country over the past year alone. Power said in an interview from the Bosnian capital: “My message is direct from President Biden. Just as the United States was there for the people of this country back in the 1990s, we are here with you now, engaging, putting political pressure, imposing economic sanctions trying to affect the cost benefit calculus of those who are fomenting division or exacerbating the economic crisis in the country.” During the Bosnian war, Power was a freelance journalist based in Sarajevo. This week, one of her first acts on her arrival in the city was to visit the grave of a friend and colleague, Kurt Schork. Schork, who ran the Reuters bureau in Sarajevo when the city was under siege, was killed in 2000 in an ambush in Sierra Leone but is buried in Sarajevo’s multi-denominational Lion cemetery alongside Bosnians whose lives and deaths he described in his journalism. Power said Schork “became a legend for his bravery and his ability to capture the human cost of senseless conflict”. Power described what it was like to return to Sarajevo at the head of an aid agency with a $28bn budget, $25m of which is spent each year in Bosnia, a third in the Serb-run entity, Republika Srpska. “One of the experiences that every journalist had during the war is that feeling of just transcribing people’s suffering and trying to use one’s pen to capture what that was like,” Power said. “But it is a different feeling to be able to draw from the USAid toolbox, because we are able to make a whole range of investments in everything from independent media and anti-corruption bodies to Covid vaccines and initiatives that create jobs for young people.” Since taking over as administrator last April, Power has sought to expand the agency’s support for civil society efforts to counter corruption, and for journalism in particular. One of her initiatives has been to launch a global defamation fund, to provide insurance against politically inspired lawsuits aimed at gagging reporters. “These lawsuits are the new tool of corrupt elites,” Power said. She held a meeting with Bosnian journalists at the offices of the Sarajevo daily, Oslobođenje, on Thursday and said one told her it was harder to be a reporter now than during the war. “There is still harassment and threats of violence and all of that. That’s all still there. But now alongside that is the tool of the lawsuit,” she said. “So we are supporting that avenue of work, which is about democratic accountability.” Power also met three former prisoners of war who have been telling their stories as part of an USAid-funded reconciliation scheme: Amir Omerspahić, a Muslim Bosniak who was tortured in a Serbian prison; Janko Samouković, a Serb who was held in a Bosnian army prison camp outside Sarajevo; and Stanislav Krezić, a Croat held by the Bosnian army in Mostar. “It’s a modest effort,” Power said. “It’s not changing the world overnight, but it’s an example of just trying at the grassroots level to both familiarize people with the suffering that went on during the war, particularly when people are stoking the flames of division again.”Travel blogger Ellie Seymour (ellieandco.co.uk) has been based in Brighton for nearly 20 years. She is the author of the guidebooks Secret Brighton and Secret Sussex Food You can’t visit the seaside city of Brighton without having fish and chips, and where to get the best is hotly debated. One of my favourite spots is the city’s oldest: Bardsley’s of Baker Street opened in 1926, which has a tiny dining room full of music hall memorabilia. I try to support independent restaurants, and love Bincho Yakitori, a buzzy, inexpensive Japanese near the seafront serving small plates cooked over fire. The covered Open Market is a global feast – Korean, Japanese, Greek, Mexican, Indian, a French bakery, homemade hummus and falafels, plus handmade chocolates and sausage rolls. Then there’s Tilt Kitchen at Fiveways, north of the centre: this unsung veggie hero serves mouth-watering toasties, heaped salads, fragrant soups, gooey brownies and much more from a postage stamp-size open kitchen. Inspiration For my blog and guidebooks, I have trained myself to see my surroundings differently, and spot urban curiosities we usually rush past. I love finding ghost signs, and there are some beautiful examples here – like one for the old Western hotel above the Paris House bar on Western Road. Brighton is a well-known artists’ enclave, and packed with galleries. Fabrica, in a former chapel, hosts three contemporary art shows a year, and Phoenix Gallery holds 12 free shows a year across two huge spaces, and has a cool coffee bar, too. In May and November Brighton holds Artists’ Open Houses, with work on display in private homes and studios. Neighbourhood The bohemian North Laine draws big crowds but a great, quieter area for a wander is Seven Dials, a leafy neighbourhood a 10-minute walk from Brighton station. Despite its proximity to the city centre, it feels off the radar. Don’t miss diminutive cactus emporium Hi Cacti, with its cheerful yellow shopfront; Dog and Bone Gallery, the city’s smallest, inside two red phone boxes; and Anna’s Museum, a miniature natural history museum in a shop window. The best coffee in the area is at Puck. Nightlife You can’t walk 10 minutes in Brighton without passing a club, bar or pub. Those in the know head to the Jolly Brewer near London Road station. It’s run by Zack and Matt, the most welcoming landlords in Brighton, and the kind of place you go to have just the one but end up making new friends and leaving at closing time. Another favourite is the Hand in Hand in Kemp Town, where you can play “toad in the hole”, where metal discs – “toads” – are thrown into a slot on a wooden box. There’s jazz on Sundays, and unusual beers from their microbrewery, Hand Brew Co. I also love the Duke of York’s cinema at Preston Circus. It’s in a beautiful Edwardian building, with a pair of stripy can-can legs protruding from the roof. It opened in 1910 and claims to be the UK’s oldest surviving purpose-built cinema. Green space With its seafront and piers, Brighton is more about blue space: the view over rooftops down to the sea from Hollingbury Hillfort is one of the best in the city, especially at dusk. However, the city is also on the fringes of the South Downs national park, and I head for the hills when I want some nature. In next to no time, you can be on a blustery hike and exploring tiny hidden villages. I am always drawn to Streat, a 15-minute drive from the centre of Brighton, even though it’s minuscule. It is a good base for a walk up and over the hills to Ditchling, and has a hidden honesty food box, Suzy’s Streat Food, filled with homebaked treats. Stay I love directing people to the small Artist Residence hotel (doubles from £105 room-only), where I once had a mini staycation. It overlooks the sea on Regency Square and is full of vintage charm.Who is Sue Gray? Until last month, civil servant Sue Gray, who is heading the inquiry into the “partygate” scandal, was virtually unknown outside Whitehall. She is now one of the best-known figures in government, with senior political figures from the prime minister downwards keen to defer to her judgment over the alleged goings-on in 10 Downing Street. Gray investigated the senior government minister Damian Green in 2017, an inquiry which triggered his resignation after she found he had broken the ministerial code. A BBC profile of Gray in 2015 described her as “the most powerful person you’ve never heard of”. Her own Twitter account has a retweeted posting in which she is referred to as “deputy GOD”. Why is she in charge of the partygate inquiry? Gray, now second permanent secretary at the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities, was drafted in to head the inquiry after Britain’s top civil servant Simon Case stepped aside last month following reports a drinks gathering was held in his office. Her experience in high-profile investigations into personal conduct made her the ideal candidate to conduct the Downing Street inquiry. What exactly is she investigating? Michael Ellis, the paymaster general, told the House of Commons on 9 December an inquiry would look at gatherings in Downing Street on 27 November 2020 and 18 December 2020. These were a leaving do for a senior aide, Cleo Watson, where Boris Johnson is said to have given a speech, and a Christmas party, which Johnson did not attend. Ellis told MPs the prime minister had been assured “there was no party and that no Covid rules were broken”. The inquiry has now been widened to cover other events, most notably the garden party at Downing Street on 20 May 2020, where those attending were sent an invitation by the principal private secretary to the prime minister, Martin Reynolds, suggesting they “make the most of this lovely weather” and advising them to “bring your own booze!” The country was in lockdown at the time and the terms of reference state the inquiry will establish “a general understanding of the gatherings, including attendance, the setting and the purpose, with reference to adherence to the guidance in place at the time”. It is also looking at two parties held by No 10 staff on the eve of the Duke of Edinburgh’s funeral in April 2021. The inquiry is also charged with looking at other events in Whitehall during lockdown, including a drinks party at the Department for Education on 10 December 2020. What powers does the inquiry have? The inquiry is an internal one and Gray is supported by lawyers from the government legal department. All ministers, special advisers and civil servants have been told to cooperate. Gray has been given access to all relevant records, which are likely to include internal emails, calendar invites and Downing Street exit and entry logs, and has been interviewing staff. It was reported on Friday that Gray’s team have asked some Downing Street officials to hand over their mobile phones. Any final decisions on disciplinary action against civil servants would ultimately be a matter for Simon Case, the cabinet secretary. The prime minister would rule on any action against political staff. Will it rule on whether Johnson and his staff broke the rules? Under the terms of reference of the inquiry, any potential evidence of a criminal offence in Downing Street will be passed to the police. Gray’s remit is to examine the guidance at the time of the parties. Johnson and his staff will be anxious about whether she reaches an unequivocal conclusion on whether the parties broke the rules. MPs say it is hard to see how she could conclude that none of the parties breached the guidelines to avoid unnecessary social mixing at the time. The inquiry is likely to closely examine the culture and management of Downing Street and one source has said she will “give it both barrels to whoever deserves it”. Those who know her say she will be anxious to avoid junior staff taking the blame for wider failings at No 10. Will the proceedings of the inquiry be published in full? The investigation will almost certainly not be published in its entirety and specific action against junior employees will be confidential. Labour and the Liberal Democrats are calling for the publication of the full report and accompanying emails and witness accounts. Could there be a smoking gun? Johnson’s defence in the Commons for attending the garden party in May 2020 was that he “implicitly” believed it was a work event. In an incendiary intervention last week, Johnson’s former chief adviser Dominic Cummings claimed the PM was warned about the drinks party. No 10 says this is untrue. If Gray uncovers an email or conclusive evidence that Johnson was warned about the event and knew it was a party, it would almost certainly force his resignation since he would have misled parliament and breached the ministerial code. How will Johnson respond? Johnson is likely to make a statement to the Commons once the report is published and answer MPs’ questions. He could decide to refer himself to Lord Geidt, the independent adviser on ministerial interests. In the face of a damning report, he will face immediate calls to stand down. If he survives the partygate scandal, Johnson is likely to make sweeping changes to his team.Roy DeCarava had been taking pictures in Harlem, where he grew up, for a decade when he came upon this scene of a young woman in the street in her graduation dress. DeCarava had mostly thought of photography as a means to an end – he had used a camera to produce aides-memoire for his painting. But around this time, 1949, his vocation changed and he became primarily a photographer. Looking at this picture, and its uncanny symbolism, it is easy to see why. Harlem, during the civil rights years, was full of visual gifts from real life. The young black woman, briefly bathed in sunlight in her white silk, is stepping forward into a place of complicated shadows. Alone, she is flanked by an incomplete “Princ–” scrawled on a wall. Her eyes are drawn to the sleek lines of the Chevrolet advert, a promise of escape from the derelict streetscape, but an alternative means of transport, an antique trash cart, is also at hand. If you were staging Cinderella in racially divided New York in 1949, it would be hard to conjure a more evocative set. This picture was among those that caught the eye of the poet and guiding spirit of the Harlem renaissance, Langston Hughes, when DeCarava paid him a visit in the summer of 1954. By then DeCarava had become the first African American to be awarded a John Simon Guggenheim fellowship, which allowed him to make pictures full time. Hughes was so struck by DeCarava’s work that he insisted his publisher produce a volume of it, for which he supplied an accompanying text. The Sweet Flypaper of Life launched DeCarava’s long and celebrated career documenting the everyday struggle of black America, up until his death in 2009. A new retrospective of his pictures in London demonstrates at every turn his belief that, as here, the best photographs “present a moment so profoundly a moment that it becomes an eternity”. Roy DeCarava: Selected Works is at David Zwirner Gallery, London W1, until 19 FebruaryIn July 1986, James Birch, a young London gallerist with vague designs on global domination, set off for the Soviet Union. It was his first visit and he had no idea what to expect. Mikhail Gorbachev had then been general secretary of the Communist party for one year: perestroika and glasnost were in the air (or, at any rate, in the British newspapers). But still, Moscow was a world apart. On the advice of his travelling companion, a “cultural entrepreneur” whose carpet business often took him to the USSR, Birch carried among his luggage a packet of chocolate digestives, just in case he found himself short of food, and cartons of Camel cigarettes, to be used as payment to all the drivers he would have to flag for a lift, there being virtually no taxis in the city. At this point, Birch hoped to convince the Soviet authorities to allow him to stage an exhibition of work by his beloved neo naturists, a group of British artists that included the future Turner prize winner Grayson Perry. Through a Sotheby’s expert in Russian icons, he had already written to Tahir Salahov, the man who ran the Union of Artists, the organisation that strictly controlled the output of creativity in the USSR. But negotiations (if that’s the word) now needed to be conducted in person via a go-between, a KGB officer called Sergei Klokov, who seemingly had some kind of special responsibility for culture. Klokov, whom Birch had briefly met in London some months before, was quite scary. In the war in Afghanistan he had operated a flamethrower (“I remember the smell of burning flesh”); the merest flash of his KGB papers caused waiters and customs officers alike to tremble at the knee. But he was also, by Birch’s telling, just a little bit ridiculous. In his Pierre Cardin suits, and with a small leather handbag at his wrist, he looked to his new English friend like nothing so much as “a hairdresser”. Somewhat predictably, Klokov and his masters soon gave the neo naturists the thumbs down. But this didn’t mean they didn’t want to help Birch. What about Andy Warhol? Would he like a show in Moscow? Or maybe Francis Bacon, whose name young Soviet artists seemingly uttered with such reverence? Birch believed he would get nowhere with Warhol – and he was right – but thanks to family connections, he’d known Bacon all his life. Back in London, Francis was excited at the idea. He would be able to get the train from Moscow to St Petersburg, where he had long dreamed of gawping at the Rembrandts in the Hermitage. Birch knew the road ahead would be tricky: Bacon was controlling and quixotic, and Klokov had already warned Birch that any work that was too “cock-exalting” would fall foul of the censors. But who could resist such an opportunity? This was the first time a British artist had been accorded the honour of an exhibition in the USSR since 1917. Birch’s picaresque memoir, Bacon in Moscow, written with help from the journalist Michael Hodges, is the first book to be published by Cheerio, an imprint established in partnership with the estate of Francis Bacon (“cheerio” was Bacon’s preferred drinking toast) – and, yes, who would have thought, considering the dozens of books about the artist that already exist, there would be anything left to say? But this really is a peculiarly evocative and authentic title: one that, at moments, brings Bacon to life far more vividly than do, say, the several hundred of pages of Mark Stevens and Annalyn Swan’s biography, published last year. Thanks to the fact they’re not buried beneath a thicket of research and pseudo-scholarship, and to Birch’s excellent recall, which comes nicely garlanded with irony, amusement and an intense fondness for Bacon, his anecdotes shine. Birch’s father, a former sheriff of London, had access to the invitation-only “Black Museum” at Scotland Yard, where ghoulish souvenirs are housed (hangmen’s nooses, the “acid bath” used by John George Haigh), and a visit was arranged for an eager Francis. It’s darkly funny reading about it, the visit having delighted him so much he took Birch for lunch at the expensive London restaurant Wiltons afterwards. How pleasing, too, to learn that Bacon voraciously read everything from Aeschylus to – yes, really – the cookbooks of Robert Carrier. But if anything, Birch is even better on the late-era Soviet Union. It’s all here. The surveillance and the spies and the bribery; the unappetising salads, the flat Coke and the state hotel rooms whose bathrooms stink of rotting apples (the result, says Birch, of vodka on the digestive system). How far off it seems now. Flying home on an almost empty plane, he finds himself sitting across the aisle from an unemployed Yorkshire miner who has just enjoyed a fraternal holiday on the Black Sea, courtesy of the Soviet state. Did his show happen? We know, of course, that it did; that in 1988, people queued around the block to see it (at the back of Bacon in Moscow, which comes with good reproductions of all the pictures that were included in it, is a series of priceless comments from the visitors’ book, my favourite of which reads: “It is good that the exhibition is small. It could drive one mad”). But the real joy of Birch’s book lies in his getting there: the spats, the hissy fits, the threats; the almost comically brazen moment when Klokov swiftly sells a painting Bacon has unaccountably given him, using the proceeds to buy a snake farm in Uzbekistan. • Bacon in Moscow by James Birch is published by Cheerio (£17.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyZiggy Marley was only eight years old when his mum and dad – the reggae great Bob Marley – were shot in an apparent assassination attempt inside their home in Kingston, Jamaica. But he remembers it like yesterday. “Cops came for us children in the middle of the night and carried us away to a secret hideaway up in the hills – no one really knew what was happening. It was scary but it was kind of exciting,” he says. Yet just two days later, on 5 December 1976, Bob Marley insisted on playing the Smile Jamaica Concert at Kingston’s National Heroes Park, as planned – even though he had bullet wounds in his arm and chest. The gig was seen as a rallying cry for peace against the backdrop of Jamaica’s spiralling violence and political unrest, with 80,000 people watching Marley swagger his way through classics including Get Up Stand Up. For reggae fans it’s the stuff of legend, though Ziggy insists his mother, who had been shot in the head on that night, deserves equal credit. “She still showed up for the show, the same as he did. I’m proud of both my dad and my mum because there’s a team work going on between them. Bob wouldn’t be Bob without Rita, you know what I’m saying?” Now 53, Ziggy is speaking to the Observer on the eve of a new exhibition about his father’s life and influences opening at the Saatchi Gallery in London next month. It’s the latest celebration of a singer who four decades after his death from cancer, aged 36, is still one of the bestselling artists in the world. His posthumous greatest hits album, Legend, released in 1984, has spent more than 950 weeks in the UK top 100 and has sold more than 25m copies worldwide. The exhibition – which includes a giant vinyl installation of Legend – is pitched as a “multi-sensory experience” with numerous rooms and spaces, each highlighting different aspects of Marley’s life. One room, for example, is designed as a forest with the sounds and smells of Jamaica, the visual backdrop to many of the songs. In another space, they have recreated a concrete urban landscape with huge art installations and there’s even a mock-up of the backstage corridor of a Bob Marley and the Wailers concert. A silent disco, which they’re calling the Soul Shakedown Studio, invites visitors to don headphones and groove to a reggae dance party. But the highlight of the show is arguably a collection of never-seen images of Marley himself. Ziggy explains that they were discovered in the storage locker of photographer Jean Bernard Sohiez, who died last year and whose two dozen photos are all seemingly taken on the same day in Kingston, more or less a year before Marley’s death. They are un-posed candid shots, some capturing the singer playing football, which he said was his greatest passion after music. “He was fanatical,” agrees Ziggy. “It was a big part of his life, and my life as a child around him, but it wasn’t just about football – he loved all sports. He loved boxing, running, table tennis, he was a sporty guy.” He would sometimes come to Ziggy’s primary school and play against his teammates, he says, adding: “He was fast and he had a good kick.” He laughs out loud though at the idea his dad’s game was on a professional level, as friends who played with him have claimed. “That was his aspiration!” he quips. He thinks playing football was a way for Marley to alleviate some of the pressures of his day-to-day life. His dad was always in demand, he says, and sometimes it felt like everyone wanted a piece of him. “Football helped him free his mind,” he says. Disturbed by the shooting at his home, Marley moved to London for a spell, living in the relative calm of 42 Oakley Street in Chelsea. It’s there that he wrote one of his most enduring songs, Three Little Birds. Ziggy stayed on in Jamaica along with the rest of his siblings (Marley had 11 acknowledged children) but claims he didn’t miss his father during the separation. Not because he didn’t love him, but through necessity, he says. “When you reflect back you can feel sad, but in that moment you gotta do what you gotta do,” he says. “I had to go to school, there were a lot of things going on, so you just get on with it.” Ziggy (a nickname his dad gave him, meaning “little spliff’’) was 12 when Marley died. He even performed at the funeral. And in a wider sense he’s “got on with it” all his adult life, carving his own niche as a top recording artist. He’s an eight-time Grammy award winner, picking up best reggae album seven times, most recently in 2017. Ziggy has a similar Trenchtown accent to his father, although he’s been living in Los Angeles with his wife Orly and four children for around 15 years now. “As my father used to say, my home is in my head,” he says. He knows he’ll never step completely out of his father’s shadow and he admits that some people want him to be his father. There’s always an expectation that he will do covers of Bob Marley songs at his live events, but that’s something he says he’s more than happy to do. Sometimes he does tours where he only sings his father’s songs. He doesn’t have a favourite one, but singles out Redemption Song as the one that is closest to his heart. It’s a song that was played a great deal around the time his father died, he says, and it meant so much to so many people. “It carries a lot of emotional connection for me.” The Bob Marley One Love Experience is at London’s Saatchi Gallery from 2 February – 18 AprilWhatever the damage to his party, his country and dependent relations – should the crowdfunding start now? – the premiership of Boris Johnson increasingly looks, for the royal family, like an unprecedented blessing. Imagine that you are continually reviled for being democratically illegitimate, lazy, greedy, philistine, pointless, absurd, spongeing, hypocritical, creepy, unprincipled and racist – when, as if to put the above in perspective, along comes an actual elected world king who is endowed with all these defects plus others unusual in UK monarchs since Charles II’s children almost doubled the size of the aristocracy. Better still, for the royals, the continuing insights into Johnson’s character coincide with a campaign for a new debate on the monarchy, “a broken institution” as Republic calls it, before Charles gets his hands on the crown. With Andrew finally expelled, along with Charles’s former valet, in a pre-jubilee clearout, the prime minister’s incumbency could not have been better designed, like some inverted glorious revolution, to further beatify the Windsors and discredit the usual alternatives. Should the royal luck hold, they might even enjoy a Johnson-free jubilee; if he does feature in the pageantry, it can only be in a capacity guaranteed not to remind the royals of a funeral eve, a broken swing, a clinking wheelie suitcase. They have probably forgotten, by now, Jennifer Arcuri’s revelation that he was almost late to welcome them to an Olympics ceremony in 2012, being delayed by an inaugural sexual assignation with the talented tech entrepreneur. It seems a pity Princess Margaret, generally admitted to be one of the most loathsome royals, could not have lived to see this rekindled dream of indefinite royal ease. Always, the rejoinder to anti-monarchists is: “Who would you rather then, Tony Blair?”, or its variant, “it can’t always be Betty Boothroyd”. Even a lifelong republican can see that the objection has recently gained a bit of purchase. Can a country that elected prime minister Boris Johnson ever be considered safe from electing a head of state like Boris Johnson? With his or her latest iteration of Mrs Johnson, their thirsty court and extended family also serving for some lengthy term as fellow figureheads in need of extensively refurbished accommodations? True, a known associate of a paedophile and a sex trafficker is unlikely, in such an election, to be either a contender or beneficiary in the style too long enjoyed by Prince Andrew. His recent erasure may have been sufficiently thorough enough, however, to indicate an attractive new direction in royal brand renewal. Well before he was dispatched, the deployment of Wholesome William and Thrifty Kate, with their ever-so-humble royal ways, suggested some careful revival of the Victorian royal template. News that the wallpaper queen was too sensitive for the Downing Street flat coincided with the duchess’s reinvention as a moral leader whose £7 Accessorize earrings will always say more about her than any free fort that might become available. From Johson’s arrival, the Queen benefited from the concern you’d feel for any very elderly person suddenly subjected to weekly visits from the sort of degenerate and unkempt-looking individual you would not wish to see prowling around sheltered accommodation. Was her handbag, you wondered, always in sight and firmly closed? Had secret cameras been concealed in pot plants? Had Johnson even washed his hands? Probably not. Dominic Cummings had to intervene in March 2020 to stop Johnson potentially infecting the Queen with Covid. There may have been some amusement on her part in being able to compare the Churchill impersonator with the real thing. And it’s not impossible she found Johnson preferable, initially, to Cameron, who had once said she’d “purred” at him, then further overshared in his autobiography. To the insult of his appearance, Johnson would shortly add the professional discourtesy of illegally proroguing parliament. John Major, demanding an apology, warned Johnson: “No prime minister must ever treat the monarch or parliament in this way again.” Opting, as per, to defend the indefensible, Johnson thereby pulled off the notable feat for an elected politician of appearing less constitutionally observant than Prince Charles. Who has also grown in stature recently, in inverse proportion to his appearances. Whether or not the Queen cares about the behaviour of Johnson’s intoxicated and anarchic functionaries during the “period of national mourning” he had recommended, that too has been another valuable service. The reports allowed for a pointed updating of the Queen Mother’s “I’m glad we’ve been bombed. It makes me feel we can look the East End in the face.” Thanks to the No 10 revels, we learned the Queen had declined the offer of a royal exemption from the lockdown mourner-limit on the grounds, according to Private Eye, that “it would be unfair… The palace told Downing Street that she wanted to set an example rather than be an exception to the rules.” If it was less impressive that the Queen subsequently allowed Andrew, semi-disappeared since his Newsnight interview, to stage a post-funeral comeback, then the palace compensated when his evasions were exhausted with an obliteration of exemplary ruthlessness. Modern technology rules out a Stalinesque Andrew-vanishing from royal balconies, but the family website did its best, consigning him so firmly to the past that you wonder if it’s actually legal, what with the government’s new rules about never throwing anything out. “An important part of the Duke of York’s role was to support the Queen’s work as Head of State,” the family all but obituarises its demi-late duke. He “would attend a number of important occasions…” Compared with this, the Tory party, still unwilling to evict an individual so colossally harmful to its elderly brand, is practically begging for abolition. If Boris Johnson makes the royals almost tolerable, the transaction works, alas, both ways. The royals have made his outfit look even worse. • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnistThe last time Donald Trump heard such hammer blows, they were from renovations at Mar-a-Lago that displeased the former president. But not even that sound would have left his ears ringing like last week’s avalanche of bad news that some believe nudged a criminal indictment one step closer. No single week in the year since Trump left the White House has been as dramatic, or for him as potentially catastrophic, as the one just passed. It included a rebuke from the supreme court over documents related to the 6 January insurrection which Trump incited; news that the congressional committee investigating the riot was closing in on Trump’s inner circle; evidence from New York’s attorney general of alleged tax fraud; and, perhaps most damaging of all, a request from a Georgia prosecutor for a grand jury in her investigation of Trump’s attempt to overturn the 2020 election. The week ended with the leaking of a document showing that Trump at least pondered harnessing the military in his attempts to overturn Joe Biden’s victory. It all left the former president with plenty to ponder. “He’s Teflon Don, he said he could shoot somebody on Fifth Avenue and survive it, his supporters are going to support him no matter what, but I’m starting to think more and more that the walls are closing in on this guy,” said Kimberly Wehle, a respected legal analyst and professor of law at the University of Baltimore. “The most immediate thing is the grand jury in Georgia because there’s audio of him trying to get [secretary of state] Brad Raffensperger to ‘find’ votes. Under Georgia election laws as I read them that is potentially a crime. “The looming question is whether Trump will be indicted along with 11 others so far for seditious conspiracy [over the 6 January Capitol attack]. To me that’s the biggest turn of events … the justice department believes they have evidence beyond a reasonable doubt of an agreement, a meeting of minds to overturn a legitimate election. “And that there are a lot of high-level people that are looped into it, including potentially Donald Trump himself, and of course he’s not president, so he’s not immune from prosecution any more.” It is that Department of Justice investigation into the deadly Capitol assault, parallel but separate to the 6 January House committee, which harbors the most legal peril for Trump. Some believe sedition charges for members of the Oath Keepers militia indicate that the inquiry has moved into a higher gear. Others, most recently Preet Bharara, former district attorney for the southern district of New York, have questioned why it appears members of Trump’s inner guard, including former chief of staff Mark Meadows, have not yet been questioned. “It’s just not a possibility they’ve tried to interview, you know, a dozen of the top people at and around the White House like the [6 January] committee has [because] they squeal like stuck pigs when people approach them,” Bharara told The New Abnormal podcast, a Daily Beast podcast. “It’s odd to have allowed all this testimony to be collected, all these documents to be subpoenaed and compiled, and they don’t look like they’ve done any of these interviews. There are some lower-level people who breached the doors to the Capitol, but I don’t think those people are giving it up in a straight line to Trump.” At a rare press conference earlier this month, the attorney general, Merrick Garland, did not mention Trump by name but sought to reassure critics of his investigation. “The justice department remains committed to holding all January 6th perpetrators, at any level, accountable under law – whether they were present that day or were otherwise criminally responsible for the assault on our democracy,” he said in a carefully worded address. The objectives of the House committee are easier to divine and more likely in the immediate term to cause political harm to Trump as he mulls another White House run. Thursday’s request for testimony from his daughter Ivanka, a former White House adviser, brings the investigation to the heart of Trump’s inner circle. Trump’s actions are also set to be explored in primetime TV hearings that Jamie Raskin, a Democratic member of the committee, has promised will “blow the roof off the House”. The panel also scored a big victory on Wednesday when the supreme court ended Trump’s efforts to shield more than 700 pages of White House records. The treasure trove of documents included a draft executive order directing the Department of Defense to seize voting machines, and appointing a special counsel to look into the election, in support of Trump’s “big lie” that the election was stolen. “Documents don’t die, they don’t lie,” Wehle said. “A witness can say, ‘Oh, I don’t recall,’ and dance around it. Documents cannot. Secondly, the documents will lead to more people to discuss what happened, including Ivanka Trump.” Trump himself has been uncharacteristically quiet about his week of setbacks, other than two statements attacking Fani Willis, the Democratic district attorney for Fulton county, Georgia, for requesting a grand jury to assist her investigation into his election interference. “The people looking for the crime are being hounded and the people who committed the crime are being protected,” he said. “This is not the American way.” To Wehle, the week’s developments have significance not only for Trump but for November midterm elections in which Republicans are tipped to reclaim Congress. “We have to think about the January 6th committee as getting information to voters before November about sitting members who might be up for reelection,” she said. “The question is not so much whether Trump will be indicted, but who in a seat of power in the US Congress was potentially involved in this conspiracy. “Frankly, if American democracy is to be saved from single-party minority rule, November is absolutely vital.”There is a theory that a band’s name doesn’t matter. The Beatles (lame), Arctic Monkeys (nonsensical) and Little Mix (infantilising) are all appalling names which don’t seem to have impeded their members’ reputation, celebrity or bank balances. This argument holds that if the music is good enough your band will make its own weather, however stupid the name. Anyone who believes this should heed the cautionary tale of California rock band Jimmy Eat World. In the five minutes it took them to come up with their name, they paid no attention to the letters. “Advice for new bands,” they tweeted in 2018. “When coming up with a band name, make sure its acronym displayed really large on your artwork or T-shirts won’t be complicating matters.” Last August, British Sea Power, an indie act preoccupied with trees, birds and tide times, announced they were removing the “British” from their name due to “a rise in a certain kind of … isolationist, antagonistic nationalism” with which they didn’t want to be associated. they were unlucky that the words “British Sea Power” have only recently come to suggest antagonistic nationalism. Last week it was Bono’s turn to reflect. In an interview with a podcast, he explained he didn’t like the name U2. When the band chose it, he explained, they thought it would conjure “futuristic” images of the spy plane and the U-boat. It didn’t work out like that perhaps because the U-2 was a spy plane from the 50s and the U-boats were submarines in the second world war and therefore not especially futuristic. Instead, Bono said, the name turned out to “imply this kind of acquiescence”. As in: “You, too, would rather listen to something else.” Some bands do change their names, but they tend not to be at the top of the charts. If you achieve lift off, why kill the golden goose, even if that goose is called The Pigeon Detectives? Brands, on the other hand, can change their name as often as they like, and do. It’s rarely an improvement and often it’s a disaster. When it comes to consumer goods there is usually a backlash, such is the pathetic emotional investment we make in these things, as though Opal Fruits were enshrined in Magna Carta. If you ever need to identify a dad in a group of men, say you are planning to do a marathon and wait to see who replies: ”They call it a Snickers now.” Britain became a surveillance state without a murmur, but if a conglomerate tries to rename a bag of sweets there’ll be a riot faster than you can say “Change.org”. Sometimes firms want to distance themselves from previous practices. Many people have forgotten that the eco-activists “BP” used to be an oil company, of all things, trading as British Petroleum. Royal Mail hoped that rebranding as “Consignia” would un-invent email and herald a return to their glory days. When Weight Watchers flipped to WW, for “Wellness that Works”, its members came down hard on them, although not as hard as they would have before they joined. Tech companies change their name when they need to disguise the extent of their power. Google became “Alphabet” at the same time as discreetly sidelining its famous “don’t be evil” motto and replacing it with the more flexible “do the right thing”. Facebook have changed their name to Meta to help promote the metaverse, a concept that is being forced by a clutch of conniving executives on to a reluctant populace, like Rita Ora or Veganuary. Ultimately, there is something endearing about all this name changing. Even the worst institutions in the world are still run by small gangs of nerds trying to come up with something cool. Perhaps bands and brands alike ought to take more inspiration from teenagers. Every school musician knows that coming up with a band name is a more urgent priority than being able to play instruments, sing or write tunes. Songs are important if you aim to perform songs. But the only reason to be in a band at school is to look cool and attract sexual interest. A name gets you most of the way there. A friend of mine spent several years in a band called Spanish Hazard. This being the early 00s, they were a ramshackle indie outfit wearing skinny jeans and winkle-pickers who had once supported the Finnish Eurovision winners, The Rasmus. It hardly mattered that Spanish Hazard were entirely made up and never wrote a song let alone played a gig. If only U2 had had the foresight to have been fictitious it could have saved Bono a lot of trouble. The listening public, too.Caitríona Balfe can remember the exact moment she realised she was done with being a model. It was the mid-2000s and Balfe was 27-ish, she thinks. It had been almost a decade since she’d been scouted in a Dublin supermarket while rattling a tin for a multiple sclerosis charity. She had done pretty well, walking in runway shows for Louis Vuitton and Chanel, flitting between Paris, Milan and New York. Balfe and her friends called themselves “the blue-collar models” – they weren’t the 0.1% of supermodels, the household names, but the next rung down. Now, though, Balfe was in Dallas, doing a well-paid but soulless shoot for a catalogue. After each set-up, a producer would ping a little bell to indicate they needed to fast-change to the next outfit. At her age, in that youth-fixated business, Balfe knew the clock was ticking. She’d handled just about as much blunt rejection as she could take for one lifetime. “The shows were fun and exciting, but with catalogues, you’re just standing there like a clothes horse – literally,” says Balfe. “And you know, ‘This is not what I want to be doing with my life.’ “Modelling does two things,” Balfe continues, with a wry laugh. “It gives you a really, really tough exterior and then a really broken interior. Everyone’s experience is different, but I know my confidence and my self-esteem when I finished was in the toilet. Being in that for so long can leave you pretty messed up for a little bit.” It’s only a mini-spoiler to mention at this point that things eventually worked out rather well for Balfe, who is now 42. That’s why we’re sitting this morning in early December in a very flash London hotel, sharing a bottle of mineral water that costs only fractionally less than a decent bottle of wine. She is wearing an oversized Lauren Manoogian midi-dress and is the first person I’ve seen make a face mask look glamorous. We now know that, after stopping being a model, Balfe would go on to star in five seasons and counting of Outlander, the wildly popular TV franchise. Later this afternoon she will find out that she has been nominated for a Golden Globe for her luminous performance in Belfast, Kenneth Branagh’s new film. An Oscar nod is presumed (by critics and pretty much everyone else, except Balfe) to follow next month. But back in Dallas, on the catalogue shoot, the transition didn’t seem so obvious. Before Balfe’s “detour” into fashion, she had studied acting at the Dublin Institute of Technology and after quitting modelling she took it up again, attending drop-in classes in New York. “Somebody should just put a camera in one of those rooms,” she says. “Absolute insanity!” She landed a blink-and-you’ll-miss-it gig as an extra on the 2006 Meryl Streep film The Devil Wears Prada, in which she thinks her legs might be visible in the opening scene as a collection of well-heeled feet are walking into the offices of Runway magazine. Balfe couldn’t be too picky back then, but she learned that it was these kinds of roles that she shouldn’t be pursuing. “So many actors used to work in bars or used to be this or that, but you come with a lot of stigma when you’ve been a model,” she says. “And that’s a hard thing to overcome, that being the first thing that people thought of me.” There were plenty of rejections in acting, too – perhaps even more than in fashion – but Balfe found these somehow more palatable: at least she usually got to open her mouth before being passed over. “In an audition, if it didn’t work out, it wasn’t always because you didn’t do a good job, or you weren’t good,” she reasons. “It was other arbitrary things like your name’s not big enough. Which can also be soul-destroying, but I don’t know, it’s different.” After a few years, Balfe went up for the pilot of a new series about a Second World War military nurse, Claire Randall, who finds herself transported back in time to the Scottish Highlands in 1743. “It was a total crapshoot,” says Balfe. “I had done a few jobs, nothing of note really. I was living in LA and I was really struggling, actually, it was about four or five months since I’d had a job.” She taped an audition, heard nothing. She got a new agent, sent in another tape, still nothing. She booked a holiday with friends to India. It was while her passport was at the Indian embassy that Balfe heard she needed to get to London, like now, for a final screen test. Outlander has built up a devoted fanbase over five seasons on Amazon Prime in the UK and Starz in the US. But back in 2013, Balfe had no idea if the show would survive beyond its pilot. “So I signed on for six seasons at that point,” she says. “I mean, you’re broke, you’ve got nothing else going on. My lawyer was like, ‘You do realise this is shooting in Scotland? You’ll be there for a year for the first season?’ I was like, ‘A year’s great, a change of scenery, I’m not doing much in LA anyway.’ Yeah, I didn’t realise I’d still be there almost eight and a half years later.” All of which is to note that, as the awards nominations roll in for Belfast, maybe even pitting her against Streep in the best supporting actress category, Balfe is no overnight success. “I feel like I’m at that place in life where, what’s happening now, I know it doesn’t happen all the time,” says Balfe. “It’s lovely, but it doesn’t mean you’re super-important.” Balfe was born in 1979 and grew up in Tydavnet, a village in rural Ireland, not far from the border with Northern Ireland. Her father was a police sergeant, a tough, often unpopular job in the peak of the Troubles, and her mother mainly looked after their five children (Balfe was the fourth) and two foster children. She has been reflecting on this period a lot since reading the script for Belfast, which Branagh wrote about his own childhood in the city in the 1960s. For Balfe, there was the time when she was in the car with her cousin and they were stopped at a checkpoint by a British soldier with a gun. This was a regular occurrence for Balfe, but her cousin, from Kildare, had no idea what was happening. “She started freaking out and was crying and screaming, ‘Don’t shoot my mum! Don’t shoot my mum!’” says Balfe. “It was just not her experience.” Another time, when she was 11 or 12, Balfe snuck up to the top floor of a café in nearby Monaghan with a friend to smoke cigarettes, and when she came down there had been a bomb scare and the town had been cleared. “My sister was supposed to be looking after me and had obviously been looking for me for ages,” says Balfe. “So she was scared and when she found me, she slapped me. When I tell this story, my sister is always like, ‘I can’t believe you’re accusing me of child abuse!’” Branagh’s film centres on Buddy, an ebullient nine-year-old from a Protestant family, played by Jude Hill. His Pa (Jamie Dornan) works as a joiner in England, as Branagh’s own father did, while his Ma (Balfe) does everything else back home. It’s set in 1969, just as barricades are appearing on streets in Belfast, separating Catholics and Protestants who had previously lived cordially enough as neighbours. Pa wants the family to relocate to England or Canada or Australia, where the work and the money are, but Ma is more resistant, wanting to stick with their friends and Buddy’s grandparents (Judi Dench and Ciarán Hinds). This might sound like a bleak premise, but Belfast is one of the warmest, most charming films you will see this year. Soundtracked by Van Morrison, there is nostalgia here, but also a recognition that, however grim the Troubles became, there was also warmth, generosity and even remorse about what was happening. “It’s strange, because obviously some of the material is so heavy, but because it’s done through the eyes of a child it never feels that way,” Balfe says. “It’s so joyous, you come out of that movie just feeling… full.” Branagh was keen to enlist actors who would bring a personal resonance to the film: Dornan and Hinds are from Belfast; Dench’s mother was from Dublin. The first time they came together, Branagh encouraged them to share tales of their own parents and upbringings. “So I’m not thinking of Judi Dench as Dame Judi Dench, the titan of acting, but I’m thinking of the little girl and her stories,” says Balfe. “It just levels everybody. And I think we all understand something of each other – all of us have left our home and not returned.” Balfe’s Ma is loving but fierce, with a wit and pragmatism that ensures the film doesn’t drift into schmaltz. “To Ma she brings a generosity of spirit that makes the character engage the audience without being ingratiating,” says Branagh. “The other quality she had that was certainly present in my mother – probably everyone’s mother? – was a ferocity of passion when protecting her young. You would not want to be in Caitríona’s way: she’s a very thoughtful, very considered person, but there’s a lioness an inch from the surface. I’d want her on my side in a fight. No question.” Belfast lands at a busy time, perhaps even a chaotic one, professionally and personally, for Balfe. Last August she and her husband, music producer Tony McGill, had their first child, a son. Balfe is well aware of the awards chatter for the film, but life at home, changing nappies, grabbing sleep when she can, provides some perspective in case she becomes too carried away thinking about little gold statues. “Luckily, I’m doing a lot of that [changing nappies], so I’m actually not thinking about the awards too much: it’s more ‘Stop peeing on me!’” she exclaims. “No, if it ever happened, I’d be bloody excited, but I don’t think you can chase that stuff, because that really does make you crazy.” Balfe and McGill live a “nomadic” existence, spending time in London and Los Angeles, but living most of the year in Glasgow while she shoots Outlander. The sixth series of that show will return on 6 March, ending a hiatus that diehard fans have called the “Droughtlander”. It was a testing season to film, back in the winter of 2021. There were Covid protocols and the bitter Scottish climate to contend with. The material was challenging as well: at the end of the fifth series, Balfe’s character Claire was brutally raped, and there was a deep, psychological and physical reckoning that came with that. All while Balfe herself was pregnant. “Claire’s story was very heavy this season,” says Balfe. “And it’s very heavy material as well. So I was just like, ‘Does your body know if you’re pretending to be stressed and upset and angry?’ Because you’re going through all the motions to get yourself into a state where you’re crying or shouting or scared, and there were times where I must have been four or five months pregnant and I’m running around shooting guns. And I’m like, ‘What does this child think?’ It must be like, ‘Who the fuck is my mother? What am I being born into?’” Belfast may be some people’s introduction to Balfe, but she already has a loyal following thanks to Outlander. Some have been there since the start, others found the very bingeable show during lockdown. One sign of its popularity comes each year on Balfe’s birthday: 4 October. In 2020, when she turned 41, a group of fans decided to plant 41 trees in her honour. (Why trees? Balfe’s not totally sure, but she does follow the charity One Tree Planted, which plants a native tree for each $1 pledged, on Instagram.) This quickly became 410 trees, and when Balfe and her Outlander co-star Sam Heughan lent their support, it all became a little crazy. That year more than 55,000 native trees were planted, everywhere from Uganda to the Andes. A similar number followed in 2021, creating a “Balforest” of more than 100,000 trees. “That’s not nothing,” says Balfe. “Sometimes people look down on shows like this and fandoms like this, but they’re amazing. And it’s funny, I do say sometimes it feels like I have thousands of stage mums. In the most beautiful way. Anything I do, they’re right on it and like, ‘Go on!’” As for what is next, Balfe has recently started shooting the seventh series of Outlander. Diana Gabaldon, the former Disney scriptwriter whose novels inspired the show, has suggested there will be 10 books in the series, but at the moment Balfe and Heughan have only committed to seven. Balfe would like to direct, and has optioned Sara Crossan’s novel Here is the Beehive to potentially produce and star in. But before that, she has a baby to look after and an awards season to contend with. Balfe is unlikely to be short of offers after that. “For someone who started in the industry so late, it’s been incredible,” says Balfe, looking a little perplexed at the run she’s having. “I don’t know, I got really fucking lucky.” Belfast is in cinemas now; Outlander resumes in March See full photoshoot here. Fashion editor Jo Jones; makeup by Mary Wiles at One Represents Using Kat Burki Skincare; hair by Gareth Bromell at Premier Hair and Makeup using Sisley Haircare; nails by Robbie Tomkins at Premier Hair and Makeup using Dior Manicure Collection and Miss Dior Hand Cream; digital technician Andy Mayfield; photographer’s assistant Alfie Bungay; fashion Assistant Peter Bevan; shot a Big Sky studiosOmicron has breached New Zealand’s borders and started spreading in the community, Jacinda Ardern has said, meaning the entire country will be placed on the highest level of restrictions. The outbreak has also forced the prime minister and Clarke Gayford to cancel their wedding, which was due to take place in the coming weeks at Gisborne on the North Island’s eastern coast. Ardern said on Sunday the country would try to slow the spread of Omicron but it was expected New Zealand would reach 1,000 cases a day in the coming weeks and thousands a day after that. New Zealand has not previously reported that level of infection. “I know hearing these sorts of case numbers will sound deeply concerning for people to hear,” Ardern said. “We’ll do everything that we can to slow the spread and reduce the number of cases we experience as a nation.” The prime minister said nine cases of Omicron had been detected among a family who travelled to Auckland for a wedding and other events. Officials had not yet been able to connect the outbreak to an “index case” at the border. “That means Omicron is now circulating in Auckland and possibly the Nelson Marlborough region, if not elsewhere,” Ardern said. Initial estimates suggest more than 100 people were at events attended by the family. A flight attendant on their flight also tested positive and has flown on several flights since. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The country would move to a “red” alert level at midnight on Sunday, the prime minister said. Under red restrictions, businesses and schools remain open and domestic travel can continue, but there are mandates for mask-wearing, restrictions on gathering size, and vaccine passes are required for entry to most non-essential businesses. Asked about her wedding cancellation, Ardern said: “Such is life. I am no different to, dare I say, thousands of other New Zealanders who have had much more devastating impacts felt by the pandemic. The most gutting of which is the inability to be with a loved one sometimes when they’re gravely ill. That will far, far outstrip any sadness I experience.” Up to 100 vaccinated people can gather under a red alert but the prime minister said her wedding would not proceed in a restricted form. “My wedding won’t be going ahead but I just join many other New Zealanders who have had an experience like that as a result of the pandemic. And to anyone caught up in that scenario, I am so sorry. But we are all so resilient and I know we understand we are doing this for one another and it will help us carry on.” Ardern also urged New Zealanders to get their booster shots. “Omicron is now in more than 80 countries around the world – by delaying its arrival here, we’ve had the time to kick off boosters, vaccinations for children and [to] prepare,” she said. The country has high levels of vaccination among adults: according to the Ministry of Health, 95% of those aged 12 and over have had at least one dose of the vaccine, and 93% have had both. Ardern asked that residents be kind as New Zealand experienced the unprecedented spread of Covid. “We are stronger as a team than we are as individuals, and so now I ask that we all pull together again. Please be kind. I know not everyone sees this pandemic in the same way. But for the most part we are motivated by the same thing, and it’s looking out for each other,” she said. New Zealand had been bracing for Omicron infections to rise as it became clear that the highly infectious variant was likely to find cracks in the country’s strict border measures. There had been several cases of Omicron among workers at the border and in managed isolation and quarantine over the past week. Sunday’s announcement suggests those border-linked cases have crossed over to the wider community. On Thursday, Ardern told New Zealanders that the variant’s wider emergence was only a matter of time. “We will experience in New Zealand cases at a level that we haven’t experienced before. We won’t stop Omicron, but we can try and slow it down,” she said.Early last week a call came into the office of a senior cabinet minister from one of Boris Johnson’s team at Downing Street. No 10 was frantically lodging requests across departments for members of the government to go on the media the following morning to defend the prime minister – and face the inevitable barrage of near-impossible questions about “partygate”. Texts were exchanged. Agonised faces were pulled. Would it be a good idea? What was to be gained for the minister concerned? Was it just a hospital pass that required a decent excuse? In the end, a judgment was reached by the minister’s closest officials. “We have to do it, don’t we?” one said. “If we say no it will be a declaration of fucking war.” Ministers and their staff, as well as Tory MPs, have been making such difficult calculations for weeks now. Should they go out, publicly, in support of Johnson’s campaign to save his premiership? Or should they steer clear and shield themselves from association with their embattled leader’s efforts to justify what a large section of the public has concluded is completely unjustifiable breaking of Covid rules at the heart of power? For those currently in ministerial jobs, and with ambitions to stay or climb further up the ladder, the “partygate” crisis has meant many tough calls and fine judgments. With Rishi Sunak and Liz Truss limbering up for a potential leadership contest in the event of the PM being forced out, should other ministers look to the future, tip winks to one or the other, guaranteeing their support in the event of a contest? There has been talk in ministerial inner circles of “cutting deals”, of conveying back channel messages saying to Sunak or Truss that if you give me this or that job, I’ll be on board. And, the Observer has been told, there has been talk in other cabinet ministerial teams of whether their man or woman should think of a surprise leadership bid themselves. “That discussion has been had and will have been had elsewhere too,” said a senior source close to a minister. This weekend it is ordinary backbench Tory MPs who are feeling the most pressure – and for many of the more recent intakes, like never before. Johnson has been on the phone to many of them from Chequers, demanding and pleading for loyalty. In the coming week the senior civil servant Sue Gray is expected to publish her report into parties at Downing Street. So far, despite uproar among their constituents, fewer than a dozen Conservative MPs have gone public with calls for Johnson to go. But if 54 or more were to write to the 1922 committee chair Sir Graham Brady, a vote of confidence in the prime minister would have to be held. If he were to lose that vote, he would have to go. The Gray report is a moment of maximum danger for Johnson. Most Tory MPs are waiting to see what she says before making up their minds whether to strike against him. From hour to hour over the last week, the mood has oscillated from one of utter despair in Downing Street to one of revived hope. A low point came on Wednesday when the Tory MP for Bury South, Christian Wakeford, dramatically crossed the floor and defected from the Conservatives to Labour in disgust at Johnson’s leadership. The initial reaction in the media was that this could be the tipping point - the end for Johnson. But it was not so. Cabinet ministers immediately began attacking the defector, briefing viciously against Wakeford, even making claims about his private life. The effect of the defection was not what Wakeford had expected. Rather than being the catalyst for more to follow him, his switch to Labour, temporarily at least, brought the Conservative parliamentary party more together. “You will see many of those who have written letters calling for the PM to go, ripping their letters up now,” said a Tory grandee. “There is nothing that unifies us more than a traitor joining the enemy side. There will be more letters coming out of Graham Brady’s office now, than going in.” But no mood settles for long in this crisis. “It all comes in waves,” said one former Tory minister. “There will be one wave that crashes over the harbour wall and causes real damage to the PM. Then another which looks like being even bigger than the last, but then it fizzles out, out at sea.” No sooner had the Tory whips and No 10 taken heart from the Wakeford defection, however, than the waters were churned up again as senior Conservative MP William Wragg broke cover to suggest some of his colleagues had been effectively blackmailed and threatened with the loss of money for projects in their constituencies if they failed to support the government. Wragg has referred the matter to the police. Ahead of Gray’s report, everyone at the top of government is on tenterhooks. Its content could have seismic effects on many, many careers. She is said to have been “forensic” in her investigations into at least nine parties at Number 10 during periods of Covid restrictions, with six officials helping her comb through the details on logs of comings and goings from Downing Street. People who are in regular touch with Gray and know her mind say she will be both “fair” but also “ruthless”, because she is the kind of person who will see the breaking of Covid rules in lockdowns as no small matter, particularly for those who made the rules in the first place. But Downing Street is not giving up. Over the past few days it has thrown everything at announcements to show it is on the front foot, ones inevitably viewed by many as rushed attempts to push “partygate” down the news agenda. Announcements about freezing the BBC licence fee and use of the Navy to stop migrants arriving on UK shores have been followed by No 10 and Foreign Office warnings of the consequences of a Russian invasion of Ukraine. Some Tory MPs say it is working and that fewer constituents are complaining about parties than a week ago. “You only write to your MP once. The worst has passed,” said one. A senior Whitehall figure said he had never seen anything like the “save Johnson” campaign of recent days. “They will stop at nothing. This is full, full on. Even war in Ukraine.” But even if the prime minister survives the aftermath of the Gray inquiry, the road ahead is full of minefields that no amount of distraction will obscure. A cost of living crisis made worse by soaring inflation will be the backdrop for local elections in May. Several Tory MPs have told the Observer they have been told by their Conservative councillors not to go on the campaign trail, because MPs’ names are mud. Yesterday Ruth Davidson, the former Tory leader in Scotland, stuck the knife into Johnson. “I didn’t support him for the leadership and I believe what has been exposed to have happened during the last few weeks shows that he is unfit for office but, I mean, he is perfectly convivial company.” A former cabinet minister said that while Johnson was in deep trouble he found it near impossible to judge what would happen next, which way public and political sentiment would go. “I would say that he has a 50:50 chance of getting through the Sue Gray report,” said the senior party figure. “Then it depends what happens and how he leads. It is just impossible to say.”A Big Mac has 508. Wagamama’s hot chicken katsu curry has 1,089. And a large mixed grill with chips at Wetherspoon’s has 2,052. But will knowing how many calories are in a restaurant meal help make a difference to the UK’s obesity epidemic? From April, all cafes and restaurants run by companies with more than 250 staff will be obliged to include calorie counts for each item on their menus. The government hopes this will encourage people to make healthier choices and nudge restaurants towards offering healthier options. But many of the UK’s largest chains have told the Observer that they are not changing their menus as a result of the new regulations, and obesity campaigners say that the measure is unlikely to have any impact. Stuart Flint, an associate professor of the psychology of obesity at Leeds University and a director of Obesity UK, which supports overweight people, said it was unclear who the new rules would help. “It might not be helpful,” he said. “We need to really understand how people are going to engage with this. Is it going to mean that people only look at calories? A chocolate bar is less than a balanced meal, but we don’t want people to be having a chocolate bar and skipping the meal. It’s not always about reducing the amount we eat.” Gregg Wallace, the presenter of MasterChef and founder of weight-loss website ShowMe.Fit, is more optimistic that it could make a difference. “Any information or understanding of calorie content in our food – whether in takeaway menus or in restaurants – is a great idea,” he said. “What we can measure, we can manage – and this is another step towards enabling people to make more educated choices.” The Observer surveyed companies representing more than 20 of the UK’s biggest restaurant and fast-food outlets to see if they were making changes as a result of the new regulations. All said they were not reformulating their menus to take the rules into account and already offer a range of healthier options. Many already publish calorie counts either on menus or on their websites and most said they had been reformulating their menus to reduce fat, salt and sugar for several years. McDonald’s said it would adapt its menu to provide specific calorie information for extras, such as cheese slices on burgers, and had already reformulated its products. “Ninety per cent of our core food and drinks menu [is] 500 calories or under in the UK,” a spokesperson said. KFC’s head of food and quality, Jo Tivers, said the chain had been first in its sector to put calories on menu boards. “This year will mark four years since we committed to removing 20% of calories per serving by 2025.” Pizza Express, Wagamama and Nando’s said they already published calorie information on their websites and would start printing information on their menus in April. Nando’s said the April deadline was “not a huge milestone for us because we’ve always tried to be transparent about our calorie information”. Wetherspoon said it had included calorie information on menus since 2012 and was not going to amend them. A spokesman said the pub chain wanted customers to be able to make informed decisions and was “in no way preaching to customers – simply giving them the information that was not available in other pubs”. However, none of the chains that already put calories on menus said they had measured whether it had any effect on customers’ behaviour. Calorie labelling in the US came into force in 2018, and a study last year of 59 restaurant chains found that there was no change to the average calorie count on menus. But new dishes introduced after 2018 did have lower calorie content, on average. Flint said that things like the placement of fast food advertisements, a lack of green space for exercise and stigma attached to obesity were all equally important. Flint compared restaurant labelling to the Soft Drinks Industry Levy (SDIL), introduced in 2018, which taxes the most sugary soft drinks at 24 pence per litre. It was introduced in the hope that customers will buy less and manufacturers will reduce the amount of sugar in the drinks, and a study by Cambridge’s Centre for Diet and Activity Research found that it had led to an average reduction of about 30g of sugar per household per week. “But who is consuming less sugar?” Flint said. “There’s no data that says that children with obesity, or even people living with obesity are consuming less sugar. “The reality is that we’ve had 14 policies over the last 20 years related to obesity, and it hasn’t decreased, it’s increased. And the reason is that most of those are focused on individual changing.” Flint said. “Obesity is very complex. If it was as simple as eating less or more, people wouldn’t gain weight to the extent we have at the moment, and people would be able to lose weight more easily.” The government estimates that 63% of adults in the UK are at increased risk of serious disease and becoming seriously ill with Covid as a result of being overweight. A Public Health England survey found that nearly 80% of respondents were in favour of calorie labelling, and eating out can account for up to a quarter of adult energy intake, according to a National Centre for Social Research study. A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson said: “Obesity is one of the most significant health challenges we face. Clear food labelling plays an important role in helping people make healthier choices for themselves and for their families, and we have consulted extensively with a wide range of experts on these proposals.”Terry Pratchett understood why most social policies fail. In his book Men At Arms, one of the characters, Samuel Vimes, put forward his “‘boots’ theory of socio-economic unfairness”. “The reason that the rich were so rich,” Vimes observed, “was because they managed to spend less money.” A really good pair of leather boots might be serviceable for years but cost more than Vimes earned in a month. The boots he could afford would last but a year or two and continually need replacing. So, a rich man had “a pair of boots that’d still be keeping his feet dry in ten years’ time”, while “a poor man who could only afford cheap boots” would have spent twice as much money and “still have wet feet”. There are likely to be many wet feet in the coming months, because few policy-makers see the world through Pratchett’s eyes. Instead, much social policy is rooted in the idea that the rich can afford good boots because of their hard work, while if the poor have wet feet, it’s the result of their own indolence. The thick smoke being generated by BYOB work events, prime ministerial mendacity and the alleged blackmail of recalcitrant MPs is helping to obscure a social calamity that is fast approaching: rising inflation, soaring energy prices, stagnating real wages and slashed benefits – all whipping up a perfect storm that will engulf the poor. Inflation is not just at its highest point since the early 1990s but is particularly damaging for the most deprived. Food writer Jack Monroe argues that official inflation figures grossly underestimate the real cost of living for those with the fewest resources. Data suggests she is right – the cost of basic foods had risen far more than the 5.4% headline inflation figure and, in many cases, the cheapest alternatives have increased most of all. All of us will be stung in the coming months by soaring gas prices. The poor, though, will again be hardest hit. In 2002, according to research by Citizens Advice, claimants spent 14% of their unemployment benefit on energy costs. Last year, it was 18%. And this April it is likely to be an extraordinary 33%. Inflation has hit wages, too. There has been much talk in recent months about labour shortages and much hope that such shortages will push up salaries. In nominal terms, wages have indeed risen. The latest Office for National Statistics data shows, however, that in real terms, taking inflation into account, pay is stagnating at best and may even be falling. A report last year from the Institute for Public Policy Research showed the continual rise throughout this century in the numbers of working people who fall below the poverty line. Before the pandemic, one in six working households was classed as poor. Even families in which both parents work are increasingly being pulled into poverty. “High levels of working poverty,” the report observed, “mean that many of those who are unemployed will simply swap ‘out-of-work’ poverty for ‘in-work’ poverty once they do, hopefully, find work.” Benefits, too, have tumbled over the past decade, with £14bn, according to the New Economics Foundation, taken out of the welfare budget since 2010. Without the cuts, the NEF estimates, there would have been 1.5m fewer people in poverty. Again, those most hit by the cuts have been families on lower incomes. Put these developments together and we are facing a potentially devastating crisis, but one that may not register because it will mostly affect those with least social visibility. The problem is not simply the constellation of developments helping create such a crisis. It is also the way we think about poverty and poor people. When the government was preparing to cut the £20 universal credit uplift, Tory MP Bim Afolami insisted it was necessary because “the best way of getting people out of poverty is into work”, ignoring the fact that 40% of those on universal credit – more than two million people – are actually in work. When the Tories imposed a benefit cap on parents with more than two children, Iain Duncan Smith claimed it would “teach parents that children cost money”, as if the poor, far more than those who have never had to scrimp and scrape to provide their children with clothes, toys and even the next meal, are not already all too painfully aware of that. The consequence of Duncan Smith’s “lesson” was to create more destitution. A new report from the Joseph Rowntree Foundation shows that poverty in families with more than two children has risen sharply since the introduction of the cap. Almost half now live below the poverty line, a figure not seen since the early 1990s. There is a long history of blaming the poor for their misfortunes, from the Victorian notion of the “undeserving poor” and the 1960s concept of the “culture of poverty” to New Labour’s crusade against “problem families” and George Osborne’s condemnation of “skivers… sleeping off a life on benefits”. It’s a history rooted in the belief that poverty is more moral failure than social problem, the consequence of individual action rather than of structural inequities. It is an attitude that has seeped into public consciousness. A 2007 study showed that Britons were more likely than most other Europeans to blame the poor for their own misfortunes. While the majority of Germans, French and Italians attributed poverty to social rather than personal causes, Britons were more inclined to see it as the product of “laziness” or “lack of willpower” rather than an issue of social injustice. Poor people are, of course, as responsible for their actions as the rich. The issue, though, is that the choices open to poor people are far more constrained than those the wealthier can pursue and the most rational choices often help maintain the poor in their poverty. That is what Samuel Vimes understood and too many policymakers don’t. The aim of social policy should be to enlarge the choices open to those with least means. A moralising view of poverty serves only to constrain choices even more. There will continue to be platitudes about levelling up and hand-wringing about the inequities faced by working-class communities. But few will ask why so many still go around with wet feet. Or even notice that they do. • Kenan Malik is an Observer columnist • This article was amended on 23 January 2022 to correct the spelling of the character Samuel Vimes.Like its disreputable bedfellow the horror genre, film noir is an unruly beast – a term used to unite wildly disparate movies sharing an aesthetic philosophy that is on the tilt and frayed at the edges. From the hard-boiled crime dramas of the 1930s to the softcore erotic thrillers of the 80s and 90s, the most potent noirs are disreputable affairs, as stylishly sleazy as the rotted societies they portray. On one level, Guillermo del Toro’s neo-noir Nightmare Alley could not be more “respectable” – an awards contender with an A-list cast, from the Oscar-winning director of the popular romantic fantasy The Shape of Water. Yet from its bruised colour palette to its spiralling descent into madness and degradation, this is deliciously damnable fare, looking back through the prism of Del Toro’s adventurous oeuvre to the existential angst of his vampiric feature debut, Cronos. Based on a 1946 novel by William Lindsay Gresham (first brought to the screen by Edmund Goulding in 1947), Nightmare Alley stars Bradley Cooper as Stanton Carlisle, a natural-born conman whom we first meet torching his family home. Escaping the past, Stan joins a travelling carnival, ingratiating himself with Zeena the Seer (Toni Collette), a clairvoyant whose act is based on an elaborate code cooked up with her alcoholic husband, Pete (David Strathairn). Spying a profitable future in mind-reading, Cooper’s charismatic huckster is soon touring as “Master Stanton” with his new love, Molly (Rooney Mara), as his assistant. But when an encounter with psychoanalyst Lilith Ritter (Cate Blanchett, channelling the femme fatale spirit of Claire Trevor) and a guilt-ridden Ezra Grindle (Richard Jenkins, sinisterly underplayed) offers the chance to sell his soul, our antihero leaps at the opportunity… Del Toro and co-writer Kim Morgan cast their inspirational net wide, drawing on everything from William Wellman’s brutal Depression-era fable Heroes for Sale to Otto Preminger’s Fallen Angel, which provided visual inspiration via its artifice-laden sets and Hopper-esque, painterly lighting. Significantly they also looked to Antonioni’s quietly despairing 1957 neorealist work Il grido, which Del Toro recently described to me as being “like a James M Cain novel without the crime”, offering “feet-on-the-ground” ballast to counterpoint Nightmare Alley’s more outlandish flights of fancy. Tod Browning’s controversial 1932 cult classic, Freaks, casts a long shadow too, both in its depiction of the carnival milieu (a place of refuge for society’s misfits) and in the clashes between loyalty and avarice that Stan’s interloper presence provokes. It’s no accident that Stan reacts with a mixture of fascination and revulsion to the “geek” – a wretched, chicken-biting sideshow attraction whom Willem Dafoe’s garrulous Clem rolls out for the crowds, and who we later learn has been trapped in this role via a cruel cocktail of poverty, desperation and addiction. No wonder the geek strikes such a primal chord with our antihero – a man who “never” drinks (Ritter teases barely hidden significance from that word), but who seems to be permanently on the run from his own bestial nature. There’s plenty of cinematic pleasure to be had in Del Toro’s evocation of beloved old B-movies, and you can feel the relish with which he approaches the theatrical apparitions of the third act. But unlike his 2015 film Crimson Peak, which resonated to the phrase “ghosts are real”, the monsters of Nightmare Alley are human-made – byproducts of guilt and greed in a festering world sorely devoid of spirituality. Nor is Del Toro afraid to follow this tale to its bleak conclusion, happily leaving his audience in a particularly lonely place, without recourse to trite redemptive codas. Tamara Deverell’s superb production design and Dan Laustsen’s imposing cinematography are complemented by a luscious score from Nathan Johnson – a late-in-the-day replacement for Alexandre Desplat – who really comes up with the goods (check out Lilith’s Revenge on the soundtrack album). Years ago, I compared Del Toro to Orson Welles, a film-maker who instinctively understood the hypnotic power of cinema to dazzle, delight and deceive. On the basis of Nightmare Alley, which is blessed with more than a touch of evil, that’s a comparison by which I still stand.You’re an 18-year-old school leaver, working in a florist’s and all set for a stint volunteering in Africa, when your godmother asks if you’d like to appear in a film. As its star. In 10 days’ time. For most of us, it would be the stuff of fairytales or fever dreams, but for Honor Swinton Byrne it was real. There would be no need to learn a script, she was assured, because it was all going to be improvised. All she needed to know was that she would play a film student called Julie, a lightly fictionalised version of her godmother, Joanna Hogg, who was also the film’s auteur-director. “From what I understand, she couldn’t find Julie in these posey professional actresses who were very comfortable in front of a camera. She just said they’re all too pretty. And then she cast me. Which, you know, I took as a compliment,” says Swinton Byrne. She lets out a throaty laugh, wriggles her feet out of a pair of sparkly stilettos and snuggles herself more comfortably into a sofa at the upmarket central London hotel that is the base for her first solo publicity round, for the sequel to that first film. The Souvenir was one of the critical hits of 2019, which won the grand jury prize at the Sundance festival and went on to be named film of the year in a poll of 100 critics around the world by the magazine Sight &amp; Sound. Set in the early 1980s, it told the story of a love affair between film student Julie and a charismatic heroin addict, several years her senior, who may or may not work for the Foreign Office. By the end of the film, the mysterious Anthony, a stunning performance from Tom Burke, is dead. The Souvenir Part II picks up the story, as a heartbroken Julie struggles to get her film studies back on track while trying to piece together who Anthony really was. With full makeup and long blond hair lacquered into a tight bun, Swinton Byrne is nothing like the diffident Julie, who drifts through the films beneath a waif-like brunette bob. In person, she is bubbly and unguarded, making no bones about the fact that her shoes pinch and hairpins are scratching her scalp. She’s in London for the film’s gala screening at the London film festival, having just flown down from Edinburgh, where she is in the third year of a psychology degree. It’s the morning after her 24th birthday, which she celebrated with a small group of close friends. “My boyfriend made me the worst cake. He’d never baked before. I kind of want to show it to you,” she says, whipping out her phone to reveal a picture of the cake, which is topped off with a dachshund outlined in wobbly icing. “I love sausage dogs, you see.” It’s no surprise to find that Swinton Byrne loves dogs – she grew up with a houseful of spaniels in the Highlands, three of which were responsible for the first award won by The Souvenir Part II, in Cannes last summer: the Palme Dog, for the year’s best canine performance. Rosy, Dora and Snowbear follow Julie’s mother, Rosalind, around their large family home in the film with a bum-waggy devotion that clearly goes beyond method acting. And that’s because Rosalind is played by the actor’s mother, Tilda Swinton, who glides quietly through the films with her dogs, in a dowdy, Thatcher-era perm and home counties tweeds. The relationship between mother and daughter has its own trajectory, which rings with authenticity. In the first part, Julie wobbles on an adolescent tightrope between neediness and resentment: she lives in a Knightsbridge flat provided by her indulgent parents and is forever touching them for money, while spurning their values and advice. By the start of the second part, in the aftermath of Anthony’s death, Julie has retreated to the family home. When she storms away in distress from the perfectly set dinner table, her mother crouches outside the bathroom, listening to her daughter vomiting into the loo, before tiptoeing off again without saying a word. By the film’s end, they have found their way to the sort of mature friendship that can only come when, in the terms of a psychology student such as Swinton Byrne, a child has truly separated. It’s a perceptive picture of a particular sort of upper-class English family, which Swinton Byrne points out is a generation removed from her own. So how relatable was it to her own childhood, growing up with her twin, Xavier, in a later, more bohemian, manifestation of the haute bourgeoisie? “It really could not be more different,” she says. “My mum and I are best friends and soulmates, we have the same mannerisms. Rosalind and Julie aren’t touchy feely and all over each other like we are. Trying not to curl up on her knee or make a joke about something felt really unnatural, but it was also a real laugh.” Swinton broke up with the twins’ father, the playwright and artist John Byrne, when Honor and Xavier were small, though they continued to co-parent. For the first years of their life, says Swinton Byrne, they went wherever their mum happened to be working. “We started school very late because we didn’t leave her side until we were seven or eight.” When they finally knuckled down, it was at a Steiner school near their home that had no truck with conventional education. “And I loved it, because I learned such practical skills. I make all my birthday and Christmas presents for everybody. I really enjoy whittling stuff out of wood,” she says. The only problem was that it had no secondary section, so Swinton teamed up with a group of other like-minded parents to set up their own school. A newspaper report, when the twins were 14 years old, depicted a rural idyll, with the children setting off for a weekend fending for themselves on a remote island with canoes they had made themselves. Though the tone was admiring, the article mildly questioned what would happen to the students afterwards, without any exam results to take with them into the world. The answer, says Swinton Byrne, was that she got into university on a 10,000-word essay, having graduated from school via a Ted talk-style taped interview. At first, she thought she wanted to be a doctor and was aiming for an access-to-medicine course, “but I’m such a big hippy that I believe in things just happening and decided to go to Africa instead”. She landed a volunteer teaching job in Namibia, but wasn’t so much of a hippy as to neglect earning the money that would get her there, hence the florist’s job, which involved taking flowers to weddings all over the Highlands. Then along came The Souvenir. Discounting a handful of school plays, it was her first acting role, she says, but it was not her first appearance on film. In 2009, she made a blink-and-you’ll-miss-it debut in I Am Love, a lush feature about a woman’s attempts to escape from her husband’s rich and restrictive Italian family, which Swinton starred in and co-produced with its writer/director, Luca Guadagnino. Her little face flashed up in a single shot, upside down, as a hallucination of her distraught mother’s prepubescent self. As teenagers, in 2015, she and Xavier appeared as themselves, in a 25-minute documentary that Swinton made as part of a four-part tribute to a family friend, the art critic John Berger. The Seasons in Quincy gives a glimpse into an apparently idyllic childhood in which her mother’s work and their family life appear to flow seamlessly into each other. The twins are shown packing eggs from the hens at their Scottish home to carry by train across Europe to Berger’s home in the Haute-Savoie, where he lectures them on the continuity of rural life and sends them off into the countryside to sample walnuts and raspberries and make candles with his son, Yves. Honor is clearly the more relaxed of the siblings, with an innate ability to say more by doing less, allowing the film’s mood of loving curiosity to play across her face as she listens to Berger, while quietly sketching his portrait. It’s the same quality that she brings to Julie in The Souvenir and it’s in marked contrast to the animated young woman in front of me, whose features are constantly on the move. The two Souvenir films have taken the family business to a new level, involving her in recreating the intimate life of her own godmother. Hogg and Swinton first met as small girls, but became best friends after the wannabe director cast the wannabe actor in one of her National Film School films, The Rehearsal. How did it feel to be trusted with such a raw, unformed part of someone she had always known as an adult? “It was really moving,” Swinton Byrne says. “I’m an unbelievably emotional person, which is why I study psychology. I just can’t ever get sick of talking about feelings. I think there’s such strength in vulnerability and I was so moved to be given the opportunity to speak with Joanna about experiences that were very different from mine but in some ways also quite similar.” In particular, Julie’s passivity in the face of a boyfriend who lies to her and steals her things was initially hard for a 21st-century feminist to take, Swinton Byrne admits. During filming for the first part, she questioned Hogg about why she didn’t walk out, convinced that she would never behave like that herself. The memory makes her laugh: “I was 18 and I hadn’t had any adult relationships.” The toxicity of the relationship between Julie and Anthony only became clear anyway during the seven weeks of filming. “Tom [Burke] had read the manuscripts. He was privy to the information that he was going to be an addict and he was going to die, but I knew nothing,” she says. “So when my mum told me, in the film, that Anthony was dead, I was extremely upset, because I really had no idea.” The idea that her mother, her godmother and her co-star could have colluded to keep her in the dark seems so bizarre that I wonder if I have heard her right. But she insists it’s true: the first she knew of this fatal plot twist was when the news was broken to Julie on screen. Part of the pleasure of watching the second film is to witness art mirroring life: though Swinton Byrne is still six years younger than Julie at its end, she has done her own growing up both on and off screen. “I’ve had relationships which I look back on and think, why didn’t you leave? You can’t explain it. I had a boyfriend who took a lot of cocaine and I had no idea at the time. And I don’t even drink, I’m really not into all that stuff.” And then there was the teaching she did between the two films in a remote area of Namibia. “I like to think that I grew some balls and came back an adult.” Whereas in Part I, both actor and character had to live with not knowing what was going on, by the end of Part II, they have taken control. When Julie directs her graduate film, Swinton Byrne is getting her own first taste of directing. This includes facing down the scepticism of her film school examiners about her decision to ditch a worthy documentary about Sunderland for something altogether wilder and more adventurous. “By the end of that scene I was so angry,” she says, “but you only see the tail end of it.” The film within a film is presented as she directed it. “I think the tape we did was about 45 seconds long. It’s just trial and error and I don’t know what the hell I’m doing but I’m really really enjoying doing it, finding a rhythm and trying to get my thoughts out through words and then being, like, ‘no actually, I’m changing my mind’. It was difficult but it was so much fun.” The question of whether this actually represents some sort of directing debut hangs in the air. It has certainly given her an appetite for making a film of her own one day, she says, but in the meantime there’s her degree to complete, which is particularly hard because she’s never had to sit exams before. She’s resolutely not part of the university theatre scene and does not intend to go on to do any training. “I’m not interested in learning how to act, apart from through acting,” she says. “I feel like it would cloud the joy I find in it.” This doesn’t come across as arrogance but a refreshing form of confidence: she simply doesn’t relate to the need to prove herself. It helps that her parents have always emphasised they’d support her in anything she wanted to do. “My mum has made it very clear that if I wanted to be a bin man, she’d be happy,” she says. At university, which she started a fortnight after finishing The Souvenir Part II, she moonlights as a waitress and was astonished when a customer, to whom she had just served tomato soup, recognised her through her Covid mask; her boyfriend isn’t a student but a club footballer, who also works as a bartender. One day, she says, she had to miss a day’s classes for an awards ceremony. “I said I really need to go to this thing and one of my friends said, ‘Are you catering staff?’ And I was like, no I’m actually, like, going because I’ve been nominated for something. There was about two minutes of them being ‘oh that’s so cool’. And then we talked about something else.” She hopes to do more film work after graduating this summer, but she is also interested in psychotherapy and would like to do some more teaching one day – “there are so many things I want to do”. There’s a line in Souvenir II about the importance of avoiding the pressure to be obvious. What does that mean to her? She starts twiddling with her bun and suddenly seems very young and unlacquered. “Oh God,” she says, “I was really hoping no one was going to ask me that, because I ought to have a really great answer and all I can say is that I think it means don’t be a sheep. Think outside the box. But isn’t it ironic that I’m using a cliche to talk about cliche?” She gives another throaty laugh, slips her feet back into her pinchy stilettos and collects herself up for her next interview. She might not have the answer, but she fluffs around it with such sweetness and wit that it would make a pretty good calling card for a role in an improvised comedy. The Souvenir Part II is in cinemas from 4 FebruaryOne year ago, on the night Poland introduced one of the most restrictive abortion laws in Europe, the phone started ringing at the country’s most high-profile family planning organisation. Over the course of the evening, volunteers took calls from more than 20 panicked women who suddenly found their next-day appointments for abortions cancelled. One of the calls was from hospital staff at a loss over what to do about a woman who broke down after being told that her termination would not go ahead. “She went into a frenzy, got into the hospital lift and was going up and down, up and down, without stopping for an hour,” says Krystyna Kacpura, director of the Federation for Women and Family Planning (Federa). Staff at Federa were used to helping women navigate a hostile healthcare system in which legal terminations were already virtually impossible. But the new legislation put in place an almost total abortion ban in everything but name, allowing women to terminate only if the pregnancy was the result of rape or incest, or if it represented a threat to life or health. At the time the legislation was brought in, about 1,000 legal abortions were carried out in Poland every year, 98% because of foetal abnormalities. This option was now closed to women. It was, says Kamila Ferenc, a lawyer for Federa, a devastating blow. Since its announcement, at least 34,000 women in Poland have managed to get abortions despite the ban, and hundreds travelled abroad for later abortions, facilitated by groups such as Abortion Support Network and Women on Web. But now the women calling Federa for help are often in serious distress, many further into their pregnancy because they have discovered a problem at a second-trimester scan. Pregnancies are more likely to have been planned. “In the past, it was rare for us to receive calls from individuals in this state. This last year, it has been 80% of our work,” says Ferenc in Federa’s Warsaw office. “Every call is very emotional.” In the past year staff and volunteers at Federa, like many other women working as advisers, lawyers and activists in the pro-choice movement, have faced death threats, intimidation and legal challenges. Many have said they are exhausted by their increasing workload as they struggle to help women trying to access safe abortions. Ferenc says she is not afraid of the people who send bomb threats to her office or superimpose bullet holes on pictures of her face. “I’m more scared that one day prosecutors will launch an investigation against us,” she says. In the past, few Poles faced trial on abortion-related charges. The state largely turned a blind eye to illegal abortion services, with pages towards the back of newspapers filled with euphemistic adverts for private clinics offering “restoration of the menstrual cycle”. That changed when the new law came in. A member of pro-choice group Abortion Dream Team became the first Polish abortion activist to face the prospect of trial in September, after a man notified the police that his wife ordered abortion pills online. The case is ongoing. Ferenc believes the latest changes did not fully appease the ruling Law and Justice party’s (PiS) religious base. “Before, abortion was not a topic, no one wanted to talk about it. Now the anti-abortion groups on whose support PiS is relying are demanding blood.” Marta Lempart – who is fighting 86 court cases under various charges – heads the pro-choice Polish Women’s Strike movement and says the new laws have targeted the women most at need of healthcare and support. “Polish women with unwanted pregnancies are now in a better situation than those with wanted pregnancies but who are facing complications, because there is a working system completely outside of public healthcare for the former. But the healthcare system does not provide a service to the latter at all.” A further attempt to ban abortion completely and jail women who had terminations for life was rejected by the Sejm, the lower chamber of the Polish parliament, but the government has since announced it would begin compiling a database of all pregnancies across the country, a move defended as a digitisation of existing documentation but which women’s rights groups believe is another natalist policy designed to control women’s lives and a sign that worse is to come. Meanwhile, an underfunded and overstretched Polish healthcare system, accused of failing to provide women with reproductive care, is emboldened by the new laws. “Women are falsely told by doctors that contraceptive pills give them cancer, or that an IUD is dangerous for those who haven’t had children yet,” says Ferenc. She has begun advising women to record their conversations with doctors. One woman said that doctors treating her breast cancer repeatedly told her the illness was caused by an abortion she had months earlier. But Kacpura and others believe the legislation may also have had a chilling effect on doctors who are terrified of navigating the new law. She says, before the 2021 ruling, doctors would rarely contact her, but in the past year she has been answering their calls day and night. “No one [in authority] explained to the doctors what they should do,” she says. Sometimes, doctors call to pass on the numbers of patients they were not able to legally help. “I called one woman straight after she left the hospital. She was in an awful state, it’s hard to say what she would have done if we hadn’t reached her.” Agata Bzdyń, a lawyer who represents a number of women who have taken their abortion refusals to the European court of human rights, points to reports that Bielański hospital in Warsaw, which she says “has a reputation for still providing abortions”, has been under pressure from the government to hand over documents on the number of terminations approved. Bielański did not respond to a request for comment. Beyond the government, Roman Catholic lay groups continue to exert pressure for an outright abortion ban. The group Ordo Iuris (Order of Law) was one of the mobilising forces behind a citizen’s bill in favour of a total abortion ban, a move that was rejected by parliament but precipitated the ruling. Since 2016, the organisation has acted as official adviser to the PiS government in areas of reproductive rights and education. The organisation recently announced that it will provide legal representation to a man who is suing his wife for having an abortion, which Ordo Iuris argues violated the man’s right to family life. The most shocking case of the past 12 months is that of a woman called Izabela, who died in November of septic shock while in her 22nd week of pregnancy. Doctors at the hospital in Pszczyna, in south-west Poland, did not perform an abortion, even though her foetus would not survive, according to a lawyer for the family. “For now, because of the abortion law, they can’t do anything,” Izabela texted to her mother shortly before she died. An investigation found “medical malpractice” led to Izabela’s death and the hospital was fined . She is survived by a husband and daughter. Kacpura said she knows of several cases in the past year where the woman’s waters broke prematurely, as Izabela’s did, but doctors refused to perform a caesarean or induce birth. “A nightmare, because the foetus cannot survive but the heartbeat can continue for days, sometimes weeks, and the woman has to wonder whether she has already become a coffin.” Bartłomiej Wróblewski, a leading PiS parliamentary force behind the change in the law, said: “It is not true that this law puts women’s lives in danger, because nobody challenged existing provision of Polish law to rescue endangered life and health of the mother, even when it leads to the death of their unborn child.” Echoing other governmental and anti-abortion voices, he stressed that in his eyes there was no connection between Izabela’s death and the new abortion restrictions, instead putting the blame on doctors. But Izabela’s death horrified the country and sparked fresh protests. It may have proved a turning point. Several polls have found the majority of people in the country oppose the 21 January ruling. Even those who are not pro-choice resent what they see as the Roman Catholic church overstepping the mark by creating political pressure for a ban, says Aleks Szczerbiak, professor of politics at Sussex University. “About 40% of people in Poland still attend weekly mass, but that is not to suggest they are happy for the church to have more control of their lives,” says Szczerbiak. He believes the change in law may have shifted perceptions of the issue in Polish politics. Ferenc echoes this. “We thought there was no political chance to change [the law around abortion]. The paradox is that it has changed for the worse, but that means we have a chance to liberalise the law too,” she says. A pro-choice citizen’s bill calling for abortion to be made fully available is gaining momentum. “We had an older gentleman come in whose wife told him to print the form from the internet and he got his friends to sign it, and then he came to deliver his 10 signatures,” says Lempart from her office on Wiejska Street, a few doors down from the Polish parliament. “Before, initiatives to collect signatures were mostly organised by groups and political parties. Now, I’d say 60% is just individuals collecting signatures.” Organisers say the citizen’s bill has reached the 100,000 signatures needed for official recognition and more signatures are coming in every day. Sign up for Her Stage to hear directly from incredible women in the developing world on the issues that matter to them, delivered to your inbox monthly:A few years ago, when I was still getting to grips with the vagaries of Twitter, I inadvertently took part in a social media pile-on. Someone well known said something stupid and I enjoyed tweeting to that effect. But when she shared how upsetting she found the onslaught, I was forced to confront my unwitting bit-part in a collective act of bullying. There was nothing wrong with my tweet by itself, but hundreds of people shouting at you feels like abuse in a way that a single critique does not and the virtual nature of social media makes it harder to know when you are complicit in a form of mob justice. Things have got worse since then and I find myself returning to this idea of proportionality often, most recently in the case of the author Kate Clanchy. Last week, it was announced that she and her publisher, Pan Macmillan, had parted company “by mutual consent” and that it will “revert the rights” and cease distribution of all her work. The book that prompted this is Some Kids I Taught and What They Taught Me, her memoir of a 30-year teaching career. Rave reviews and an Orwell prize gave way to mixed reactions from readers: some adored it, others thought she used racial and ableist stereotypes to describe her diverse students. Among the readers of colour I know, reactions were just as mixed: some found her descriptors offensive, others thought they were OK, especially in the context of her honesty about her own naivety and prejudices. After apologies and safeguarding investigations had been demanded on their behalf, a group of Clanchy’s students wrote of her “unequivocal care and support for us… as poets and as people”, noting the book’s “flaws and imperfections”, but drawing attention to her “empowering methods of supporting and championing youth poetry... from disadvantaged backgrounds”. Supporting Clanchy, a former student railed against criticism of the author’s description of her “almond-shaped eyes” as offensive; another has written of the “unimaginable” positive impact Clanchy has had on her life. It is true that Clanchy reacted badly to the criticism, denying the phrases in question were in her book. Defensiveness is a flawed but common response when being charged with something you abhor. But both she and Pan Macmillan issued apologies for the offence the book caused and her publisher announced she would rewrite it to address concerns. One might think that that would have drawn a line, enabling the industry to move on to issues about its lack of diversity, which Clanchy has done more than many of her critics to address. It did not. Pan Macmillan was further berated for giving her the opportunity to make amends by rewriting. After her publisher, Picador imprint’s Philip Gwyn Jones, rightly reflected that he wished he had been clearer about its support for Clanchy and her rights, alongside condemning the online abuse and trolling by her critics, he issued an apology for causing further hurt that read like a hostage note: “I now understand I must use my privileged position as a white middle-class gatekeeper with more awareness.” Clanchy appears to have been cast beyond the pale, where there is no room for nuance. But it is evident from the testimony of those who know her that she has done a huge amount of good, championing young people whom society too often ignores. Her students have gone on to address the UN, been commissioned to write poetry for the BBC and had their poetry set to music by acclaimed composers. How to make sense of her ostracism? Some people are desperate to see the world cast in black and white. Clanchy’s worst crime is not to fit this mould. Of course she doesn’t: none of us can rise above the imperfectly human. Look at her in the round and it’s obvious she’s done more good than most. This is why the strand of anti-racist thinking that is obsessed with the blame and shame all white people should bear for structural discrimination is so corrosive to common cause and understanding. White people who do nothing to challenge racism are terrible, but white people who trip up when trying to do something about it are even worse. The societal misogyny that infects this movement means it sees older white women as the very worst of all. Any expression of distress is the weaponisation of “white women’s tears”. The witch is not permitted to have feelings; they distract from her role as lightning rod for anger at all of society’s ills. Publishing’s lack of diversity makes it vulnerable to witch-hunts. It is notoriously posh and white; when someone unfamiliar comes along saying that something is so offensive it should be expunged from the record, publishers assume they speak for all people of colour, as if we constitute a blob of uniform thought. Pan Macmillan’s overreaction has caused huge collateral damage – it will no longer publish a new anthology of poems by Clanchy’s students – and is no substitute for working at becoming more diverse. “Sensitivity readers”, people who comb manuscripts looking for the potentially offensive, are a crass development: it outsources responsibility and plays on the idea that if a book has the potential to offend, it shouldn’t be published. What has happened to Clanchy is a sad tale for our ages. No individual is to blame: it is the product of brittle and cowardly institutions, and the collective social media frenzy that prizes heads on a platter over change. But what I cannot understand is the lack of humanity at Pan Macmillan. One of its authors writes about feeling suicidal, as Clanchy has done recently, and, rather than offering her support, it walks away. For all our differences of opinion, our eagerness to call out right and wrong, the one thing we must never let the digital age allow us to forget is the duty of care we owe each other as human beings. • Sonia Sodha is an Observer columnistBritain’s welfare system is “unfit for purpose” and in urgent need of reform, experts warned on Sunday amid fears that millions more families will struggle to make ends meet amid the dual pressures of the pandemic and the spiralling cost-of-living crisis. The soaring price of food and rent, along with energy bills – which are expected to more than double in April when the price cap is lifted, bringing the number of households under “fuel stress” to at least 6 million – is forcing families to choose between basic essentials such as food and heat, the experts said, while growing numbers are being forced into debt and relying on food banks. The warning comes as a damning report, due to be published on Monday, calls for rapid reforms to the social security system to protect low-income families from extreme hardship as its lead author cautioned that they “don’t have any resilience left”. Covid Realities, a two-year study by the universities of York and Birmingham and the Child Poverty Action Group documenting the lives of 150 low-income families with children during the pandemic, says Covid has exposed and exacerbated existing problems with the benefits system. “Our social security system is currently ill-suited to protect people from poverty, and to provide individuals with some level of security as they navigate what are often temporary challenges in their lives – for example, the loss of a job, relationship breakdown, parenting and care work or ill health,” said Ruth Patrick, senior lecturer in social policy at York University and leader of the research programme. “This was clear before the pandemic, but Covid-19 further exposed and highlighted just what it means when your social security system is simply unfit for purpose.” Patrick said many were struggling before the pandemic, which added to difficulties that are now being compounded by the cost-of-living crisis. “People have just been battered again and again by things and they don’t have any resilience left.” She said many are being forced into making “impossible” trade-offs – sitting in the dark to conserve electricity or saving the heating for when the children come home – and are living in fear of the coming months, which is also having an effect on mental health. “People are experiencing stress, anxiety and insecurity about how they’ll manage now and in the future,” she said. The report, created with parents and carers living in poverty, calls for changes to the welfare system, which it said often increases financial pressures on families because of structural issues with universal credit, which was cut by £20 a week to pre-pandemic levels in October. Jo Barker-Marsh, 49, who lives with her 12-year-old son Harry in Manchester, said people on low incomes were already “on our knees” in 2020, but now the situation is even worse. “We’re not having the chance to recover from anything,” she said. The former film-maker, who lost her part-time cleaning job at the start of the pandemic, said as a result of her heating bills doubling they are living in one room to conserve heat and friends are helping out with groceries. “We’re quite used to putting a load of blankets on, but this is actually way beyond anything I can budget for. I cannot budget for an increase of up to 54% heating my home.” She said she feels “desolate and angry”. A government spokesperson said: “We’re providing extensive support to those on the lowest incomes, including putting an average of £1,000 more per year into the pockets of working families on universal credit, increasing the living wage to provide an extra £1,000 for a full-time worker, and helping with the cost of fuel bills and rent arrears.” Labour called for “fundamental reform” to universal credit and a cut to VAT on energy bills, and the expansion of the warm home discount scheme, which offers a one-off electricity bill discount to those who are eligible between October and March. Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow work and pensions secretary, said: “Years of Tory economic incompetence have landed working people, families and pensioners with rocketing heating bills, punishing tax rises, rising prices and the highest inflation for 30 years, which will mean a real-terms cut in the support people rely on this April. Coming on top of the universal credit cut, this will cause real hardship for families. “Hopeless Tory ministers claim they can’t fix the five-week wait for universal credit. But it’s clear that this system needs fundamental reform.” Research by the Resolution Foundation thinktank found that the number of households falling into fuel stress, spending at least 10% of their budget on energy bills, will triple overnight in April to 27%, affecting an additional 4 million households. Jack Leslie, a senior economist at the foundation, said the government needs to take urgent action, potentially offering targeted support either through universal credit or by expanding the warm home discount, or face “catastrophe”. “If there isn’t policy action, there will be really significant numbers in the UK who are going to struggle to get by,” he said, adding: “This is absolutely a catastrophe coming down the track and we know it’s coming and something needs to be done.” The combined impact of rising living costs, high rent and last year’s housing benefit freeze is also causing problems, especially in big cities such as London, along with the south-east, Northern Ireland, the Midlands and the south-west. Darren Baxter, a policy manager at the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, an anti-poverty charity, said that across the country rent increases are “pushing far too many people into poverty”. Victoria Benson, chief executive of the single-parent charity Gingerbread, said urgent targeted support is especially needed for single parents, some of whom are going without food to feed their children and putting childcare costs on credit cards. “They have to make that really stark choice between food or fuel. It’s really difficult,” she said. She also called for an increase to universal credit so that single parents can afford to feed their families and heat their homes: “It seems to me that there’s something very wrong if people who are working still can’t afford to feed their families.”It is Saturday afternoon, and the centre of Chełm, a Polish city on the Ukrainian border, is empty except for one woman and her toddler. A monument to “the fallen sons” of the 1920 Polish-Soviet war marks the middle of the market square, surrounded by two churches, a few closed restaurants, and a boarded-up wooden booth with a sign reading, “cheap footwear”. The Catholic Basilica – a former Eastern Orthodox church – dominates the landscape and, locals say, the social life of the town. Chełm is in one of the poorest areas in Poland, a stronghold of the ruling nationalist Law and Justice party, where the birthrate is -6.1 and people in their 60s comprise the largest age group. The city – once among Poland’s most religiously and ethnically diverse, with a pre-second world war population split evenly between Poles, Ukrainians, and Jews – was the site of one of the first postwar anti-Jewish Pogroms and, more recently, among the first local councils to declare itself an “LGBT-free zone.” “It’s a dying shithole and we’re stuck in it,” says 33-year-old Monika, a mother of three who owns a local print-shop with her husband. She is the only person in Chełm officially collecting signatures under a citizen’s bill to legalise abortion in Poland. She dreams of moving to the Czech Republic, a “normal country,” she says, where there is a “division between church and government”. Monika grew up in Chełm and first became pregnant at 22, while at university. She never considered an abortion. “I thought then that it would be my sin, and a crime, and murder,” she says. Monika graduated two years later with a master’s degree and two babies. Abortion was not discussed in the city, neither publicly nor in hushed tones among young women, according to Monika, save for high school screenings of the discredited 1980s anti-abortion film The Silent Scream. “If anyone ever mentioned it,” Monika says, “it was along the lines of, ‘I would never do it.’ It was something that people did out there in the big world, in these progressive, leftist countries. Not here.” After her third daughter was born three years ago, Monika approached her gynaecologist to fit her with an intrauterine device (IUD). Her children were all born by caesarean section, a procedure that places the woman under increased risk each time it is performed. With her third pregnancy, Monika felt “we were cutting it too close. A fourth could end badly for me.” She was tired of the side-effects from the pill and, because contraception is not publicly funded in Poland, the monthly prescriptions were a financial problem. The doctor misled her, saying she could only get an IUD privately. “That costs 1,500zł to 2,000 zł (£300 – £400). I didn’t have that type of money,” Monika says. She tried other doctors but was told the same thing each time. In October 2020, when the wave of protests against the near-total ban on abortion – the largest demonstrations since the fall of communism – reached Chełm, Monika didn’t join the women on the streets. She was busy and needed to pick up her toddler from the nursery. “‘Let others worry about it, the ones who still want to have children and who might end up in hospital with problems,’ I thought. I was safe, I didn’t have to comment,” Monika recalls. But as the protests raged on into 2021, she began thinking about abortion more often. “I think I read Aborcyjny [abortion] Dream Team’s entire website and a lot of advice books, and I came to the conclusion that it isn’t anything bad. It’s not hurting or killing anyone,” Monika says. Then, in September 2021, Monika was faced with that reality when she became pregnant for a fourth time. She immediately went online and found a safe way to get abortion pills sent to her home. A week later a cardboard package from the Netherlands arrived in her postbox. “I was so happy when I saw it. I started crying with joy,” she says. She took the pills on a Saturday after work – two between her gum and cheek on either side. Her older daughters were at a birthday party, the youngest was watching cartoons. The whole process lasted five hours, by 11pm Monika was showered and asleep. Legal risks were not on her mind. While aiding someone in an abortion in Poland risks a prison sentence of up to three years, inducing your own miscarriage is not illegal until the 22nd week of pregnancy. Over the last 30 years, few people have faced court cases on abortion-related charges, but many more have been questioned by the police. Monika does not regret her abortion but says the experience has changed her. She has started sharing her story with friends, to mixed response, and recently signed her eldest daughter out of religious classes in school, despite teachers’ protests. “I admit, I used to judge people,” she says. “Afterwards, I was reading the testimonies of other people online and I thought, ‘Oh God, how stupid I was.’ There are so many of us – one in three. So why are we acting as if we aren’t here at all?” In her shop, Monika keeps a paper petition out for customers to sign, supporting full access to abortion in Poland. She is still waiting for the first signature. Sign up for Her Stage to hear directly from incredible women in the developing world on the issues that matter to them, delivered to your inbox monthly:The “new Margaret Thatcher” has white blonde hair and the plump bronzed skin of a wealthy apricot. She favours clothes where the fabric has been cut out in unexpected places suddenly declared erotic, small brown zones like an airfield seen from above. During a December appearance on the Diary of a CEO podcast, Molly-Mae Hague, the 22-year-old Love Island star turned influencer, said: “We all have the same 24 hours in a day.” She was discussing the concept of “hard work”, the idea that we are all individually responsible for our own success. “We all have different backgrounds and we’re raised in different ways and have different financial situations, but if you want something enough you can achieve it – it just depends to what lengths you want to go to get to where you want to be in the future.” Days later, after much criticism, she issued an apology, and can now be seen solemnly thinking about her actions in the sidebar of the Mail Online in very white trainers and a nice Chanel scarf. Since the story broke and a thousand fingers pointed at her, ex-fans either explaining the “class ceiling”, editing the surname on her Wikipedia page to Thatcher or calling her the “Fiat 500 Führer”. I have found myself distracted, looking out for her online, clicking on stories much in the way one might worry a potential hangnail. Why do I care? Though the story has got much attention, it’s not because it’s surprising. Though outraged, nobody is really shocked that a 22-year-old ex-reality star believes people should simply choose not to be poor. This is how influencers work, after all, by offering the possibility of great happiness through the simple purchase of a product or plan. But one curse of the influencer is that she is paid not just to be a salesperson for a bikini or politic but also to be the face of the idea behind it, and when that idea is criticised part of the deal is that she must take the fall. While, of course, I find her individualist argument sad and a bit silly, I am not surprised that she’s making it, nor that she underestimates the help she’s had becoming rich and successful, unquestioningly linking wealth and hard work. I care, I think, because she should not be blamed for telling a story that she has to believe, because if she doesn’t, what else is there? If she doesn’t write herself a fairytale ending, she’s seen no evidence that makes her think anyone else will. Hague is a product of her generation, a generation that has grown up at the sharpest point of a housing crisis. Thatcher selling off council houses may have allowed that generation’s parents to buy a home, but the failures afterwards (a lack of new properties and insufficient tax on housing) meant their children would never be able to join them, destined for a life that must fit in three Ikea bags. This is a generation unlikely to ever have benefited from government support, emerging into a job market where wages have stayed still so long they have rooted and sprouted small shoots. Those born, like her, in the 1990s, are expected to be the first generation in many decades to be worse off than their parents. Isn’t it inevitable that Hague and her peers, scrabbling up ladders that sink comically into the sand, studying without student grants, living without affordable rent, the concept of buying a flat so far-off it appears pixellated, might assume people thrive and survive simply by dragging themselves up, rather than taking a hand offered from above? Why would they expect even a flake of support from government or those with power? Reading Hague’s tortured apology I was reminded of the headline I saw last week: “Savvy mum slashes bills after ditching house to live off-grid with kids in £1,800 caravan”, a straightforward story of poverty and homelessness repackaged as an empowering lifestyle choice. Doesn’t it make perfect sense that young people might find themselves leaning, whether they identify it as such or not, further and further to the right? Influencers, entrepreneurs, people whose bedrooms are also their office, Depop shop, yoga studio and bathbomb empire – these are not just creative people taking control of their lives, often these are also people who were born too late to find security or peace in traditional industries or workplaces, and so, in order to make their lives work, have been forced to make their lives their work, their careers their entire identity. While the memes, yes, have been enjoyable, the backlash should be on policymakers, employers, on the structures that mean young people like Hague have such little faith in the idea that they might be supported through their lives and careers. Instead it has focused on Molly-Mae, just a girl standing in front of capitalism, asking it to love her. Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter @EvaWisemanOffice life I’ve read and thought more about office life over the last two years than I have at any time over the previous two decades when I worked in one. I say worked, but of course from this distance I can see that what I called office work might not quite stand up in a court of law, being comprised of equal amounts gossip, tea-runs and shouting passive aggressively at computers, alongside the clattery typing I am paid for. There was a moment, in those early pandemic days, the days of shock and clapping, before the felt-tip rainbows in our windows faded to a ghostly grey, when the closure of offices felt like an opportunity. The future of work might find efficiency in compassion – it might not be focused on cities or require five-day weeks, or offices with dubious rat control. For many of us, once we had cleared a decent space at the kitchen table and evacuated our children, working from home for the first time in our lives was a revelation. Yet every day brought another small hurdle, a step forward in our psychosocial development. Zoom meetings required a new kind of listening, along with the daily shock of our large, lined face at rest. The fashions we’d cultivated were now obsolete. Bras and heels and other such fripperies seemed suddenly absolutely ridiculous, and Zoom style (bold accessories and jazzy jumpers) took hold. We learned how to translate the nuanced opacity of a colleague’s Gchat in under three hours. Once we’d clarified that our bosses were human, and not of the Pimlico Plumbers founder’s mould (“The virus has turned millions into selfish, cowardly liars who don’t give a damn about their fellow citizens so long as they can hide away at home while continuing to get paid,” he said in 2020) we felt confident enough to fold our days into new shapes that allowed such luxuries as a mid-afternoon dentist appointment. And still, still we did our work. Better, some say. Faster, without the grim commute or distraction of eight other people’s failing relationships, or emails about toilets and printers and “please refrain from leaving plates in the sink”, or the exhausting knowledge that at any moment the person you fancy from the post room might appear and you’ll have to look up, glittering and fabulous. Though England has ended its work-from-home guidance, this time, surely, for good, we won’t forget what we learned, the new ways of communicating, the particular realisations about our own mangled productivity, the importance of switching off when the work day ends. But nor will we forget what we missed about office culture, and what we appreciate afresh – the thrill of really good gossip, the unlikely community there, the change that happens when you leave the house. As many British office spaces remain vacant, it is projected that one in 10 will no longer be required by 2027, which suggests that while the grand work revolution is yet to emerge, a smaller shift, allowing a flake of flexibility, has taken place. One that has unearthed, among the coffee cups and charger cables, some dusty humanity. Housing One of the most enduring and intractable problems of British society is housing. There aren’t enough homes in the places where – for economic and sometimes social reasons – there is the greatest demand. This means London and some other big cities such as Bristol, Manchester and Edinburgh, Cambridge and Oxford, the south-east. Decades of attempts to build more homes in and around these hotspots repeatedly founder on local opposition (some of it reasonable, some of it not) to development. Too little gets built, and at too high a price. Working from home offers the attractive prospect of at least partly addressing this problem without laying a brick. If you only have to go into your office three days a week, it’s tolerable to live further away, in less overheated parts of the country, where the use of existing housing stock is slacker. A house, a garden – things which should not be unattainable dreams – might become affordable to those previously excluded from them. If you can’t bring more affordable houses to where people are, in other words, perhaps people can choose places where affordable houses are. Other benefits would follow. People working from home might contribute more to their local economies and their famously suffering high streets by spending the money that they would otherwise be handing over to a big city Pret a Manger. They might have the time and mental space to be active members of local communities. It can only be a good thing if daily mass commutes become less intense. There would be environmental advantages to putting existing buildings to good use rather than building new homes. There are also drawbacks to this redistribution of human and financial energy. It can simply mean gentrification on a national scale. One of the less happy effects of the pandemic has been the pressure on notable beauty spots in places like Cornwall and Wales, as well-off buyers seek rural idylls for their remote working, further squeezing locals out of the housing market. There are plenty of jobs that can never be done remotely, often poorly paid, and relocation to less-expensive parts of the country is no kind of solution to the housing issues of those who do them. But there has never been any one solution to something as big, complex and multi-faceted as the housing crisis. What is the case is that there are many parts of the country where two- and three-storeyterraced houses can cost a tenth of what otherwise identical homes sell for in London. The disparity presents opportunities that shouldn’t be lost in thestrange urge to rush back to five-day-a-week commuting. In Boris Johnson’s Peppa Pig speech last November, an event so much outshone by subsequent scandals that it seems to belong to another era, he hinted that people who partly work from home might be called twats, on the basis that they come into their offices only on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. Instead of throwing out cheap insults, he should salute them for their role in helping with one of the many problems his government is failing to solve. Food and drink In the summer of 2021, the north-west-based chef Gary Usher crowdfunded a new business. There was nothing new in that; he’d done it numerous times for his restaurants. On this occasion, however, it was to fund a different kind of enterprise: one that would prepare and deliver the meal kit boxes that had got him through the pandemic. “There’s no doubt that the lockdowns created an entirely new revenue stream for restaurant businesses like mine,” Usher says. He did bigger trade in those kits over Christmas 2021, despite there being no lockdown, than he did in 2020, when there was a lockdown. It has, he says, continued into January. People have discovered the joy of importing restaurant-quality food into their homes even if, or perhaps even because, it requires a little finishing at home. Companies like Dishpatch, which works with well-known chefs including Michel Roux Jr, Angela Hartnett and Ravneet Gill to create ambitious meal kits, are thriving. Meanwhile, takeaways have become ever more sophisticated, and there have even been major advances in recyclable and compostable packaging. For the food sector, innovation in food delivery is the big dividend of the pandemic. For restaurants, the picture is much more mixed. “The positives are that demand remains strong,” says Kate Nicholls of industry body UKHospitality. “When restrictions are lifted, diners do want to come out and have a good time.” But it depends on location. The centre of London is in a dire state, with trading at only 20% to 30% of normal. In other city centres, it’s around 60%. It’s in the suburbs, closer to where people actually live, that business is building healthily. But the restaurants themselves, robbed of Christmas business by Omicron and battered by staff shortages and food price inflation, may not be so healthy. “A third of hospitality businesses have no cash reserves,” Nicholls says. What’s more, they are trading into massive headwinds. “Both the lower VAT rate for hospitality and the rent moratorium will finish at the end of March,” Nicholls says. “Plus, there’s the increase to the national living wage, and the energy bill hike. It all amounts to a 13% cost price hike in the sector.” Diners may be ready to eat out; a lot of the restaurants may no longer be there to feed them, without continued government support, she says. Which leaves many of us at home, interrogating our own kitchen skills. There’s no doubt there’s been an awful lot of that, perhaps by necessity. The growth in retail food sales at the big supermarkets has been marked, up 5.4% year on year in 2020, then up again another 3.1% in 2021. In a retail market worth more than £90bn, this is an enormous increase in spend on food to be consumed inside the home rather than outside. But what are people doing with it all? If cookbook sales – which saw double-digit percentage increases – are anything to go by, they are trying to improve their repertoire. As we finally emerge from restrictions it seems many of us have become rather better, and rather more ambitious, cooks. And all thanks to a virus. Relationships The difference between imagining going back to the office – sometime – and the announcement that we are to go back, is like night and day. A languorous exploration of what an individual was wanting, looking forward to or dreading, allowed for all possibilities: it will be good to see everyone, I will hate the journey, I hope the office venting is sound, I can’t wait to have my lunch out and be part of an old but new physical ambience. The envisioning was abundant. Being able to challenge five days of relentless commuting and the juggling of domestic life had sparked creative solutions inconceivable two years ago. Some had babies in lockdown and can’t imagine leaving them even for a few hours. Others were desperate to leave their childhood bedrooms or demanding partners who didn’t take one’s work as seriously as their own. The anticipation of being a little more separate was intoxicating for those who didn’t want to see their schleppy partner, or themselves, in joggers endlessly, who didn’t want another’s moods or needs constantly on show. The chance to sparkle, to get away from the domestic, from all those meals and dishes, was a magical fantasy. But there was also an ennui. Will we go back to the office only to find ourselves returning to the home again? Is the dangerous phase really over? Will we be gearing up only to deflate again? What kind of choices and personal agency will I have? How do I protect my vulnerable colleagues? Then the announcement came. You will return to work. No exemptions, unless your work decides it. An excitement and a chill. A fear as well. Will I lose the easy sharing and continuity I have with my partner, where we have to come to know what each other actually does daily as well as the triumphs and grinds of the jobs we do? Will it be akin to riding a bike or do I have to learn new social codes? What will it be like to be in the same room as my boss, students, co-workers? How will I respond to their smells, their looming, their presence and a work etiquette so different from bendy boundaries of work-from-home? Last spring I was approached by a few HR departments of large companies to prepare seminars for staff on returning to work. Interestingly, nothing came of the initiatives. It simply wasn’t real enough to be happening, and the more pressing need was to help staff with the psychological changes – both helpful and difficult – that the stop-go of Covid was creating for the new geographies of work. It needed to address present dilemmas, not prospective ones. Work was and is where many live, thrive, have their struggles, have their identities affirmed or negated or some mix of the two. Now that the injunction to be at the office is seriously on the table, discussions are more focused on the practicalities of avoiding rush hour or finding childcare again and on the nervousness of leaving one’s nest, how to get as much work done as one was doing when not commuting, managing one’s boss’s expectations and so on. The passion many Observer readers bring to work will be recast in the following weeks as the balance between togetherness and separation on the home front is recalibrated. Expect confusion, relief, pleasures and frustrations. In other words, life. We make it where we find it, rarely in conditions of our own making but which we mould as much as we can to satisfy ourselves. Shopping The high street limped into the pandemic and the edict to work from home caused a retail earthquake. Shops were already closing and, two years of turmoil later, it has turbocharged the shift to online shopping and cost the high street billions of pounds of trade. In February 2020 online sales were around a fifth of retail spending, but by that Christmas they would be 37%. The easing of restrictions has seen that number fall back to 28%, but it is a dramatic shift in the balance of power that will affect the long-term financial viability of some high-street outlets. The hiatus forced people to replace shopping trips with clicks and buy everything from groceries to wardrobe updates (read tracksuit trousers and slippers) to toiletries and cars, online. This topsy-turviness, with so much time spent in our houses and flats, also had a dramatic impact on the profile of spending as people diverted cash spent on foreign holidays and socialising into room makeovers and garden projects. With social lives on hold, the going-out look was ditched in favour of cosy comfort. The trend was writ large in John Lewis’s annual shopping report as demand for slippers, pyjamas and dressing gowns rocketed while the casualties included neck ties, briefcases, makeup bags and thongs. But if people were less invested in how they looked, the opposite was true of their homes. Lockdowns turned homewares into fast fashion used to dress home offices for work Zoom calls. This focus on home and hearth in 2021 saw an extra £500m spent in DIY stores, while the country’s 1.2 million new gardeners spent an extra £50m on plants, sheds and decking. This tilt to the web was the final nail in the coffin for big high street names already on the ropes, with Debenhams and Sir Philip Green’s Arcadia shutting all their stores, following BHS. House of Fraser and John Lewis are still standing, but the department store model, with its fragrant beauty counters and huge expanses of fashion, has been shaken hard by restrictions that made it hard to try on clothes or smell perfume, or basically take any enjoyment from shopping. It will be difficult to put the genie back in the bottle. With restaurants, cafes and pubs often off limits, the pandemic also signalled big changes for supermarkets. The big weekly shop came back with a bang while other consumers, including older shoppers, embraced home delivery for the first time. After going through the initial pain of setting up accounts, many are converts. With the number of empty stores at a record high, the pandemic has left scars on nearly every high street and shopping centre. But despite the gloom it is too early to deliver the postmortem because the sands are shifting again as last week’s reports of downturn at lockdown winners Peloton, the trendy exercise bike maker, and Netflix attest. In the UK Aldi is ditching Deliveroo’s delivery services because shoppers are returning to its stores. This is likely to be a trend as the cost-of-living crisis sees people seek out cheaper stores. We get the high street we deserve, so use it or lose it.A glance at Ryan Fox’s performances since Covid-19 rocked the world would not particularly nudge anybody towards further investigation. The 35-year-old made 15 cuts from the 20 European Tour events he played during 2021 but recorded just two top 10 finishes. He came 82nd in the order of merit, 24 places lower than in 2020. His annual prize money remained consistent at just under €400,000, but was still a considerable drop from what he had accumulated in the three seasons between 2017 and 2019. He has slipped outside the world’s top 200. The New Zealander is keen to insist many people have had it far, far worse during the pandemic but his country’s strict border controls have made life far from straightforward for Fox, his wife, Anneke, and their 13-month-old daughter, Isabel. Or, as he puts it: “Brutal.” At the end of Fox’s run in the Middle East – he is now at Yas Links, competing in the Abu Dhabi Championship – he will return to New Zealand for a fourth mandatory hotel quarantine. This time it will be for 10 days, at least, as opposed to 14. “I’m in a good place, I know I’ve got a job,” he says. “There are some Kiwis overseas that are not as well placed as me, that don’t have a job. It was frustrating enough at the start and it’s probably got worse. Our system has got harder and harder. We finally, just before Christmas, had some help. I think we get 22 spots a month as individual athletes trying to get into the country. “There’s less and less hotel spaces. We went from basically first in, first served to where you put your passport number in a system at a certain time and that number gets randomised. You get in a queue to book a room. They will release dates for maybe three months and if the date you want is gone then you can’t go back at all. “I spent the whole back end of last year, me and my wife, trying to get in this lottery system to get a space to go home for Christmas. I missed a couple of events at the end of the year because that was the only time we could get home. Hopefully, when we go back this will be the last time that I do it. It’s been an incredibly frustrating 18 months. I find it really, really hard in quarantine by myself.” Fox and his wife have a small flat in London as an alternative base. The problem there is the lack of broader family backup with everyone else in New Zealand. The newly named DP World Tour’s span from South Africa to the Middle East to mainland Europe means England is not always a convenient home. “It was really tough on my wife last year having four months where she was with a baby 24 hours a day,” Fox says. “I was out playing golf. She travelled to some events but just not being able to have any support was pretty tough. We were desperate to get home at the end of the year. Thankfully we did manage to get a spot to do that but it was a pretty messy way to get it.” Fox is of illustrious stock. His father, Grant, is a famed All Black. The late Merv Wallace, who played Test cricket for New Zealand, was Ryan’s grandfather. Not only is it admirable that Ryan has forged his own sporting pathway, he has always been one of the most engaging individuals on tour. He has been able to compartmentalise life in a tough professional environment and maintain domestic harmony. “Back home a lot of people think they should just shut the borders,” Fox says. “You don’t get Covid if you don’t let anyone in. “I’ve personally not caught flak for travelling but there’s an undercurrent of: ‘Why are people travelling in the middle of the pandemic?’ Well, it’s very results driven. If I don’t play or I don’t play well, I don’t have a job and I can’t support my family. I feel like I don’t have a choice. “If I miss these events, it’s a big opportunity wasted and it puts a lot of pressure on later in the year. You know you’ve got no choice but you’re caught between a rock and a hard place not knowing when you can get back, if you can get back.” In keeping with his character, Fox supplies broader context. “You look at some of the stories of pregnant woman getting stuck overseas,” he says. “People who are living illegally with no money in a different country, applying for an emergency spot and getting told just to go to another country. These people are a lot worse off than me. People missing dying relatives, funerals.There’s a lot of people who have a lot tougher stories than what I have.” It just seems fair to wish Fox well. Making the cut here at Yas Links has done him no harm at all.Dael Fry tries his best to remain measured but before long candour prevails. “Everyone’s really excited,” concedes Middlesbrough’s former England Under-21s centre-half. “The atmosphere around the place is absolutely fantastic, everyone’s buzzing, everyone in the town’s talking about promotion.” Since Chris Wilder succeeded Neil Warnock as manager in early November, Boro have collected 20 points from nine league games, rising from 15th to sixth in the Championship. They travel to a third-place Blackburn side coached by their former captain, manager and enduring hero Tony Mowbray, on Monday aiming to reinforce suddenly realistic automatic promotion hopes. Wilder does not really do coy and he has duly galvanised his players with sometimes brutal honesty and vaulting ambition. Euphemism is out as the former Sheffield United manager’s brand of high-energy, high-pressing football revitalises Boro’s squad in front of steadily rising attendances at the Riverside. At this rate there should be no need for Steve Gibson to pursue any more lawsuits of the sort embroiling Boro’s owner in his attempt to extract around £40m in compensation from Derby, arguing that their circumvention of the EFL’s financial fair play rules denied the Teesside club a play-off place in 2018-19. To many neutrals – not to mention Boro fans – Gibson’s legal action against a club now under real threat of extinction seems as ill-advised as his decision, in 2009, to sack Gareth Southgate as manager and replace him with Gordon Strachan. Overall, though, the owner has got much more right than wrong at the Riverside and, more than a decade on from the Strachan nadir, Wilder’s installation appears among his most inspired manoeuvres. Seven wins from the last eight games in all competitions have certainly vindicated the new manager’s decision to switch to a back three increasingly accomplished at moving forward with the ball. If that rearguard is not quite a mirror image of Sheffield United’s once famous overlapping centre-halves, there are distinct similarities. “Chris has brought that style of play here,” agrees Fry, who generally operates alongside Paddy McNair and Anfernee Dijksteel in a defensive trinity adept at stepping upfield. “We’re all comfortable on the ball and we’re moving it across the back quickly. We’re encouraged to create attacks but, at the same time, we can’t forget our main job is defending. Chris makes sure he gets that message drilled into us. “He doesn’t want us doing Cruyff turns but I’ve always known I could play out from the back. When I was going away with England when I was a bit younger, you had to pass through the lines and when Chris came in he told me that’s what he wants me to do now. He said he’d make me a better player and he’s done it. He’s given me a lot of confidence, this is the most enjoyable style of football I’ve ever played.” Wilder has also made a certain C-word taboo. “At the start of the season we were a little bit inconsistent, we’d win one game but then lose two,” explains Fry, who hopes to end up marking Cristiano Ronaldo when Boro visit Manchester United in the fourth round of the FA Cup early next month. “So the manager’s taught us not to be complacent or get too ahead of ourselves. “Even on the training pitch, if there’s something he doesn’t like or that he thinks is sloppy, he’ll make sure he tells us and we put it right, straightaway. It’s always about keeping your standards high every day and making sure you take that in to games. If you don’t, he’ll nail you in the dressing room. The mentality’s really changed, we’re consistent and seeing out games now.” As at Sheffield United, most training sessions are conducted by Wilder’s assistant, Alan Knill. “He’s been very good, “ says Fry. “He makes everything seem so simple; when we go into a game everybody knows exactly what they’re doing, there’s no confusion.” Such clarity of thought is perhaps heightened by an awareness that competition for places has intensified this month. Kieran Scott, Boro’s director of football, remains busy, with the acquisition of the strikers Folarin Balogun and Aaron Connolly on loan from Arsenal and Brighton respectively and the signing of Australia midfielder Riley McGree from MLS Charlotte FC, enhancing a newfound sense of expanding horizons. For the first time since Aitor Karanka’s team won promotion in 2016, supporters are daring to dream that a Premier League place could soon be within touching distance. “It feels a bit like the year we got promoted last time, I know we’re going to give it a really good go,” agrees the locally born Fry, at 24 a Boro “lifer” . “We can’t get ahead of ourselves, it’s important not to become complacent but, coming from Middlesbrough, I feel so proud to be part of this team at this moment.”Twickenham Stadium has a particular smell on a game day. It’s the fug of sweat and condensed breath when you’re pressed up close, sizzling sausages and onions, spilled beer, mud, waxed jackets and, when it’s raining, of wet wool. You used to catch gusts of cigar smoke, too, until they banned smoking. I never thought I would miss it particularly, but round about now anything that offers a hint of spring is welcome. After the past two years, when the Six Nations lost so much of its colour and fun while it was being played in empty stadiums, the prospect of having it back again feels pretty good. That’s the thing other fans never understand. When people say the Six Nations is the best tournament in the world, they are not talking about the quality of the rugby but everything around it: the good cheer and bellyfuls of beer, the walk down Whitton Road, the Royal Welsh’s regimental goat, the first burst of La Marseillaise and (better yet for everyone else) the way the French will hoot and whistle their own team when they’re losing, the painfully slow going of the opposition coach when stuck behind the pipe band on a slate-grey day at Murrayfield, The Fields of Athenry, the uproar in Cardiff city centre. It will be enough to have all that back or as much of it as the restrictions on travelling fans allow. But this year, as it happens, the rugby is shaping up to be pretty good too. Just ask Eddie Jones. He used to cross his fingers when asked about that view of the tournament. “When I started six years ago, they were always talking about how it’s ‘the greatest rugby tournament in the world’,” he told me last month. “And you know probably under my breath I was saying: ‘I don’t think that’s the case,’ but now I don’t think there’s any debate.” Well, maybe Jones would say that given England finished fifth in 2021, but even the people who take most of what he says with a pinch of salt will agree he has a point. This tournament is set to be the most competitive in years. At the end of November, the northern sides won a clean sweep over the four southern hemisphere teams. England beat South Africa by a point, Wales did the same against Australia, and, in the standout match of the year, France beat New Zealand by 15. It was the first time the three teams had been beaten on the same weekend since 2002. Scotland, who had defeated Australia a fortnight earlier, beat Japan at Murrayfield. The following day, Ireland, who had beaten the All Blacks the previous week, thrashed Argentina 53-7. If you were a European, it was the best weekend of Test rugby in a very long time. The world lurched, but it has not turned upside quite yet. South Africa and New Zealand top the rankings and they and Australia, too, had their own good reasons why they underperformed on tour, but there is an undeniable sense of something stirring. The All Blacks coach, Ian Foster, said at the end of the autumn: “The top six or seven teams in world rugby right now are strong.” Jones agrees: “The five bigger countries are all on an upward curve.” Every one of them can beat the other and each will believe they are capable of winning a grand slam, which is precisely why pulling it off has never been harder. It says a lot about how good France are that they start as clear favourites. The schedule suits them, too, because it begins with home games against Italy and Ireland, who have become quietly formidable under Andy Farrell. They have now won their past eight Tests. England are intriguing, still rebuilding, and Jones says the question is whether “we can play really good rugby for five games and keep going on the pathway we’ve set ourselves, with an exciting young group of players, and some older players coming back who want to prove that they can still be the best”. Their tournament may turn on whether they can win that first match at Murrayfield. Scotland are also searching for more consistency. Last year, they did the hard part and won away against England and France but still ended up finishing fourth after they were pipped by Ireland and Wales at home. Wales, the champions, seem to be struggling, as ever, with a spate of injuries, but so often seem to find a way to win that you would be a fool to write off their chances. Which leaves Italy and the perennial questions about whether they are worth their place. Only Jones believes they’re improving too, under their new coach, Kieran Crowley. “People shouldn’t underestimate what a great job he did for Canada,” Jones says. “When I started off with Japan, Canada were ahead of us and he’d done a fantastic job, he got them up to like 12th in the world. “He will do a great job with Italy because he’s had that experience of coaching a tier-two country and he knows how to bring them up.” Spring’s a way away yet, but winter’s looking up.Seven weeks ago, at the start of the Ashes, Joe Root made a strikingly clear statement. “Of course it will define my captaincy,” he said. “I’m not naive enough to think that it won’t.” He was right and there’s no wriggling out of it now. To lose one Ashes series 4-0 may be regarded as a misfortune, as long as the captain is inexperienced. To lose two that heavily, when you have been in charge for more Tests than any other England captain, looks like a reason to resign. Root is an honourable person who may come to this conclusion now that he’s back home with his young family. If he doesn’t quit, the England and Wales Cricket Board could well stand by him. An organisation whose predecessor once churned its way through four captains in one summer, in 1988, has lurched to the other extreme. The last Test captain to be fired was Kevin Pietersen, 13 years ago this month. It is all a far cry from the 90s, the golden age of the Ashes fiasco. As yet another series went horribly wrong, a howl would go up in the shires: “Sack the lot of them.” Whisper it, but we could do with a little more of that now. Root needs to return to the ranks because he has never been a natural captain and he is getting worse. His win/loss ratio is 1.08 (27 Tests won, 25 lost). If you look at the league table of the 18 England captains who have lasted at least 20 Tests, Root has fallen from eighth equal with MJK Smith at the end of January 2021 to 13th, just below his immediate predecessor, Alastair Cook. Against the top three teams – Australia, India and New Zealand – Root’s ratio plunges to 0.42, whereas it is 3.33 against the rest. Genial though he may be, he has become a bad-team bully. Even his batting, which can be so glorious, is patchy. Since the start of last year, he averages 81 when Jos Buttler is there to share the tactical burden and 22 when Buttler is missing. All four of England’s victories in that time have come with Buttler present and it now looks as if his Test career is over. In the chain of command above Root, even allowing for the stresses of the pandemic, it is hard to say who is the weakest link. The head coach and chief selector, Chris Silverwood, is well out of his depth: England’s best performance of the Ashes came when he was not there and in Australia and India he has tended to pick a team for the previous Test, not the one in front of him. Silverwood’s boss is the director of cricket, Ashley Giles, who has been no better. He was wrong to abolish the role of national selector, wrong to oust Ed Smith and wrong to give Silverwood so much power. The post England could manage without is not Smith’s old job but Giles’s current one. They don’t need a director of cricket as well as a performance director (Mo Bobat) and a chair of the cricket committee (Andrew Strauss). Giles’s boss is Tom Harrison, the ECB’s chief executive. He could have resigned over the handling of the Yorkshire racism saga; he could have resigned last week; he could, at the very least, have turned down the hefty bonus that awaits him. Instead we keep hearing that he is “unimpressed” with what he has seen of the touring party. The feeling may well be mutual. Not one of Root, Silverwood, Giles and Harrison has done enough to retain the confidence of the cricket-loving public. Who, you may wonder, would do better? It’s all guesswork, but we can at least make sure the guesses are educated. Everybody agrees England’s red-ball cricket needs a reset. Happily, they have someone who has conducted one before, with spectacular results. It was Strauss who saw, following England’s last purge in 2015, that something drastic needed to be done about their white-ball cricket. He made it a priority for the first time, advocated batting without fear and empowered Eoin Morgan, who became the most successful England captain since Mike Brearley. When Strauss stepped back in 2018 to look after his late wife, Ruth, Morgan said: “He will be missed.” He has been. So put Strauss back in charge: it hardly matters what his title is. The coach will have to be someone with plenty of Test experience and a firm hand because Root and Silverwood have been playing good cop, good cop. Gary Kirsten wants the job, Jason Gillespie probably does not, Alec Stewart may or may not. Any of them would surely outshine Silverwood. The captain needs to be commanding, intense and interested in tactics and strategy. When Ben Stokes took over from Root in Adelaide, England suddenly shaped up. He has the presence and the clarity and he did superbly with a bunch of understudies in last year’s one-day series against Pakistan. But he seems reluctant, so Strauss will need a plan B. B for Broad, that is. England’s best performance of the Ashes, off the field, was Stuart Broad’s press conference in Sydney. He was bolder, clearer and sharper than anyone else in the camp had been. He is a natural analyst and a fierce competitor: even as a stopgap, he would be an upgrade. He should be offered the job on three conditions – that he rebuilds his batting, gives himself the odd game off and lets someone else handle the reviews. Good leaders know their limitations. • This article was amended on 23 January 2022 because an earlier version said that Andrew Strauss sacked Alastair Cook as England one-day captain and replaced him with Eoin Morgan. In fact, these events happened before Strauss came into his role as director of cricket.One of the most wonderful (and peculiar) things about gardening is the seemingly universal desire to defy climate to create landscapes that would be impossible in nature. While Singaporean gardeners flock to see cherry blossom trees flown in from the temperate regions of China and held in chilled glasshouses each “spring”, here in Blighty many of us pay absolute fortunes for exotic palms, which Singaporeans would wander past without a second look. Yet perhaps the most fascinating thing to me are the plants that we seem convinced are impossible to grow in our climate because of their “exotic” appearance when, in fact, they are really quite resilient. A classic example is the Tasmanian tree fern, Dicksonia antarctica. These pricey specimens look so jungly that it is, indeed, hard to believe they could ever grow on our blustery north Atlantic islands. However, in their native habitat they experience winter temperatures that are largely comparable to the UK, and can often be even lower. Nine times out of 10 when I am shown tree ferns that have been proclaimed to be victims of winter cold, they show all the classic signs not of frost damage but severe and prolonged drought stress: thinning trunks, stunted canopies, desiccated growing points. Rainfall in their Tasmanian habitat can be as much as six times that of the levels in, say, southeast England, so without generous watering from gardeners I promise you it’s almost always thirst that spells doom for them, not cold. At the other end of the spectrum, there are a range of exotic species like cacti and succulents that, despite being incredibly cold-hardy, cannot handle our comparatively higher levels of rainfall. Much like alpine plants, many bunny ear Cacti Opuntia sp regularly experience months in sub-zero temperatures in their native habitat, where any rain falls as snow. Despite having evolved a number of strategies to handle the frost, they are simply not used to their roots sitting in soggy soils during their dormant period, where they can quickly succumb to rot. So in the UK planting these in a really free-draining mix, and preferably in porous pots sited in a rain shadow, is an easy way to grow “impossible” plants surprisingly easily. There are a huge range of plants we don’t even try to grow due to the assumption that they are not cold-tolerant. Most of us still follow Victorian advice that assumes species like dahlias and even cannas are not hardy, despite the fact that they will happily spring back up from their undergrowth tubers across most of the country even after a particularly cold winter, especially if given an insulating layer of mulch. These misconceptions have only been gradually overturned by horticulturists carefully observing their plants’ behaviour and paying close attention to how conditions affect their growth. So this winter, keep an eye out and you may find you can grow many plants you might have assumed impossible. Follow James on Twitter @BotanygeekBoris Johnson is facing a growing backlash over his “levelling up” agenda as leaked documents on Sunday reveal that funding has been slashed in half for his favourite transport policy – improving bus services in more deprived areas including “red wall” seats. The prime minister announced last year that £3bn would be spent on “new funding to level up buses across England towards London standards” as part of the government’s “bus back better” strategy. He said: “I love buses and I have never quite understood why so few governments before mine have felt the same way,” adding that “better buses will be one of our major acts of levelling up”. But a letter sent to Local Transport Authority directors by the Department for Transport on 11 January – and obtained by the Observer – makes clear that the budget for the “transformation” of buses – a pot from which local regions can bid for funds – has now shrunk to just £1.4bn for the next three years. The letter says this will mean hard choices for areas that had expected more, adding that “prioritisation is inevitable, given the scale of ambition across the country greatly exceeds the amount”. The funding cuts have caused dismay behind the red wall and are an embarrassment for the government, particularly as a white paper on levelling up is expected to be published by Michael Gove – the cabinet minister in charge of the broad push to equalise standards of living across the country – within a fortnight. The white paper has already been delayed, partly as a result of pressure from the Treasury to keep costs down. In his spending review last autumn the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, prepared the way for a reduction in spending on buses, but local transport leaders had still pinned hopes on the prime minister sticking to his word about £3bn for extra investment. Figures compiled by the shadow buses minister Sam Tarry’s office show the amount of funding bids submitted by 53 out of 79 local transport authorities from the extra funding pot is already more than £7bn. This suggests the total is likely to exceed £9bn, against a total available of £1.4bn. Local transport authorities and bus operators are already facing huge financial uncertainty as a result of the fall in passenger numbers and fare revenue during the Omicron surge, and lack of clarity from government over whether extra Covid-related funding will continue. Tarry said last night: “The Tories promised ‘transformational’ investment in bus services. But millions of passengers are seeing managed decline. They’ve dramatically downgraded the ambitions of local communities. With bus services being slashed nationwide, this is proof that this government simply will not and cannot deliver for the people that need it most.” The mayor of West Yorkshire, Tracy Brabin, said the decision to cut the funding for bus service improvement by more than 50% was a major blow. After losing out on long-promised rail investment – with the scrapping of HS2 and paring-back of Northern Powerhouse Rail – we in the north of England were counting on this funding, so we could deliver the green, reliable and affordable bus network our people deserve.” The director of the Urban Transport Group, representing the transport authorities for the largest urban areas, Jonathan Bray, said: “We welcome any additional funding for buses given they are relied upon by those communities with the least and which are most in need of levelling up. However it is disappointing that the Treasury has substantially reduced the amount we were originally promised.” Transport expert Stephen Joseph, a visiting professor at the University of Hertfordshire’s Smart Mobility Unit, said: “On buses, the Treasury isn’t counter-signing the cheques No 10 is writing. In fact the prospect seems to be of cuts, including in the red wall areas, rather than the expansion Boris Johnson has been promising.” A Department for Transport spokesperson said: “It is incorrect to claim that funding has been cut from our original ambition. Over this parliament, the government has committed to making a step change investment of over £3bn into bus services. “This includes £1.2bn in dedicated new funding to deliver improvements in fares, services and infrastructure, and a further £355m of new funding for zero emission buses.”Farmers are putting off planting trees because of the uncertainty surrounding the government’s plans for subsidies based on protecting nature, delaying the UK’s efforts to cut greenhouse gas emissions and stem the drastic decline in farmland wildlife. New farm payments are expected from 2024, under the post-Brexit subsidy regime the government has promised, but farmers fear if they plant trees now they will not get the credit for it when the new schemes start. Meanwhile, they face potentially losing their existing subsidies if they switch to more tree-planting now. Ministers have repeatedly stressed that future payments to farmers will be on the principle of “public money for public goods”, meaning farmers will be paid for taking care of the land and wildlife, under “environmental land management contracts” or ELMs. But farmers have told the Observer there are too few details available about the expected new system, four years after it was promised by the government. This leaves farmers in limbo. If they use land currently in food production to plant trees, they could forfeit their existing subsidies, called basic payments. Many farmers are also tied into stewardship agreements with the government, under which they receive special subsidy payments for good environmental management. But these are so inflexible that farmers cannot plant trees as this would violate their agreement. “We are grateful for the stewardship payments, but it is difficult to change them,” said Martin Hole, a livestock farmer in Sussex. “Farmers are in a pinch. This is happening to me, and I hear it from many others. We want to plant trees, but there may be financial penalties if we do.” Hole wanted to triple the area of woodland on his farm, but could not make the finances work, as it would mean redrawing his current stewardship arrangement and he is unsure of any future support. Richard Bramley, an arable farmer south of York, who chairs the National Farmers’ Union environment forum, faces a similar quandary. He said the government had not yet set out details of how farmers would be encouraged to plant trees and hedgerows in future. “There is just so little information. Planting trees requires capital and time, and is a permanent change so you want to get it right.” Trees are an integral part of environmentally beneficial farming, as they provide habitats for wildlife, help prevent flooding, store carbon and clean the air. They also benefit farmers, providing shade and shelter for livestock, and encouraging pollinators. Planting trees requires significant investment, however. Rhys Evans, a beef and sheep farmer in south Snowdonia, is planting 1km of hedgerow, with fence poles costing £3 each and £30 for corners, even before the cost of the 7,000 saplings required, and labour. “It’s very expensive. There will be long-term benefits, and we want to do it, but many farmers who are less proactive will be put off,” he said. Martin Lines, chair of the Nature Friendly Farming Network, said farmers were increasingly aware of the benefits of trees and hedgerows, but needed more encouragement to start planting. “We’re getting mixed signals,” he said. “The government needs to give us more reassurance.” Organic farmers are also being deterred from investing in agroforestry, combining forestry with food production by growing trees that produce organic nuts and fruit in among crops or livestock pasture. Guy Singh-Watson, founder of Riverford, the vegetable box company, said: “Some of these trees are not native, they are European or American, so they might not be included in a requirement to plant native species. The government has shown little interest in agroforestry in general.” The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs pointed to its scheme for farmers to plant as little as one hectare of trees. “By taking up grants such as the England Woodland Creation Offer now, farmers and landowners will be able to transfer into future environmental land management schemes at agreed points without having to repay their current funding,” a spokesperson said. However, farmers said the woodland creation scheme was not suitable for all farms, as it was geared to those who could afford to take a significant area out of production. Many are also concerned about what would happen if the trees failed, or were damaged by storms, deer or rabbits, as they could be held liable for fresh investment to replant the woodland. As many as one in four trees can require replanting, even in good circumstances. Farm subsidies are a devolved policy across the UK, but Scotland and Wales face similar issues. Hywel Morgan, with a hill farm in the western Brecon Beacons, told the Observer many farms nearby were being bought up by corporations to grow forests for carbon credits, to offset their carbon emissions. “What about those of us who want to continue as family farms? I can’t see how planting these trees but then importing food makes sense [for the environment]. I’d like to plant trees but to farm too.” Ministers must act faster, urged Ben Raskin, head of horticulture and agroforestry at the Soil Association. “This is a complex and long-term issue, but they should not make us wait until they have something they think is perfect. We would like to see some interim help at least, on agroforestry and hedgerows. Farmers want to be doing more now.”The magic number is 54. This is how many Tory MPs have to write a secret letter to the chairman of their 1922 Committee in order to trigger a vote of no confidence in Boris Johnson. There are easily more than 54 Conservative MPs who think their leader is a busted flush, who appreciate the risk his attempts to hang on to the premiership will inflict lasting reputational damage on their party and who understand that Britain won’t return to anything resembling seemly and orderly government until he is gone. One senior Tory ended a conversation with me by quoting François Rabelais: “Bring down the curtain, the farce is over.” Quite a lot share the public revulsion with the lockdown-busting of the prime minister and his staff. Some agree that he lied to MPs and that it is critical to the integrity of our politics that deliberately misleading parliament is always treated as a resignation offence. More are agitated about what leaving Mr Johnson in place means for their electoral prospects. All can read the opinion polls. His personal ratings have plunged to depths not even plumbed by Theresa May at her lowest point. This strongly suggests we are witnessing the implosion of the Cult of Johnson that I wrote about at the time of the last Tory party conference. And yet Sir Graham Brady, the man who keeps count of the letters, has not announced that the magic number has been reached. Tory MPs scheme, gossip, brief, speculate and plot. With a few exceptions, what they have not done is act. One of the exceptions is David Davis, the prominent Brexiter and former cabinet minister. He waited until Prime Minister’s Questions had gone into injury time before he rose to confront the prime minister by quoting Leo Amery quoting Oliver Cromwell. “In the name of God, go.” Things would be much easier for Tories if their leader took that advice and walked away. That would spare everyone the spectacle of ministers tortuously trying to defend the indefensible. His departure would probably reduce the chances of more Tories following the example of Christian Wakeford, the Bury South MP who defected to Labour. A swift exit is not the outcome desired by Labour, which is best served by weeks more of dreadful headlines for the Tories, accompanied by poisonous infighting among them. So you can see why some Conservative MPs are attracted to the notion that their leader might be induced to announce that he is off to spend more time with his families. Mr Johnson’s friends have often heard him whingeing that he can’t live on the salary while moaning that being prime minister is not as much fun as he thought it would be. It never seems to have occurred to him that making money and having a laugh are not the top lines of the job description. On the retelling of Dominic Cummings, his former boon companion turned enemy, Mr Johnson was bored with being prime minister within a month of the 2019 election. “This job,” he groaned. “It’s like getting up every morning pulling a 747 down the runway.” Even as a disgraced ex-prime minister, a lucrative afterlife would await him as a celebrity speaker. He could return to writing columns for the Telegraph, a much more appropriate vocation for him than heading a government. He could finish his long-delayed book, Shakespeare: The Riddle of Genius. He could then pen his memoirs, which he has the ego to entitle Johnson: The Wronged Genius. To go now might earn him a bit of redemption with his party, and possibly even with some of the public, for eventually doing the decent thing. You probably choked as hard reading that last sentence as I did writing it. Anyone acquainted with his biography knows how unfamiliar he is with the concept of doing the decent thing. Putting the interests of others before his own is alien to a man who has always been governed entirely by his ambitions and appetites. His remaining allies are busy briefing friendly journalists that he will fight to stay in Number 10 to the bitter end. They would say that, of course. They hope to deter Tory MPs from moving against him by filling them with terror that prising him out will be a grisly enterprise with no guarantee of success. One former cabinet minister predicts: “Boris will only be dragged out of Number 10 with his fingernails clinging to the door. There will be scratch marks down the woodwork.” The battle to save his skin has already turned vicious. From William Wragg, a Tory committee chairman who was once a keen supporter of the prime minister, we have heard charges that blackmail is being used against MPs suspected of wanting him gone. Mr Wragg thinks this is another scandal and one grave enough to merit investigation by the police. Westminster has always been associated with dark arts and dirty tricks, but intimidating MPs by threatening to cut off government funding for schools or hospitals in their constituencies takes things to a previously unvisited and atrocious level. That is government by extortion racket. Another sign of Mr Johnson’s desperation is “Operation Save Big Dog”, the puerile appellation apparently invented by himself to describe the effort to buy him more time. The attempt to pander to rightwing Tories by throwing them lumps of “red meat” included spinning a yarn that asylum seekers could be sent to Ghana. The government of the west African country exposed that as fiction by ridiculing it as “Operation Dead Meat”. There is no step too low for Mr Johnson, including trashing Britain’s international reputation. The longer Tory MPs prevaricate, the more they become complicit in this scandal and the less the public will trust the lot of them. They surely know this. So what is stopping them? One scenario haunting the Conservative benches is that a confidence vote is triggered in the next few weeks, Mr Johnson just scrapes through and then insists he has a right to carry on. They would then be stuck with a leader who was finished, but not finished off. That prompts some Tories to seek reasons to delay the moment when they reckon with the mistake their party made when it gave him the premiership in the first place. I hear some Conservative MPs arguing that he should be given a period of “probation” to see whether he can put together a more professional team at Number 10 and run a better government. That’s like having Dracula before you and a stake to hand, but offering him three months to prove that he can be a vegetarian. Then there are those dithering Tory MPs who contend that they should put the decision in the hands of the voters by waiting for the May elections. One Conservative MP reports that his local councillors are angrily demanding: “Why should we be sacrificed because Tory MPs lack a spine?” The most common mantra on the Tory benches is “wait for Sue Gray”. The bulk of them have fallen in behind the idea that they should pause until the senior civil servant has concluded her investigation into the parties scandal. The Johnson loyalists are hoping that Ms Gray will grant him some kind of reprieve by widely spreading culpability for the rule-breaking booze-ups at Number 10. Even before Ms Gray had completed her interviews, the prime minister’s propagandists were putting it about that her report would exonerate him from the most damning charges. That’s a dangerous game for Number 10 to be playing, not least because Ms Gray will have a strong regard for her own credibility. Someone who knows her well remarks: “She will be very pissed off by that.” Some of the Tory MPs who want him gone, but have yet to say so into a microphone, are indicating that they are waiting for the release of the report before they add their voices to those calling for his resignation. Ms Gray’s findings are now expected to be published this week, later than originally planned. That’s because she has uncovered more evidence about Number 10’s party culture as she has gone along. The prime minister has committed himself to being questioned about it by MPs, who should insist that the report is published in full. Ms Gray is a civil servant, not an independent prosecutor or judge. Her findings, and the degree of severity with which she chooses to word them, can tip the scales for or against the prime minister with Tory MPs, but ultimately they will have to make the decision. Those who want rid of Boris Johnson will have to be as resolute about evicting him as he is frantic to cling on. • Andrew Rawnsley is Chief Political Commentator of the ObserverRussia has sent troops more than 4,000 miles to Ukraine’s borders and announced sweeping naval drills as Moscow expands its preparations for a potential attack on Ukraine as negotiations appear at a deadlock. Six Russian landing ships capable of carrying main battle tanks, troops and other military vehicles travelled through the Channel en route to the Mediterranean last week in a deployment that could bolster an amphibious landing on Ukraine’s southern coast if Vladimir Putin orders an attack. Ukraine’s military intelligence has claimed that Russia is hiring mercenaries and supplying its proxy forces in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions with fuel, tanks and self-propelled artillery in preparation for a potential upsurge in fighting. And a large military force, including Iskander short-range ballistic missiles, elite spetsnaz troops and anti-aircraft batteries, has arrived in Belarus from Russia’s eastern military district, an extraordinary deployment that western officials and analysts say could enable Moscow to threaten Kyiv, Ukraine’s capital. The new deployments have worried US officials. “What concerns us is the total picture,” said a senior state department official in a briefing last week. “It is the amassing of 100,000 troops along Ukraine’s borders combined with moving forces into Belarus over the weekend … these numbers are beyond, of course, what we would expect with regard to a normal exercise.” The new forces in Belarus, the official added, represent an “increased capability for Russia to launch this attack, increased opportunity, increased avenues, increased routes”. The US president, Joe Biden, last week said that Putin himself may not know what he plans to do. But the results are either reckless brinkmanship or preparations for a large-scale military operation. “It gradually dawned on Putin that if he stays on the track of stable and predictable, as Biden indicated, he’s the designated loser,” said Pavel Baev, research professor at the Peace Research Institute Oslo and a Brookings Institution nonresident fellow. “Something needed to be done. He went for this escalation quite sharply.” Diplomatic efforts last week were inconclusive. The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, called talks with US secretary of state Antony Blinken “frank and substantive”. “I can’t say whether we are on the right track or not on the right track. We’ll understand that when we receive an American response on paper to all items of our proposals,” Lavrov told reporters in Geneva. But there are no concrete plans for a follow-up and the two sides appear irreconcilable, with Russia’s foreign ministry repeating maximalist demands for Nato forces to leave all countries that joined the alliance after 1997. “What is happening on the Russian side in the last couple of weeks is not really diplomacy. It’s a combination of bluff, blackmail and warmongering,” said Baev during a roundtable discussion on Friday. As Russia’s buildup nears completion, US and European countries have stepped up military support for Ukraine. The UK last week sent more than 2,000 NLAW (next generation light anti-tank weapon) launchers and deployed about 30 troops from a new ranger regiment as trainers. Estonia has said it will provide Javelin anti-tank missiles, while Lithuania and Latvia will send Stinger anti-aircraft missiles. In a shift, the Netherlands also said it would be ready to provide defensive weapons to Ukraine. And the US has said it will increase aid and send Mi-17 transport helicopters originally meant for use in Afghanistan to Ukraine instead. The decision to fast-track arms to Ukraine reflects an understanding that Russia could launch an attack at any moment. “We know that there are plans in place to increase that force even more on very short notice, and that gives President Putin the capacity, also on very short notice, to take further aggressive action against Ukraine,” Blinken said in public remarks last week. The scope of a Russian attack and its ultimate goals remain unclear. Some analysts have suggested Russia may want to formally annex the Donbas region or capture territory to connect the Russian mainland with Crimea, the Ukrainian peninsula annexed by Russia in 2014. But others see Moscow’s larger aim as compelling the Ukrainian government to submit to Russia’s terms, effectively re-establishing a sphere of influence in eastern Europe. And that ambitious goal could mean that a Russian attack would have to put extraordinary pressure on the Ukrainian government.“If the purpose is to compel Ukraine’s leadership, then a ground invasion only makes sense if it puts Ukraine in a more untenable or threatened position. Neither a land bridge nor an operation in Odessa would likely achieve that result, but an offensive towards Kyiv could,” wrote Rob Lee, a former US marine and a fellow in the Foreign Policy Research Institute’s Eurasia programme, in an analysis. Ultimately, Russia wants to block Ukraine’s entrance into Nato, stymie cooperation with western powers and reverse Kyiv’s trajectory away from Moscow. To that end, it has sought to put Ukraine in a position that would stretch its defences and threaten a potential hammer blow against Kyiv. Russia has deployed more than 60 battalion tactical groups – more than a third of the military’s total available force – and appears unwilling to halt its buildup on Ukraine’s borders. Russian troops, along with Iskander short-range ballistic missiles, began arriving in Belarus last week after travelling across the country from Russia’s far east. The troops are arriving for joint military exercises set for mid-February and will include Russian Sukhoi Su-35 fighter jets and nearly the entire Belarusian armed forces, according to the country’s leader, Alexander Lukashenko.“Don’t get into [a fight] with us,” said Lukashenko in punchy remarks on Friday. “We can’t be defeated.” At the same time, Russia has announced sweeping naval drills that will include every fleet in the country’s navy, numbering more than 140 warships. Along with the six landing craft likely headed for the Mediterranean, a Russian cruiser and destroyer will also be dispatched following the exercises. Nato has also announced its own naval drills, including a US aircraft carrier strike group in the Mediterranean for the next two weeks, meaning that the two rivals will be conducting exercises at the same time amid heightened tensions. Russia appears to be finalising its preparations for a strike on Ukraine. But even if the attack never comes, analysts say that there may never be a return to the status quo before the Russian buildup began last year.“I think it’s clear that even if a war is avoided, I don’t think we’re going to go back to the situation prior to April 2021,” said Angela Stent, director emerita of the Center for Russian, East European and Eurasian studies at Georgetown University and a nonresident senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. During a roundtable discussion, she said that the crisis could lead to the “third reorganisation of Euro-Atlantic security since the 1940s”.During the pandemic, the UK and other rich nations have relied on African doctors and nurses to shore up their health services. Now the continent’s chief health leader is hoping to put the brain drain into reverse with a plan to persuade African expats to return. Dr John Nkengasong, the head of the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC), said they were planning a programme to attract scientists, doctors and nurses back from the diaspora. “The leadership of the continent must invest in strengthening health systems,” Nkengasong said, in an interview with the Observer. “We need a very deliberate programme that facilitates Africans in the diaspora to come back to the continent and do a rotation. A Ghanaian or Nigerian in London doesn’t just wake up in the morning and think, ‘I’m going to go to Nigeria for a year.’ That person needs lodging, basic transportation. They have responsibilities, a job.” He said the Africa CDC would soon put forward a package of measures to the African Union commission to create a regional health treaty to govern the pandemic response, which would include support for expatriates. Research by the House of Commons library last year showed that 2.5% of NHS England’s 1.35 million staff were African. The largest proportion were the 10,494 from Nigeria, with a further 4,780 from Zimbabwe, 3,395 from Ghana and 2,895 from Egypt. Nigeria has about 72,000 registered doctors, but only 35,000 were practising in the country in 2021, according to Abba Moro, a Nigerian senator. The Africa CDC set up seven working groups allowing doctors and scientists working in richer countries to give regular advice remotely. “They have been extremely useful during this pandemic,” Nkengasong said. “We need to formalise it and facilitate the return to the continent to support the public need.” Africa seems to have suffered less severely from Covid and its variants than other continents. About 10 million people are estimated to have been infected but that is probably an undercounting, Dr Nkengasong said, and about 220,000 people have died. “That’s relatively low for a continent of 1.3 billion,” he said. “We saw India was overwhelmed by Covid in May, you couldn’t hide it. We’ve not seen a scenario in Africa where people are dying on the streets. “I think there is a puzzle of why many more people have been infected in Africa, but it has not translated into many deaths. That is a research question we need to investigate, and also how many deaths we are missing. “We have to be prepared for variants to emerge that will be more challenging than what we are dealing with.” Africa CDC has been instrumental in creating the Sentinel network of labs to track the virus using genomic sequencing that led to the detection of the Omicron variant in Botswana in November. “We have the infrastructure in place to detect early, prevent and respond,” he said. “Take west Africa – there’s a lot of public health assets there. The Noguchi [Medical Research] Institute in Nigeria is a state-of-the-art facility. The Pasteur Institute in Cote d’Ivoire, the Pasteur Institute in Senegal, the Medical Research Council in the Gambia – but they were not talking to each other. The whole concept of this new public health order is to use as much in the region as you can.” He added that in 2018 he was contacted by public health officials in Sierra Leone about a suspected monkeypox case, asking for help to find someone at the US CDC to test for the disease. “I said no, if you send that to Cote d’Ivoire, I know they have the primers to help you do that.” That mindset of Africans always needing help from richer western nations is far too widespread, he said. “People see the continent as a place to go, do a few projects, gather the data, publish it, do a few clinical trials and get out. That is not global health. It should be an equal partnership, recognising that the principal investigators should come from the developing countries.” The pandemic provided an example of the limits of western help, he said, with the WHO’s Covax programme. The Gavi alliance, which directs the programme, had pledged 2bn doses of vaccines to 144 poorer countries in 2021, but managed about 900m. Earlier this month, poorer nations rejected 100m doses that were close to expiring. There have been heated debates about whether western countries were hoarding vaccines. “Covax represents the best mechanisms of global cooperation,” Nkengasong said. “But look at what happened. It’s a good example of where good intention is not matched by reality. The promissory note that African countries would get vaccines at the same time didn’t happen. “And what we did, under the leadership of President Ramaphosa, we established the African Vaccine Acquisition Task Team and we were able to acquire 400m doses of the Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine.” So far Africa CDC has launched 12 pandemic initiatives, he said. As well as genomic surveillance and vaccines, there are plans to secure diagnostics and testing kits, and medical supplies.With the culture secretary Nadine Dorries’s announcement last week that the licence fee will be frozen for two years, the BBC’s future is at best uncertain and possibly terminal, at least in the form that we’ve come to know and often love it. In its centenary year the corporation is under existential threat not just from this government but also the streaming companies that have most benefited from the digital revolution. One hundred years ago the BBC was itself a startup attempting to exploit a relatively new but not very well-understood technology: wireless. There’s a modern-day wisdom about startups that says only three people are really needed – someone to build the product, someone to make it attractive, and someone to sell it. Or to put it in today’s language, a hacker, a hipster and a hustler. David Hendy, a professor of media and cultural history, opens The BBC: A People’s History with three men looking for an office to house their new enterprise, the British Broadcasting Company, as it was then called. The men are Cecil Lewis, a former fighter pilot still in his early 20s with an idealistic sense of culture’s edifying value; John Reith, a rather stern moralist with an organising zeal; and Arthur Burrows, the only one who actually had experience of working on wireless. With a certain creative licence, you might say that Burrows was the hacker, Lewis the hipster and Reith the hustler. Hendy doesn’t employ that taxonomy but he does set the scene rather well of these three influential figures at the dawning of what would turn out to be this country’s biggest and most significant cultural institution. The reader is prepared for a dramatic tale of innovation and determination as the trio succeed in establishing their new business amid a hostile and powerful Fleet Street resistance. Yet no sooner does Hendy introduce these characters than they largely slip out of the narrative. Instead, an array of other functionaries appear and pretty soon Lewis is gone, the BBC has become a corporation and listening to the radio has shifted from an obscure hobby for the wealthy to a national pastime. Exactly how that transformation takes place is lost in an abundance of information that never quite forms into a dynamic narrative. The book is an authorised history, insofar as the BBC has made its archives available to Hendy, though, as he emphasises, without any editorial control or influence. Yet there is nevertheless a sense of obligation in the writing, a need to cover the ground, even when it’s not that interesting or new. The other aspect of the book is that it’s a “People’s History”, which means that there is a Mass Observation-style element to it, with the public being frequently quoted to underline the contract between the broadcaster and its audience. It’s a contract that Reith saw in paternalistic terms, requiring the BBC to play the role of nation’s conscience and moral improver, while notionally maintaining a position of journalistic impartiality. It was and remains a tricky balancing act, further complicated by the BBC’s ambiguous relationship with the state and, more pressingly, whichever government is in power. As Hendy writes: “Since the BBC was never going to please everyone, it often tried instead not to offend anyone.” These are hoary subjects that the author revisits dutifully without adding any particularly fresh insight. It is, however, to this more political understanding of the BBC that he is repeatedly drawn. In a narrative of 570 pages, more than 100 of them are devoted to the second world war, when the BBC became the central voice of Britain’s plight and a vital conduit for government propaganda. It was also itself subject to myth creation. Churchill’s famous “We shall fight them on the beaches” speech may have roused the Commons, but was not the inspirational event of legend when he repeated it on radio, as Hendy reminds us. The war also delayed the development of what would become the BBC’s main concern and purpose, namely television. The suits at the BBC are often accused of being uninterested in programme-making, and the same criticism might be levelled at this book, which is much more inclined to revisit administrative tensions than explore creative talent. In this era of technological upheaval, when cultural gatekeepers have been falling like ninepins, the idea of a licence fee and a public broadcaster are in danger of appearing increasingly anachronistic – a vulnerability Dorries is busy exploiting. Hendy is understandably sympathetic to the corporation, quoting Clive James: “The Beeb is a great institution, always to be defended against its enemies, which include itself.” James, however, knew what was great about the BBC beyond its symbolism and sense of purpose. He was a connoisseur of its actual product, and a strong sense of what that has entailed is what is most conspicuously missing from this conscientious but rather pedestrian history. • The BBC: A People’s History by David Hendy is published by Profile Books (£25). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyWhile training to become a GP, Gavin Francis became ill with a severe sinus problem. In acute pain and exhausted as he waited for an operation, he chose to reduce his hours to three days a week. “I persuaded myself that there was no point risking burnout for the sake of sticking to a schedule,” he writes in his new book, Recovery: The Lost Art of Convalescence. “I qualified all the same, albeit a couple of months late.” This strikes me as an unusually proactive “physician heal thyself” attitude for a junior doctor. But Francis’s whole approach to practising medicine feels unusual. Growing up in Fife with a passion for science, he chose to study medicine because “I wanted to have a job that would give me a kind of trade; all the men in my family seemed to have a trade of one sort or another.” Then there’s the fact that on qualification, after a year as a junior house officer, he headed off to explore the wildest parts of the world for a decade, visiting the Arctic, motorbiking across Asia to New Zealand, and working for the British Antarctic Survey. “It was so peaceful,” he says of his time there when we speak over Zoom. “There was so much time for contemplation.” He missed the buzz of clinic life, but he already knew he did not want to return to emergency medicine. “I didn’t want to go back to that highly pressurised environment of resus and ambulance sirens.” Now he tells medical students to “look at the doctors around them, look at the lifestyle they have and imagine if they want their lifestyle to look like that in 20 years’ time. I suppose it would be fair to say I was quite good at doing that early on.” In his work as a GP, Francis spends half the week in a small practice in Edinburgh, including a morning a week at a clinic for the homeless, which he’s just left when we speak. Two or three times a year, he helps out in remote Hebridean island practices, immersed in the wild, landscapes and big skies he believes help him stave off burnout. The rest of the time he spends with his primary school-age children and his writing: essays, reviews and books, on travel and wild places, and on his experiences at the frontline of general practice, including the gripping, tender, bestseller Adventures in Human Being, described by Hilary Mantel as “sober and beautiful”. “I love practising medicine,” he says. “And I can’t imagine stopping, but it’s quite emotionally exhausting. I discovered early on that a really wonderful way for me to do medicine that made me more effective as a doctor and also helped me flourish, I suppose, as a human being, was to do a full intense day and then to have a day off to think about it and contemplate it.” Francis devotes time to his own recovery from a job notorious for burnout and never more so than now, as an underfunded, traumatised NHS faces another winter of Covid firefighting. (“The days of people clapping on Thursday are long gone,” he says. “People are getting really, really tired after two years of this.”) Avoiding getting depleted to a point where he is “exhausted and inffective as a doctor” is both for his own and his patients’ benefit. “I needed to find a way of doing medicine that helps my patients, too, that is a much more sustainable, creative, mutually helpful relationship.” This makes him the ideal person to explore the “lost art” of recovery and convalescence. It’s also something that has been in the forefront of his mind for a while. “In 2020, I spent such an extraordinarily large amount of my time talking to people about recovery and convalescence, not just recovery from Covid, but from all the crises of mental health that were provoked by lockdowns and just also talking to people about recovery from surgery, from emotional crises in their life… It came up again and again.” He wrote his latest book, he says, because “I realised there are huge numbers of things I take for granted in those consultations that my patients don’t, and I wanted to put them all in one place.” The slim volume he has produced – a collection of reflections, really – is humane and thoughtful. Combining personal reminiscence, hard science and history, it explores the architecture of convalescence, rest, treatments and placebos, the healing power of nature and the transformative impact a sick note can have. I particularly like this section, I tell him, which provides a powerful counter-narrative to tabloid tales of malingering and fraud. It was influenced by Francis’s early working experiences in Muirhouse, an area of socio-economic deprivation. “One of the GPs there taught me that sick notes can be the most powerful prescription I ever write. Most people try and go back to work too quickly; the amount of abuse in the sick note system is tiny, about 1%. It can be a lovely thing to actually reassure somebody, ‘You need time, you need to give some respect to this process.’” He likes, too, the fact that a sick note can be deliberately left vague. “Quite often, I’ll put ‘life crisis’. If somebody’s basement is flooded, their cat died, and their wife left them all in the same week, that’s a life crisis.” Recovery is fascinating, too, on the greater respect convalescence was accorded in the past. Francis describes the “glorious, sunlit, south-facing” wards and wide wheelchair-friendly corridors of the Princess Margaret Rose hospital in Edinburgh, which was designed in the 1930s for patients to recuperate from tuberculosis. Another convalescent hospital where he worked, the Astley Ainslie, “was set up in the 1920s not only to help patients convalesce after acute illness, but also to fatten them up before surgery. It’s amazing, now to get a single night in a hospital bed, you have to have a medical diagnosis and a plan in place that’s going to prioritise getting you out as quickly a possible.” Of course, there are many things we do better now: “We’re doing mental health a lot better, the range of treatments we have available are fantastic, the fact that you’re not plunging your family into destitution every time you get ill, all those kinds of things are much better.” But the Victorians and Edwardians were more enlightened when it came to valuing rest and understanding how slow recovery can be. The book is clear-sighted and accepting of the limitations of what doctors can do, particular in relation to chronic conditions and that slow, often non-linear, process of recovery. “People get a slightly inflated sense of the power of western medicine sometimes,” says Francis, “and they’re quite surprised we don’t have an answer. I wanted to lay that out – that lots of times in medicine we can’t cure what’s going on.” This feels particularly timely, as a survey reveals there are 1.3 million long Covid sufferers in the UK, many struggling with the lack of effective treatment strategies. “People can get frustrated when I say we don’t understand the reasons for post-viral fatigue, we don’t really have a good grasp on what the mechanism is,” Francis says. “We are frustrated, too.” This is, he reminds me, not a new phenomenon. “The ancient Greeks talked about post-viral fatigue and we are not really a huge amount further on.” The chapter called “Snakes and Ladders” reproduces the pro-forma NHS advice a long Covid-suffering friend also received, with its advice to: “Don’t rush, get fresh air, push, don’t pull, slide, don’t lift…” She found it both helpful and maddening, I tell him, reading out what she texted me: “Basically what you are told is, ‘Sorry your life sucks, that is just the way it is now and you have to deal with it.’” Francis thinks it’s not quite that negative or judgmental (though he accepts it’s “typical NHS: one form for everybody whether you are 80 or 20”). “You’re in this predicament and here are some ways we’ve seen to be effective to get out of your predicament. I wish there was a pill for this but there isn’t.” He’s acutely aware how scary Covid has been for many sufferers: “I’ve had 25-year-old marathon runners take weeks to recover, have weeks where they were struggling to walk up their first-floor stairs. It’s frightening to be reminded of your mortality and how fragile we can be.” Many patients take comfort, he says, in knowing they are not alone and that most sufferers make a good recovery in the end. “People recover from Covid. The figures are starting to come in. There’s a long tail, but it does continue to drop, the number of people still experiencing symptoms just goes down and down.” He promises me, too, that the pandemic will end, when I ask, plaintively, though a respiratory specialist colleague predicted we were in for five years when they spoke in June 2020. Recovery is not a book that pretends to have the answers, other than the overarching message that healing – from anything – is completely specific to the individual and is a process that requires patience, from both sufferer and physician. Accompanying a patient on a long, unpredictable recovery feels to me like a different job and skill set than the one most people become doctors for. But for Francis, it’s absolutely part of the job. “If you go into medicine expecting to cure all your patients, you’re going to be disappointed very quickly. If my job can somehow ease suffering a little, or give someone a little more dignity or a bit more autonomy, even if I can’t do anything about their condition, then it’s probably worthwhile.” Although “carbon guilt” may have put paid to some of the wilder far-flung adventures Francis would have undertaken 20 years ago, he’s planning to get back out for some “big overland trips” with the family when Covid allows and his children are old enough to enjoy them. In the short term, he’s planning a road trip to northern Italy’s Po Valley, to visit his wife’s family, and respecting the “really lovely rhythm” that works for him. “I would love to persuade more of my colleagues that’s a good model,” he says, but staffing challenges (“We need far more doctors and nurses in this country”) sadly make it unrealistic. Even with all the frustrations of working in the NHS in 2022, Francis can’t imagine wanting to do anything different, as long as it is balanced with enough breathing space. “It’s a wonderful job as long as you can keep the pressures of it within certain bounds. It’s immensely satisfying, no two days are the same and you have this wonderful opportunity to meet all kinds of people and have sometimes transformational, sometimes quite mundane conversations with them and do something often quite modest, small and realistic about making their lives a little bit better… You can’t ask any better than that.” Recovery: The Lost Art of Convalescence by Gavin Francis is published by Profile at £4.99. To order a copy for £4.23, go to guardianbookshop.comThe recent unexpected rise in interest rates could have been the good news that savers had waited so long for. But more than five weeks after the Bank of England increased rates, only four financial firms have passed on the full rise to all, or nearly all, of their variable-rate savings account customers. The Bank decided on 16 December to lift the base rate from its historic low of 0.1% to 0.25%, prompting expectation it would be passed on. But several banks and building societies boosted rates on just one, or a handful, of accounts in the weeks following the decision, and some have even reduced them. Only Suffolk, Newcastle and Cambridge building societies, and Atom bank, raised rates by the full 0.15% across all, or the majority of their ranges, according to financial data provider Moneyfacts. This leaves the vast majority of long-suffering savers still waiting for a rise that may never come. Some commentators believe this is unlikely to change any time soon, even if – as many expect – the Bank announces another increase on 3 February. Analysts expect further rises this year to take the base rate above 1%. Adrian Lowery, a personal finance expert at investing platform Bestinvest, says that “most of the big banks are uninterested in attracting savers’ deposits … and so will probably decline to pass on base-rate hikes in any meaningful way”. That is echoed by Sarah Coles, a personal finance analyst at investment firm Hargreaves Lansdown, who says: “The banks have plenty of cheap money from the government, so they are in no rush to raise rates to attract more from savers.” Even if providers do nudge up rates, rising inflation will eat away at the value of savings. On Wednesday it emerged that it had jumped to 5.4% – the highest in almost 30 years. Moneyfacts says there is not one standard savings account that can outpace 5.4%, but adds that getting the best deal is essential to soften the impact of the rising cost of living. “It’s imperative that savers continue to monitor and switch if they are on a poor rate,” says Rachel Springall at the data provider. Ipswich-based Suffolk building society says all of its currently available variable rate savings accounts had 0.15% added with effect from 4 January. Newcastle building society says it will apply the rise to the majority of its variable-rate savings accounts, which means that 97% of those who have one will benefit from 1 February. Two recently launched accounts – triple access saver and monthly access saver – will not see a rise, however. Atom bank has raised the rate on its instant saver account (its only variable rate account) by 0.15% to 0.65%, making this one of the best easy-access rates available. Cambridge building society says it will increase by 0.15% its instant access, your saver, first account and 100 day notice accounts from Tuesday. And Yorkshire building society, with nearly 3 million customers, says it is adding 0.1% to its variable-rate savings accounts on 1 February. Most experts say that everyone should aim to have some cash in an easy-access account to provide a financial safety net. Unfortunately, some of the leading ones – including Lloyds Bank’s easy saver, HSBC’s flexible saver and Halifax’s everyday saver – pay just 0.01%. There are providers offering a lot more, though some have restrictions. Topping the table at the time of writing was Shawbrook Bank’s easy-access account, paying 0.67%, though the minimum opening balance is £1,000, and the minimum withdrawal £500. Be aware that savings products are coming and going very quickly, so you may need to act fast. Financial app Chip offers an easy-access account with a relatively good rate, though it was last week reduced from 0.7% to (a still pretty good) 0.61%. Marcus by Goldman Sachs has an online savings account paying 0.6% and you can start with as little as £1. That includes 0.1% interest bonus, fixed for the first 12 months. If you want a return of more than 2%, you will typically have to lock your money away for several years. There are a number of five-year fixed-rate savings bonds paying just over 2%, from the likes of Charter Savings Bank, Hodge Bank, InBank and Monument Bank. Some of the best rates are offered by regular savings accounts, where you put aside money each month. If you have a NatWest current account, you can apply for its digital regular saver, which pays 3% on balances up to £1,000 (and just 0.01% above that). You can withdraw your money at any time, though you can only pay in up to £50 each month. Similarly, Nationwide and TSB have regular savings accounts for current account customers paying 2%. Yorkshire building society last week launched a regular savings account with a lower rate than that – 1% – but boasting an extra perk: the chance to win £1,500 cash prize each month. There will be 11 prize draws, at the start of the month, between March and January 2023, with the account maturing in a year. This easy-access account, called make me a saver, allows customers to pay in up to £150 a month. One big-name provider that was fairly quick to respond to the rate rise was National Savings &amp; Investments (NS&amp;I), which increased rates on three accounts on 29 December. Its direct Isa, direct saver and income bonds now all pay 0.35%. The Isa previously paid just 0.1%, while the other two offered 0.15%. These are far from table-topping – but it is possible that NS&amp;I may soon have to increase them again to get more people through the doors. That is because it has an official target to raise about £6bn in 2021-22. In October, halfway through the current financial year, it revealed it had so far only raised £0.6bn.Past the animal cemetery, the grave of Margaret Greville, the rose garden and the vegetable garden is where I sit. On the sofa. In a cottage, in the grounds of Polesden Lacey in southern England’s Surrey (for all you global readers). PL was Mrs Greville’s weekend house, for parties – imagine! It is enormous, with a gold saloon that was made for gossiping about others in corners. At Christmas it is the most festive – almost aggressively so – of any stately home I’ve seen. Anyway, I am kneeling on the sofa, looking out into the garden, watching the visitors and feeling very smug that I am indoors on such a drizzle of a day, with the promise of a jigsaw. And a chocolate bar so exquisite I am going to dedicate this whole column to it: Continuum Conceits Ile de Ré salted caramel sauce in 42% milk chocolate, chucked into my bag as an after thought. A small bar, just 45g but with chunky pieces. The chocolate is perfect: creamy but proper with a thick, thick underlay, and the salted caramel sauce, which I yawned at, is indeed, made with fresh cream and oozes delight. Isn’t this time of year all about self care? Alexandra, the one woman behind CC, told me it was a special she made every year, but no longer stocked it. Nonsense, Alexandra, I said, channelling Mrs Greville, my readers must have it. So she has agreed to make a small batch of it, just for you, at £3.80 each and then they will be gone again until November. frenchchocolates.co.uk Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaBMost creatives yearn to build their own home, experimenting with materials, styles and ideals. Type “self build” into Google and up will pop homes ranging from the singular to the outlandish. Triangular houses squeezed into tight urban spots, round houses perched on stilts like landlocked moons – the vacant plot is your blank canvas. Garvan de Bruir’s home in Kildare, Ireland, is a case in point. A designer-craftsman best known for his leather bags and accessories, de Bruir drew on the history of aviation to build his unusual, timber-framed dwelling. “The technical term is a monocoque, which refers to the cocooning shape of an aircraft’s fuselage. It’s thin, but by virtue of its curved profile – like a shell – it’s also very strong.” It is also eco-friendly. “You use the minimum amount of materials for maximum effect.” The result is hard to miss. The Aviator Haus is a gleaming, hoop-shaped structure rising from flat green fields, where a low stone wall is all that remains of a former abbey. Previously a scrap yard, the site later became an industrial zone. “Because I built my workshop here I was allowed to add a home as well,” says de Bruir who built the two-bedroom, prefabricated structure himself. Its pre-insulated components were digitally cut and assembled in sections, as neatly as Lego, over the course of a few weeks. The ideas behind his home grew out of his fascination with wood and its architectural potential. He studied furniture making at Buckinghamshire Chilterns University in High Wycombe, the former furniture making hub of the UK. “During the Second World War, local factories also made parts for aircraft. A shortage of metal led to a return to timber. They used plywood, heavily engineered for strength. I began thinking about how I could apply those techniques to architecture.” His “melting pot of ideas” home was executed on a tight “self-builders’ budget. It was about materials and economy.” The curving outer shell is covered in a powder-coated corrugated iron, riveted like a fuselage. “It is what they use for local farm buildings, but unfortunately the planners wouldn’t allow me to use the classic agricultural red oxide colour.” For the exterior, he used cedar cladding with inexpensive PVC framed windows. Measuring a lean 5m wide by 10m long, there is an open-plan living area downstairs with two bedrooms and a bathroom upstairs, where light spills in through windows at either end. “It’s your classic terrace house,” smiles de Bruir, industrious in his leather apron. Of course, it is not really. “In a traditional house the ceiling corners of the top floor rooms are dead space. By eliminating them you cut down on the energy needed to heat the space,” he explains. “A typical house requires thick walls to support a heavy roof; the curved profile does away with that, reducing the materials needed.” With its gently sloping walls and wood panelling, the interior feels as cosy as a woodland cabin mixed with the economical elegance of a ship’s cabin. “The different woods add texture and warmth,” he says, pointing out the floors, made from a budget-engineered wood (OSB) produced in Waterford. The staircase which twirls gracefully upstairs is made from offcuts. The walls are clad in plywood also used to make the kitchen with its ingeniously curved doors and shelves full of cheerful pottery. There is leather in unusual details, like the handles or hinges, inspired by vintage luggage design. “Leather as a building material has been overtaken by plastic or metal. But its strength and flexibility makes it so versatile.” Other experiments include the leather tables and chairs perching on animated, curving legs. He uses whole sections of leather for his designs, unlike mass-produced pieces, which are generally made from smaller cuts stitched together. “Wrapping a bag in one piece of leather makes it much more durable. Fewer joins mean it’s structurally far stronger,” he says.“Typically there would be four panels of leather stitched together to create the bucket shape. However my design is moulded as a single piece. It’s a medieval process called ‘cuir bouilli’ which craftsmen used to make armour by boiling and moulding leather to the shape of a torso.” De Bruir built his “singleform” house as a prototype. Ideally he would like to roll it out commercially as home or studio solutions. “I am still working out the costs, but it would be very economical.” The interior’s snugness and tactility, he says, have also made it a delight to live in. The modular structure will make it easy to produce different versions with more windows, rooms and a deeper footprint. Picture a row of his Aviator Hauses set in their own green plots, glinting softly against blue skies. It could be fun – and different. aviatorhaus.com; debruir.comNHS trust leaders are divided about whether the government should press ahead with mandatory jabs for healthcare workers in England after the prime minister told MPs he was considering relaxing the policy. About 80,000 frontline NHS workers have still not had a Covid vaccination and have less than two weeks to have their first dose in time to be able to complete the course before the 1 April deadline. Trusts have been told to begin either dismissing or redeploying unvaccinated staff after 3 February, but there are more than 90,000 vacancies and thousands more absences for Covid-related reasons. On Friday, Boris Johnson told backbench Conservative MPs he was looking again at the policy. Danny Mortimer, deputy chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said: “NHS leaders have always been clear there are risks as well as benefits to mandating the Covid-19 vaccination for all health and social care staff.” He said trusts had told the confederation they “would have preferred longer to implement the policy”. “As the deadline approaches some frontline staff will have to leave their present roles if they continue to decline to be vaccinated. This will reduce frontline NHS staff numbers even further and lead to more gaps in capacity at a time of intense pressure and patient demand,” he said. Saffron Cordery, the deputy chief executive of NHS Providers, said: “Trust leaders are worried about exacerbating staff shortages at a time when the service is under huge operational pressure. At the time it was proposed, our survey found that 90% of trust leaders – regardless of whether they support mandatory vaccinations or not – were concerned about the potential for additional staff gaps in both the NHS and social care. “Some organisations are calling for a delay in this policy, but we don’t think that is the answer. Our survey of trust leaders found a majority backed this policy as a means of protecting colleagues, patients and visitors from cross-infection by unvaccinated staff.” Martin Marshall, chair of the Royal College of GPs, said: “Our view is that mandation of vaccination for health professionals is not the right way forward. Informed choice is much better than forcing people to get it because that just risks generating mistrust.” It was reported last night that an option being considered by Downing Street is to delay the requirement for six months to help quell a revolt among Tory MPs. The compulsory requirement is likely to be “kicked down the road” amid demands by Tory backbenchers for it to be dropped entirely, the Sunday Telegraph reported. Vaccinations were made mandatory for social care staff, which has an even greater shortage of workers than the NHS, but those who are not vaccinated can apply for an exemption on medical or religious grounds, and are able to self-certificate until 31 March. Even so, the number of staff employed directly by care homes has fallen by more than 20,000 since the regulations were introduced in July 2021. Research by the Department of Health and Social Care in December found that 81.9% of social care providers found it more challenging to recruit staff than six months earlier, and 70.3% said it was harder to retain staff. The second most common reason given for workers leaving care homes was that they did not want to be vaccinated. Dr Nikki Kanani, the deputy lead for NHS England’s Covid vaccination programme, said that teams had been going to great lengths to deliver vaccinations, even giving one person with learning needs a jab while they sat in a hot tub at home. “Mandatory vaccination is a government policy but as healthcare professionals we all have a duty to make sure that we are protected, to make sure that our colleagues and our patients are protected,” she said. “I know that our teams will be doing everything they can to continue to have vaccine confidence building conversations and offering that all important vaccination to staff who are yet to have their first, second or their booster dose.” The Department of Health and Social Care said: “Ensuring staff are vaccinated is the right thing to do to protect patients and those in care. The vast majority of NHS staff have had the vaccine, which is our best defence against Covid-19.”Formed from the ashes of previous cult bands, Leeds-based Yard Act are 2022’s anointed guitar act and deservedly so. Northern, observational, shoo-ins for indie disco playlists, it’s tempting to compare them to local heroes Kaiser Chiefs. In truth, The Overload – Yard Act’s debut – better resembles classics such as Blur’s Modern Life Is Rubbish, but as sung by the Fall’s Mark E Smith or Mike Skinner: a takedown of where, who and how we are now, full of declamatory ire and fed-up humour. Money and lack thereof are themes on The Overload, as are nuanced character studies of “tall poppies” and crooks, people who sue the council and those trying to get by without hypocrisy. Yard Act’s core tunefulness and the easy “ba-ba-ba”s on songs such as Land of the Blind go hand-in-hand with unexpected musical feints throughout, with sound effects, ad libs and unexpected guitar counter-melodies keeping listening ears on their toes. The decade this outfit have spent in other bands pays off in a record that’s raucous and fun, incisive and – as it winds to a close – profoundly heartfelt, as vocalist James Smith apologises disgustedly for the sins of British foreign policy.Almost 50 years ago, in the early hours of 2 February 1972, the British embassy in Dublin was gutted by fire. This was not an accident. A huge crowd had gathered in protest outside the lovely Georgian terrace in Merrion Square all through the previous day. They cheered as young men climbed across the balconies and smashed a window. They threw in some petrol and lit it. A fusillade of petrol bombs was unleashed from the crowd. People chanted the slogan they had learned from the Watts riots in Los Angeles in 1965: burn, baby, burn. The police did nothing to stop the attack. I was 14 at the time, so I wasn’t there. But some of my older friends were and I wished I had been with them. The assault was organised by the IRA, but most ordinary, peaceful Irish people approved of it. It seemed like the right thing to do, a reasonable response to the massacre the previous weekend in Derry of 13 unarmed civilians by the first battalion of the British army’s Parachute Regiment. A woman waiting for a bus in Dublin told the Irish Times: “I felt outraged that the British should do this and I felt that whatever the rights and wrongs, they would know how we felt when we burned down their embassy.” The outrage was not just the atrocity in Derry itself. It was also the way the British lied about it, falsely claiming that the paratroopers had come under fire and were protecting themselves against terrorists. The official Widgery inquiry, which essentially repeated this lie, made it clear the British state had no interest in acknowledging what had happened, let alone punishing anyone for what the Derry coroner, Major Hubert O’Neill, called “sheer unadulterated murder”. Against such imperviousness, burning down the embassy did indeed seem like the only way to let the British establishment know how most Irish people felt. Thus, 50 years after the foundation of the Irish Free State, relations between Britain and independent Ireland were about as bad as they could be. There had been other low points, particularly during the Second World War, when Ireland’s neutrality seemed, to many in Britain, a scandalous betrayal. But relations after Bloody Sunday seemed even worse because the slaughter was one episode – albeit an especially disastrous one – in a conflict in Northern Ireland that was still escalating. (1972 would indeed turn out to be the bloodiest year of the Troubles.) It felt in those months almost as if the two states on these islands were sliding uncontrollably into mutual and violent hostility. Yet, just eight days before Bloody Sunday, something completely different had happened. The British prime minister, Edward Heath, and the taoiseach, Jack Lynch, had been together in a ceremonial hall in Brussels to each sign his country’s treaties of accession to the European Economic Community. There are pictures of the two men standing shoulder to shoulder, both beaming with bonhomie. Less than a year after the burning of the embassy in Dublin, the two countries would be close partners in the European project. It is fair to say, moreover, that Ireland owed its place in what was then an exclusive club to its deep economic connection to Britain. On its own, Ireland was too poor to justify a seat at the top table of Europe. It was admitted essentially on Britain’s coat-tails. It is strange, in retrospect, how these two stories ran side by side – one of profound and deeply rooted animosity, the other of intense cooperation; one full of fracturing and division, the other a joint commitment to “ever closer union” in Europe. As it happened, membership of the EU allowed Ireland to wean itself off its dependency on the British economy and to achieve a much more substantial independence. (One of the many things Brexiters could never understand is this notion that the supposedly oppressive EU could be, for small nations, a route out of domination by bigger neighbours.) But it also became a school in which Irish and British governments learned to work very closely, and respectfully, together. That experience, in turn, made possible the joint choreography of the 1990s, the carefully calibrated steps that produced the peace agreement of 1998. By 2011, when the Queen became the first British monarch in a century to visit southern Ireland, it really felt like this good neighbourliness had become a permanent condition, that British arrogance and Irish rage were exhibits in a museum of historical curiosities. That illusion of permanence was shattered by Brexit, not just by the loss of the common ground of EU membership but also by the refusal to think at all about the consequences for the island of Ireland. Many of the Brexiters still see those consequences not as the inevitable results of their own choices, but as some kind of Irish conspiracy to thwart them. There is a corner of their minds in which Brexit would have been a rip-roaring triumph by now if the damned Irish hadn’t spoiled it with their backstops and protocols. The open attempts of the Johnson administration to tear up the agreements on the Irish dimension of Brexit have revived that old spectre, Perfidious Albion. And yet we should remember 1972. Even at that awful nadir, the stakes were far too high for Britain and Ireland to allow their relationship to deteriorate into toxicity. Two little things forced them together: history and geography. The two big islands on our archipelago can no more escape each other’s fates than Britain can float off into the Atlantic away from Europe. Maybe there are even ways in which we understand each other better. Some slow learners in Britain have discovered, after a mere century, that Ireland is an independent country with its own national interests and relationships with Europe. Irish people have discovered that they have no monopoly in these islands on identity crises and binary tribalisms. It is new for Ireland to feel like the more stable and self-confident of the states on the archipelago and new for Britain to be dealing with the fractious aftermath of a nationalist revolution. It may take some time for all of us to get used to these novelties. But in much worse circumstances, we have found ways to face new realities together. • Fintan O’Toole’s most recent book is We Don’t Know Ourselves: A Personal History of Ireland Since 1958Shocking new details have emerged of Britain’s role in one of the most brutal massacres of the postwar 20th century. Last year the Observer revealed how British officials secretly deployed black propaganda in the 1960s to incite prominent Indonesians to “cut out” the “communist cancer”. It is estimated that at least 500,000 people linked to the Indonesia communist party (PKI) were eliminated between 1965 and 1966. Documents newly released in the National Archives show how propaganda specialists from the Foreign Office sent hundreds of inflammatory pamphlets to leading anti-communists in Indonesia, inciting them to kill the foreign minister Dr Subandrio and claiming that ethnic Chinese Indonesians deserved the violence meted out to them. The British wanted the Indonesian army and militias to overthrow elected president Sukarno’s government. He and Subandrio were considered to be too close to the PKI and communist China, and Britain wanted to end Confrontation, the low-level military and political campaign launched by Sukarno and Subandrio against the Malaysian Federation. The newly discovered pamphlets, dating from the mid-1960s, targeted the leftwing foreign minister, repeatedly challenging the anti-communists to kill Subandrio, describing him as Sukarno’s pet “cockerel”. The propagandists reserved special venom for Subandrio. “The Army has only pulled out a few of the cockerel’s many feathers, they haven’t even clipped its wings,” the pamphlets complained. The bird needed its “neck wrung; and the whole of Indonesia will rejoice”. Hundreds of pamphlets were also sent to Muslim anti-communists, claiming agents of communist China would take over Indonesia. Following an abortive coup in which six generals were kidnapped and murdered, which the army blamed on the communists, “it was inevitable” that “many innocent Chinese would suffer in consequence”, one covert British pamphlet claimed. “We may deplore the unbridled fury” unleashed on Indonesia’s Chinese, but “we realise that for the most part they only have themselves to blame”. The British also wrote the script for a ghoulish radio broadcast, purportedly from the dead generals whose bodies had been dumped in a well. “Worms may feed upon our rotting flesh,” cried the dead generals “but our voices have become the voices of the Nation’s conscience.” “Oh Subandrio!” they shrieked, “Do you not think that a hangman’s rope is too easy a way out for such a man as you?” Immediately after the coup attempt, General Suharto took control of the Indonesian army and oversaw the massacres of the anti-communist purge. Over the next months, the rightwing, pro-west Suharto usurped the ailing Sukarno. He was appointed acting president in 1967 and then president the following year. His dictatorship lasted for 32 years. Lenah Susianty, whose father was arrested and detained in the crackdown said: “The whole Chinese community in Sukabumi bore the brunt for a long time.” Susianty, who is now on the board of the Indonesian human rights organisation Tapol, added: “They were afraid to say anything and had to silently bear extortion, harassment and other ill-treatment from others in the society. They were an easy target because they were considered as ‘communists’.” Soe Tjen Marching’s father was also tortured and imprisoned for two-and-a-half years because the military suspected him of being a member of the PKI. Now a lecturer at Soas University of London, she says that the targeting of the Chinese community in 1965 had “a huge part in sustaining suspicion as well as discrimination between Chinese and non-Chinese in Indonesia. It is therefore urgent for the British government to apologise”. In October the Observer revealed the first hard evidence that British officials secretly deployed black propaganda in the 1960s. The material purported to come from exiled nationalist Indonesians. In fact it was written by Foreign Office psychological warfare experts working from a comfortable chalet in Singapore in cooperation with MI6. For five decades the Foreign Office has denied any involvement in the murders. As the massacres started in October 1965, British pamphlets called for “the PKI and all communist organisations” to “be eliminated”. The nation, they warned, would be in danger “as long as the communist leaders are at large, and their rank and file are allowed to go unpunished”. At least 500,000 people were massacred, and some estimates go as high as three million. These included ethnic Chinese, many who were killed by Muslim and other militias. Steve Alston of Tapol yesterday said his organisation was “appalled that the British government engaged in a disinformation campaign to incite violence”. “In the face of such evidence, the British government must now commit to launching an inquiry by independent counsel to be completed within 18 months.”It started with the Incredible Hulk, we think. Our son hasn’t been exposed to much superhero stuff beyond the odd Avengers backpack or Justice League sticker book he’s received from pals or family. Shorn of context, they must have seemed inscrutable. Their brightly coloured forms may as well have been the cast of Hollyoaks, or the Guildford Four. But now he’s seen the Hulk in action, in an all-banging, all-clanging, all-Hulk-Smashing cartoon to which he has swiftly become devoted. Not so much that he can pronounce the character’s name correctly, incidentally, so when he smashes the little Hulk toy he’s purloined from a pal, he refers to him as HUG!, a cutesy touch that offsets the damage he is doing to our home and bodies as he slams it against them shouting ‘HUG! HUG! HUG!’ Of course, we can’t blame it all on the Incredible Hug. We were told to watch out for signs of acting out once we told our son about the new baby on the way, and it would appear the cheque has finally arrived. He refuses my attempts to lead him into nursery as if I’m shoving him into one of those machines that turns cars into little cubes. At pickup, with a reciprocity never less than charming, he pivots in the opposite direction; refusing to leave as it is now where he wants to stay forever. When he first started doing this, I joked to staff that he could stay overnight and they laughed that small, polite laugh parents are legally mandated to receive on such occasions. A laugh that says ‘that is the worst joke I have ever heard in my life’. A laugh that might dissuade, for example, a professional humorist from ever drawing another breath. I think if I say it one more time they’ll call the police, and they’d be right to. Back home, he grumps around like a tin-pot dictator, strutting with his arms down in the manner of a tiny hard man. He struts, often with his top off, grimacing like a Victorian bodybuilder and, in case anyone might be confused by this macho pantomime, says handily scrutable things like ‘Hug very angry’. And then there’s the thieving. A few days ago, he grabbed an entire slab of chocolate that had been, we thought, nicely concealed by my wife’s side of the sofa. Dismayed, she shouted ‘No!’ and in the grip of panic I rushed to stop him as if his life was in danger. Jolted by my enthusiasm, she immediately consoled me that her annoyance was caused by the chocolate being her chocolate, and not due to any risk of poisoning to him. I allowed a small trickle of relief to penetrate my mortification at having momentarily mistaken our son for a dog. He vents, we deal. He shrieks, we listen. We continue to tell him that we know this is all a lot to take in, but the changes to come won’t change how much we love him. Inevitably, he runs out of steam and comes round to our way of thinking, drops his gamma-irradiated fists and comes to our side of the couch, now denuded of dog poison. Tired and confused, he offers me a conciliatory, if slightly angry, embrace. It’s a strange cuddle, perhaps, but an Incredible Hug. Did Ye Hear Mammy Died? by Séamas O’Reilly is out now (Little, Brown, £16.99). Buy a copy from guardianbookshop at £14.78 Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeatsRossy de Palma was working as a waitress in a rockabilly bar when she met Pedro Almodóvar, prince of the underground film scene in 1980s Madrid. Four decades on, she remains one of the director’s regular collaborators – a vivid, volatile figure in films such as Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown and The Flower of My Secret. She’s also acted for Robert Altman and Terry Gilliam, modelled for Alexander McQueen and Jean Paul Gaultier, and released her own line of cosmetic products. Almodóvar’s latest film, Parallel Mothers, is a tale of fraught maternal mix-ups and buried secrets from the Spanish civil war. De Palma, 57, plays the confidante of Penélope Cruz’s troubled heroine. Hi Rossy, where are you? I thought you lived in Madrid. No, I’m at a wellness clinic, near Alicante. Macrobiotic food. Watsu massages. And look, I’ll show you the Mediterranean – you can see it from the balcony. It is a very good place. Parallel Mothers is your eighth film with Almodóvar. How has the experience changed since you made Law of Desire way back in 1987? Honestly, it’s almost the same. We work well together, so there’s no need for many retakes. We have a dialogue. We understand each other. He knows I’m going to be perfect for the role – and that I’m going to play it perfectly. Almodóvar must be different, though. He says he’s become a recluse and mainly focuses on work. Well, I think with age we become more of a concentrated essence of who we really are. But he’s not a recluse. He has his cats. And yes, he’s very focused on his work, but then he always was. The way we work, it’s the same as 35 years ago. I’m always saying, “Can I do this? Can I say that?” – perhaps because I’m trying to have more lines but also because I’m an organic artist and I need to feel comfortable and make something that’s real. And Pedro is open to improvisation, so he’ll say, “Oh OK, go ahead.” He has everything under control but he always leaves space for things that happen accidentally – for a little bit of life to come in through the door. Parallel Mothers is a ghost story of sorts insofar as it’s about the historic trauma of the Spanish civil war. Does that make it Almodóvar’s most conventionally political film? It’s the most serious film that he’s done. It’s about the lies the government tells us, and the lies we tell each other, and whether we all ought to tell the truth or not. Without facing the truth, it’s impossible to grow and evolve. And if you close a wound too quickly it becomes infected. How much of a direct influence was the Francoist era on your own work? Wasn’t the whole Movida Madrileña [the underground arts scene of 1980s Madrid] a conscious reaction to Franco’s death [in 1975]? Amazing influence. But perhaps I didn’t know it at the time. I’m younger than Pedro. He lived through the Franco era. I was a little girl in Mallorca. When I arrived in Madrid at the age of 18, I had a pop music band called the Worst Possible – and I felt I had such freedom. We didn’t care about money or celebrity, we just wanted to express ourselves. There were painters, poets, musicians, film-makers, all mixed up together, like spaghetti letters in an alphabet soup. I wasn’t interested in the past. I was looking forward, not behind. But then you grow up and you realise how important it is to look back and re-examine and reopen the tombs. Do you still play your old Worst Possible records? Of course! We had a few famous songs. I have two kids – they are 22 and 23 – and they say, “How lucky you were to be young in the 80s!” Good music, good cinema. And good music never dies. Look at the fashion world – it keeps going back to the 80s and 90s, the era is everywhere. That gives me a new lease of life with young people today. You described yourself earlier as an “organic artist”. It means I like everything – poetry and music and fashion and painting. For me, art is an excuse to get away from reality. Because reality is hardcore. I don’t like it at all. So I escape reality whenever I can. Also, art is an open universe. You don’t have religion, or gender, or age. So that is my refuge, It’s where I feel protected, especially now with the pandemic and fucking business interests and the irresponsible politicians still fighting one another, like abusive parents. It’s funny. I think that the pandemic has made people more empathic, looking after each other in their own small circles, but global politics is still following the same old patterns, which is very upsetting. When the pandemic started, I thought it was a chance to reset. To put the system back to the beginning. To have a global humanist president. [Laughs.] I accept that this is a little bit naive. I’m growing older, but I’m still a little girl. So you haven’t changed a bit. I guess not that much. I always think that I’m changing, but then I realise that I’m still at the first step. Always the first step. It sounds so stupid, but after this I’ll go and walk by the sea and breathe the air and look at the sunset. And I’m always amazed when I see a sunset. It’s like it’s the first time that I’ve seen it. Parallel Mothers is in cinemas from FridayOzark (Netflix) Stacey Dooley: Stalkers (BBC One/Three) | iPlayer As We See It (Amazon Prime) Dancing on Ice (ITV) | ITV Hub If there is such a thing as a mild-mannered bloodbath, then Netflix’s Ozark, created by Bill Dubuque and Mark Williams, with Chris Mundy as showrunner, delivered it over the course of three series. Jason Bateman (also co-executive producer and co-director) plays Marty Byrde, the accountant who placates a Mexican drug cartel by transplanting his family – wife Wendy (Laura Linney) and children (Sofia Hublitz and Skylar Gaertner) – to the Lake of the Ozarks, central Missouri, to launder money in floating casinos and the like. By the close of series three – spoilers ahead! – Wendy’s unstable, inconvenient brother was dead and cartel-fixer Helen (Janet McTeer) had her brains shot out by drug lord Omar (Felix Solis), all over the Byrdes, whom he’d decided were more useful. This fourth and final series will be delivered in two parts, with the first seven episodes available now. It follows the Byrdes as they scrape bits of “Helen” out of their hair, then deal with the aftermath. Omar wants to live legitimately, but FBI deals don’t come easily. A PI is digging for dirt. Omar’s nephew, Javi (Alfonso Herrera), arrives as a trigger-happy playboy-gangster. Then there are the Ozark locals, including fiery hustler Ruth (Julia Garner), once Marty’s protege, now bereaved, betrayed and in league with heroin poppy grower Darlene (Lisa Emery), a hillbilly sociopath so petrifying and unpredictable, I find myself watching her scenes in full fight-or-flight mode. When Ozark first appeared – another middle-class family dragged into the underworld – it was dismissed by some as a mere Breaking Bad rehash. Give over. Ozark is its own beast: a chilling, slow-churning opera of frayed loyalties, burnt bridges and familial decay. Bateman saved himself from a career path of playing endless benign dads with the grimly urbane Marty. Linney’s Wendy has evolved into a scheming lakeside Lady Macbeth who has sold her soul so many times it’s virtually on eBay. Immersed in this slurry of ethical bin juice, it’s little surprise that their children coolly ponder their parents’ deaths as though discussing unreliable wifi. By the half-season finale, only Ruth – raging, broken, eyes blazing like hot coals – retains any semblance of moral core. Garner has already won two Emmys for this role; another should be on the way. In the week the government threatened the BBC, please remember that Channel 4 also remains endangered. How long before terrestrial British television is reduced to a series of test cards, with Boris Johnson, Rupert Murdoch and Nadine Dorries taking it in turns to be the little girl chalking on the blackboard? On BBC One and Three there was the two-part docuseries Stacey Dooley: Stalkers, directed by Alana McVerry. Far from being a rare celebrity phenomenon, one in five women are stalked and one in 10 men. Dooley embedded herself with Cheshire police’s specialist stalking unit, interviewing understandably distraught victims. Sabrina, a single mother, spends her life looking over her shoulder. Dancer Abby’s stalker hid in her shed and is revealed – conflictingly for her and Dooley – to be autistic. Katie’s stalker tried to claim that she was harassing him. His Google searches were found to include: “How do you get a black eye without pain?” In the second episode (both available to stream), Dooley examines the less prevalent stranger-stalking. Along the way she interviews (disguised) former offenders and considers ways to help stalkers: could psychotherapy be effective? Still, Dooley reserves her empathy and hugs for the victims, and rightly so. Stalking is shown to be a grotesque matrix of mind games, fixation, narcissism, entitlement, threats and worse. Half of convicted stalkers reoffend, and restraining orders make little difference. Such scrutiny is good, but with stalking victims stuck in what amounts to a hellish, hyper-vigilant Groundhog Day, what’s clearly needed is action. Amazon Prime’s new eight-part dramedy about autistic flatmates, As We See It, was created by Jason Katims (Parenthood), who himself has an autistic child. The main characters are played by people on the spectrum: Rick Glassman is Jack, a computer programmer who is abrupt and outspoken: “Harrison smells. It’s probably because he’s so fat.” Albert Rutecki plays Harrison, who’s scared of the outside world. Sue Ann Pien is Violet, who yearns to be in love and “normal”. Sosie Bacon (Mare of Easttown) is their aide, who’s offered a career opportunity but can’t bear to leave them. This is an intriguing, inventive project, based on an Israeli show, with a strong message. The first three episodes, directed by Jesse Peretz (Girls) and Jaffar Mahmood, have an offbeat tone but address real issues: Jack’s father (Joe Mantegna) dying of cancer (“I need to know you’re OK, Jack”); Violet’s brother, Van (Chris Pang), exploding with anxiety: “You’re not fucking normal!”. Glassman, Rutecki and Pien should be commended for giving such distinct portrayals of autistic personalities. As We See It isn’t merely instructive – it’s a genuinely engaging watch. Last, I thought I should take an in-depth look at the opening instalment of ITV’s Dancing on Ice, so that the world could be made aware of the atrocities being committed there. At first, all was calm and strangely beautiful. A dreamy opening sequence showed celebrity contestants staring up at the main judges, fabled Olympians Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean, skating in the heavens. Next came the presenters: Holly Willoughby, doing her gorgeous but accessible thing (the Asos Marilyn Monroe), and Phillip Schofield, sporting a suit made from carpet underlay. Celebrity skaters included former Pussycat Doll Kimberly Wyatt (good) and Sally Dynevor from Coronation Street (nervous). Bez from Happy Mondays (hopeless) was lowered on to the ice atop a gigantic pair of maracas; now there’s a man who knows how to give the public what they want. DOI isn’t Strictly Come Dancing, even though two people from it are involved: past and present professional dancers Brendan Cole, as a contestant, and Oti Mabuse, as a judge. The ambience is 1970s Butlin’s if the weather turned chilly. It doesn’t even have an orchestra; it sounds as though a radio has been left on in a giant fridge-freezer. But what DOI does have is glorious unstuffiness and real lurking danger. Good luck, ice-bound celebrities, you’ll need it. What else I’m watching Why Ships Crash (BBC Two) A documentary about the running aground last year of the Ever Given cargo vessel in the Suez Canal. There’s no mystery as to how it got stuck (it’s as long as the Empire State Building), but how could it affect so many global supply chains? Dolly Parton: Here I Am (BBC Two) This 2019 documentary, previously aired on Netflix, is included in a night of programmes paying homage to the Nashville goddess, LGBTQ advocate and so much more. Interviewees include 9 to 5 co-stars Lily Tomlin and Jane Fonda. Keeping Up With the Aristocrats (ITV) This three-part docuseries explores hard-up British aristocratic families so cash-strapped they’re considering supper clubs with Jean-Christophe Novelli and starting up vineyards. Do you end up feeling sorry for them? No, you don’t.Governing complex economies and societies by consent is hard. Much easier to impose decisions and restrict any capacity by the governed to complain, challenge and protest. The Chinese Communist party’s brutal repression in Hong Kong is driven by that impulse, as is the Singapore government’s recent intensification of its crackdown against dissent. The US Republican party’s approach may be less directly repressive but serves the same end – to gerrymander the voting system to ensure a government that brooks no opposition. Democracy is in retreat worldwide. Democracies seem weak, unable to get things done, and are captured by big money. A basic precondition for democracy – respect for different opinions – is vanishing in fractious times; adversaries are seen not as part of the same polity but rather abhorrent “others” to be quashed. Next to such “strong men” as Vladimir Putin and Xi Jinping, democratic leaders can seem insipid. Yet for all the democracies’ weaknesses they remain the best protector of liberties and the rule of law – and have two understated strengths. They solve the issue of succession: who is to follow Putin and Xi, and how damaging will be the brutal struggle for power as it becomes obvious their capacities are failing? Equally, deliberation, discussion, dissent and protest within democracies may be time-consuming and sometimes irritating – but no one and no party is right all the time. Ensuring an argument is strong enough to withstand challenge or public demonstrations is vital to ensure that, as far as possible, our leaders get the big decisions right. When a million citizens are aroused to give up their time to march – as they were, say, against the Iraq war or for a second referendum on Brexit – it is a storm warning that the policy in question has serious, perhaps fatal, flaws. The wise democratic government takes note. Freedom of expression and freedom to protest publicly and peacefully are not just pivotal liberties in their own right but essential building blocks of trust and good government. Time was when an article expressing views like this would have seemed unremarkable – and plainly directed at political systems other than ours. But they are alien to Priti Patel, the home secretary, and the bulk of the cabinet and party of which she is a member. Her police and crime bill, which lost an incredible 14 divisions against successive provisions in the House of Lords last week, is a cleavage from the British democratic tradition, and an embrace of the new authoritarianism. She and her fellow cabinet ministers hold to a thin definition of democracy. Once a political party has won a majority in the House of Commons in a first-past-the-post voting system backed by a flagrantly partisan press, it should be free to do whatever it likes – override judges’ sentences or defund the BBC. Division of powers? Respect for peaceful protest? An independent judiciary? Building cross-party consensus? Winning arguments? Being held to account? Forget it. In particular, the governing party should be free to shred the way legitimate protest is currently framed by the 1986 Public Order Act – which makes public demonstration hard enough, even if it is just within the terms of the Human Rights Act. The proposed bill, as it went to the Lords, would have criminalised protest, with protesters suffering prison or sky-high fines for not observing prohibitive new rules, about which they could not pretend they did not know if tried in court. The police and home secretary would become the arbiters of whether a protest or assembly is allowable, when it can start and finish, and they could outlaw it if it is too noisy. The police would be empowered to issue “serious disruption prevention orders” at will, arrest individuals without any cause except that they look suspicious, and imprison, for up to 51 weeks, those who “lock on” to railings. Protest in Parliament Square was to be off limits. Patel belongs in today’s Hong Kong, Beijing or Singapore – not Britain, a former beacon of democracy. Beyond a desperation to paint Labour as being against tough law and order measures and an anxiety to show that Brexit Britain, free from obligations as an EU member state to conform with basic democratic standards, can reconceptualise itself as an Asian police state if it chooses, she and the prime minister hope to catch a popular mood. For, as opinion has become more polarised so protest has become more aggressive and imaginatively disruptive. Law-abiding citizens object to strategic roads being closed or protesters “locking on” to railings or whatever to inconvenience passersby. They may support the right to peaceful protest, but with proportionate rather than extreme disruption. Something, maybe not as draconian as proposed by Patel, surely needs to be done to set limits. Except it doesn’t. Mrs Thatcher’s Public Order Act already makes peaceful protest harder than in almost every other democracy, according the police and government exceptional powers. The flurry of additions to this police and crime bill over Christmas (extraordinary, after it had left the Commons) were explicitly aimed at environment protesters, as Patel acknowledges. It was “red meat” to appease the growing trend towards climate change scepticism on the Tory right, her natural constituency. It was wrong at every level: in principle, constitutionally and in practice – but it pleased an element in her party and her press. In fact, the Lords did not strike out the provision that strategic roads should be protest free. The bill going back to the Commons thus permits the widening of the scope of the Public Order Act but removes most of Patel’s most egregious proposals, so that police and executive discretion to outlaw protest remain within limits. Human rights are protected. Will Patel and Boris Johnson accept the revised bill? Given the state of the Tory party, both will see advantage in facing down the “unelected” Lords and casting themselves as the “protectors” of public order – a cynical ploy that debases them. That so much parliamentary time and effort should be consecrated to what, essentially, are third-order problems speaks volumes about the government’s priorities and lack of strategic direction – and its insouciant approach to longstanding democratic rights. The Tory party under Johnson is going rogue before our eyes; it is the new enemy within. Will Hutton is an Observer columnistIn 1938, a brilliant young Black scholar at Oxford University wrote a thesis on the economic history of British empire and challenged a claim about slavery that had been defining Britain’s role in the world for more than a century. But when Eric Williams – who would later become the first prime minister of Trinidad and Tobago – sought to publish his “mind-blowing” thesis on capitalism and slavery in Britain, he was shunned by publishers and accused of undermining the humanitarian motivation for Britain’s Slavery Abolition Act. It was not until 1964 that the work found a publisher in the UK, but it has been out of print here for decades. Now, 84 years after his work was rejected in the UK, and 78 years after it was first published in America, where it became a highly influential anti-colonial text, a new edition of Williams’s book, Capitalism and Slavery, is to be published in Britain. Fans of the book include the rapper and author Akala, the novelist Monique Roffey, the poet Michael Rosen and Sathnam Sanghera, author of Empireland. He welcomed the news that 40 years after Williams’s death, British people are “finally waking up” to the significance of his work: “I think it’s amazing he hasn’t been published until now, because you can’t really make sense of Britain’s involvement in transatlantic slavery without reading his book,” Sanghera said. “You cannot begin to talk about slavery without talking about it. It’s so important.” Slavery, Williams argues, was abolished in much of the British empire in 1833 because doing so at that time was in Britain’s economic self-interest – not because the British suddenly discovered a conscience. “The capitalists had first encouraged West Indian slavery and then helped to destroy it,” he writes. In the early 19th century, slave-owning sugar planters in the Caribbean British colonies enjoyed a monopoly on the supply of sugar to Britain, because of an imperial tax policy of protectionism. Williams argues: “When British capitalism depended on [sugar and cotton plantations in] the West Indies, they [the capitalists] ignored slavery or defended it. When British capitalism found the West Indian monopoly [on sugar] a nuisance, they destroyed West Indian slavery as the first step in the destruction of West Indian monopoly.” In great detail, he lays out the scale of the wealth and industry that was created in Britain, not just from the slave plantations and in the sugar refineries and cotton mills, but by building and insuring slave ships, manufacturing goods transported to the colonies – including guns, manacles, chains and padlocks – and then banking and reinvesting the profits. It was all this wealth created by slavery in the 17th and 18th centuries that powered the Industrial Revolution in the 19th century, Williams argued. And it was this economic change that meant the preferential sugar duties – which artificially pushed up the price of sugar in the UK, a deliberate policy that had once so suited the many wealthy British families involved in the slave trade – came to be seen by 19th-century industrialists as an “unpopular” barrier to free trade, low factory wages and global domination. The book, to be published by Penguin Modern Classics on 24 February, also traces the emergence of the slave trade in the 16th century when the demand for labour exceeded the number of white convicts and poor, white, indentured servants willing to work the land cheaply. “A racial twist has been given to what is basically an economic phenomenon. Slavery was not born of racism: rather, racism was the consequence of slavery,” he writes. Williams submitted his manuscript to the most “revolutionary” publisher he could find in 1930s Britain, Fredric Warburg, who had published Hitler’s Mein Kampf in 1925 and would later go on to publish George Orwell’s Animal Farm and Nineteen Eighty-Four. It was rejected out of hand. Any suggestion that the slave trade and slavery were abolished for economic and not humanitarian reasons ran “contrary to the British tradition”, Warburg told him, adding: “I would never publish such a book.” Even in modern Britain, Sanghera said, this attitude persists: “Williams said: ‘The British historians wrote almost as if Britain had introduced Negro slavery solely for the satisfaction of abolishing it.’ And that is the truest thing ever said about Britain’s attitude to slavery. We almost act as if we weren’t involved in it. We focus on the fact that we abolished it, we don’t like to talk about what Williams talks about in the book: that we made a load of money out of it, that it was – more than anything else – an economic exercise. It made so many people in Britain so rich, and that wealth still exists today.” Sanghera adds: “It’s a totally essential book. I was 42 when I first read it and it blew my mind.” One reason the book still has the power to shock is because, to this day, British historians still do not take the arguments in Williams’s book seriously, according to Kehinde Andrews, professor of Black studies at Birmingham City University and author of The New Age of Empire. “The orthodoxy of the history of the Industrial Revolution is that slavery wasn’t important. If you go to most universities, most academics will say that and they’ll dismiss the book – because they just cannot accept that the Industrial Revolution could not have happened without slavery. It’s that simple. You cannot have one without the other, which this book made the case for in 1938. And it’s still being ignored.” Capitalism and Slavery continued to be spurned by British publishers until 1964, when the Hungarian-born André Deutsch, who fled to the UK to escape the Nazis, agreed to print it. Over the course of his publishing career, Deutsch, who would later be called “possibly the most difficult man in London”, also published authors as varied as Wole Soyinka, VS Naipaul, John Updike, Philip Roth and Margaret Atwood. However, the text – which is still in print in America and has been translated into nine different languages and published all over the world – has been inaccessible and out of print in this country for years. “It’s good that the book’s being published by a major publisher, but it’s kind of an indictment that it’s taken more than 80 years,” said Andrews. “I hope people read it and it’s nice it’s available. But I think it will probably just get ignored in Britain, the way it has been, largely, in the past.” • This article was amended on 24 January 2022 because an earlier version incorrectly said Capitalism and Slavery was first published in the UK “in 1966 when a small university press gave it a very limited print run”. It was published in 1964 and then reprinted a number of times; and the André Deutsch publishing house was not a university press. The headline was also revised to reflect that the work was published previously in Britain.Britain’s lottery operator should be banned from using the national lottery brand and logo to promote online instant-win games that may lead to problem gambling, according to the chair of a group of MPs examining gambling harms. Carolyn Harris, the Labour MP and chair of the all party parliamentary group for gambling-related harm, said the online games now offered by the lottery operator, Camelot, were similar to harmful betting products promoted by the gambling industry. They also give a smaller proportion of revenues to good causes compared with the draw-based games. She said: “The national lottery is now unrecognisable from when it was launched. It is not acceptable that they are using what people trust as a brand for good causes to encourage people to gamble. It’s appalling.” Harris said she would like to see a ban on the national lottery trademarks being linked with online instant-win games such as Cash Tripler and Jewel Smash, which can offer wins of up to £1m. Campaigners calling for more curbs on the industry say these games are more likely to be associated with problem gambling. The national lottery brand is well known around the country and the trademarks are owned by the regulator, the Gambling Commission. The brand, which includes the crossed-fingers logo, is licensed to Camelot. MPs have called for a review of the lottery, and a debate on its future, as rival companies bid for a new licence. The former boss of Sainsbury’s, Justin King, is advising Czech group Allwyn, one of the bidders. He has said the lottery needs to be revitalised and that there has been a decline in the number of players since it was launched. He said last year: “We need more players playing more often, and through greater sales we will be able to deliver more for the great causes.” Camelot said 37 million adults played the lottery last year and any suggestion that it was raising more money from a smaller number of players was “completely wrong”. The firm said it was internationally recognised for encouraging many people to play but only to spend small amounts. It says its products are very different from those offered by the mainstream gambling sector and the risks associated with them are very low. The MPs are concerned that lottery operations are “shrouded in secrecy” and want more public information on the number of participants for each year and the amounts lost each year by the highest-spending players. Lord Foster of Bath, who is a member of the group and chair of Peers for Gambling Reform, said ministers needed to examine whether any new restrictions for betting firms should also apply to the lottery instant-win games. Ministers are due to publish a white paper shortly which will set out their vision on gambling regulation. Foster said: “One of the big drivers towards problem gambling is repetitive play because you can chase your losses instantly, whether it’s on a fruit machine or online instant wins.” The other bidders for the lottery licence are the Italian operator Sisal, which is being taken over by the gambling giant Flutter, and media tycoon Richard Desmond, who owns the Health Lottery. The bid is being conducted in strict secrecy and a decision is expected in the next two months.A surrealist masterpiece believed destroyed when a fascist mob raided an arthouse cinema in 1930s Paris has made a triumphant return. The thugs vandalised the theatre, which was showing a subversive, anticlerical film by Salvador Dalí and Luis Buñuel and displaying avant-garde paintings, and took knives to artworks, including a futuristic landscape by Yves Tanguy, which was photographed with gaping scars and slashes in the aftermath of the attack. The painting, Fraud in the Garden, painted in 1930, was thought to have been lost or destroyed. Now it is back, its wounds healed by a restorer’s surgery. Its rediscovery has been confirmed by Professor Jennifer Mass, an American conservation scientist, who told the Observer that the painting had been presumed “lost to history”. She said: “We were able to do different types of imaging and analysis and demonstrate that it was the original work that had been put back together again.” On 3 December 1930, two right-wing extremist groups, the League of Patriots and the Anti-Semitic League, raided the newly renovated Studio 28 in Montmartre. They were protesting at “the immorality of this Bolshevist spectacle”; L’Âge d’Or (The Age of Gold) was a savage cinematice attack on the Catholic church and sexual hypocrisy, whose controversial scenes include a sequence based on the Marquis de Sade’s 120 Days of Sodom in which the chief sadist appears to be Jesus. The fascists attacked the Tanguy, along with other works by Dalí, Man Ray and Joan Miró displayed in the lobby. They smashed furniture and windows, tore up books, threw ink at the screen and ignited smoke bombs. They shouted: “We’ll show you that there are still Christians in France!” and “Death to Jews!” In the following days, pressure from rightwing newspapers led to the film being banned. Dalí’s painting, Invisible Sleeping Woman, Horse, Lion, survived the attack, having been slashed, and is in the Pompidou in Paris. Mass said: “Now we know that this Tanguy also survived. Many of the surrealist painters of the period were pro-Communist. They were really trying to question the status quo, and so this made them a target.” She added that an anonymous French owner had acquired the Tanguy at auction in 1985: “He thought that this could be the original painting that had been attacked. People didn’t believe him because it looked like it was in perfect condition. “We looked at it and thought it can’t be the same painting. We’ve been doing work in the lab – X-ray, ultraviolet and pigment analysis – and we found that it is the original that had been repaired.” Scientific tests revealed its scars. The painting, which measures 92cm by 73cm, is typical of Tanguy’s timeless, barren landscapes with imaginary objects and ambiguous forms. Shortly before his death in 1955, the artist said: “The painting develops before my eyes, unfolding its surprises as it progresses.” Mass leads the consultancy Scientific Analysis of Fine Art, which studies works through cutting-edge science, and is professor of cultural heritage science at the Bard Graduate Centre in New York. She has co-authored a study of the Tanguy painting with numerous academics, including specialists at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York. Art historian Charles Stuckey, who has been working with researcher Stephen Mack on a Tanguy catalogue raisonné, or definitive study, described the survival of this historic painting as “very significant”. Professor Elliott King, a Dalí expert, said that its rediscovery was “extremely exciting”, partly due to its link with a key moment for the surrealists: “In 1930, they were not really sure if surrealism had become too acceptable and this gave their movement new excitement. L’Âge d’Or was designed to shock. The attack was frightening and violent, no doubt, but in its way expected. Indeed, Dalí wrote to a friend at the time saying that tensions were rising, suggesting the surrealists anticipated some sort of eruption.” The British Film Institute notes that, while L’Âge d’Or was vilified for many years for its subversive eroticism and furious dissection of “civilised” values, it is today considered a masterpiece. Mass said that the “terror” suffered by the painting has been completely covered up by the restorer: “It’s only in an X-ray that it’s possible to see that the painting was slashed.” That raises a dilemma, a “tension between the painting as a historical document and an art historical document”, she said. “If you don’t study history, then you’re doomed to repeat it. It seems that we’re at a point in time when the far right might be interested in happily repeating some of our early 20th-century history and probably a lot of people don’t fully understand what fascism means at this moment. “As a historical document, I would like to see it in its unrestored state. But for art historical purposes, it’s understandable that people want to focus on Tanguy.”I’m back on the road until August with my five-star standup show, Snowflake Tornado, mouthing confirmation-bias to packed rooms of masked elitists. Over six nights at the Oxford Playhouse, I saw the familiar and friendly staff and crowds return, though the historic Eagle and Child pub sadly appears to have closed. It was here in 1933, apparently, that JRR Tolkien thought up the terrifying fissure the Crack of Doom after hearing a becubicled CS Lewis battle the afterburn of an especially potent Old Peculiar. But I am waiting for an inquiry by the very experienced civil servant Sue Gray to decide if this story is true. Dominic Cummings claims to have recorded evidence of the incident, but sceptics suggest it may just be a tape of him squelching his hand under his own armpit. That’s why you have Sue Gray looking at all the details. Let Sue Gray do her job. Sadly, the two-year pandemic hiatus has rendered my 20-minute routine on what I imagined the new woke Bond film would be like irrelevant, but a section summarising Boris Johnson’s dismal career of flaccid dishonesty now makes a satisfying conclusion to the show for the performatively disgusted crowd, hopefully until the tour ends in August. Thus I am probably the only champagne socialist who wants the party-blind PM to stay. But the prudent thing is to wait for Sue Gray to report. Sue Gray is a very senior civil servant. Sue Gray is very well able to conduct this investigation. In his co-authored 2012 treatise Britannia Unzipped, the justice secretary, Dominic Calais Raab, declared: “The British are among the worst idlers in the world. We work among the lowest hours, we retire early and our productivity is poor.” Luckily, despite their well-documented love of raiding the newly bought £142 Downing Street wine fridge every week for Wine-Time Fridays, it appears the staff at No 10 are the exception. Raab himself justified their right to bring their own bottles to work, saying they have been “working phenomenally hard under gruelling conditions”. Maybe the fridge was bought for Johnson to hide in in case Beth Rigby asked him a question. No one knows. That why you have Sue Gray looking at all the details. Sue Gray is all across these issues. Let Sue Gray do her job. On the BBC on Monday, the PM was incoherently defended by the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, whose taxpayer-heated horses were never knowingly underwarmed, and on Sky, the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, said, strangely: “We are waiting for an inquiry by a very formidable servile servant Sue Gray to conclude.” Did Dorries’s “servile” blunder betray her inner hope that Sue Gray would compliantly exonerate the boss she has to answer to or was it just a slip of the tongue? Who can be sure? The prudent thing now is to wait for Sue Gray to report. Sue Gray can follow the evidence wherever it takes her. We must have patience while Sue Gray carries out her inquiry. On Sunday, the Conservatives launched Operation Red Meat, a transparent attempt to placate the ravenous dire wolves on the far right of the party with the announcement of a host of poorly thought-out populist policies. But the Royal Navy, which, like all the armed forces, is increasingly marketed as a relief agency whose staff happen to carry rifles, wasn’t keen to murder children in the sea just to detract from Johnson’s wine and Doritos habit; and the entire country of Ghana, floated by Priti Patel as a possible offshore processing plant for migrants, sent out a press release announcing, with Dorries-like levels of unintended accuracy, that it wanted no part of “Operation Dead Meat”. Why had Patel said Ghana was on board? Sue Gray will look at all the various issues. Sue Gray is very well able to conduct this investigation. Sue Gray will do an absolutely thorough job. On Twitter last Sunday, Dorries said the next BBC licence fee settlement would be the last, but in parliament she then said that wasn’t the case, having created some confusion to distract further from her leader’s generally assumed criminality. On LBC on Wednesday, the Conservative MP for Boston and Skegness, Matt Warman, tried to argue that both of Dorries’s contradictory positions were simultaneously correct, a kind of Schrödinger’s licence fee settlement that was both the last and not the last as well. But what was the truth? Sue Gray is across all these issues. We need to know the facts and that is what Sue Gray is doing. Taking us back to where we began, David Davis concluded PMQs on Wednesday by addressing Johnson with the very quote famously attributed to the Christian mystic and latchkey incontinent Charles Williams, as he waited patiently outside the Eagle and Child toilet cubicle still occupied by a flatulent CS Lewis: “You have sat there too long for all the good you have done. In the name of God, go.” But has the prime minister sat there too long? That’s what the Sue Gray inquiry is for. Sue Gray is across all these issues. Sue Gray will look at all the various issues. That’s why you have Sue Gray looking at all the details. Let Sue Gray do her job. The prudent thing now is to wait for Sue Gray to report. Sue Gray is a very senior civil servant. Sue Gray is very well able to conduct this investigation. Sue Gray will do an absolutely thorough job. Sue Gray can follow the evidence wherever it takes her. Anything Sue Gray needs to do she will be able to do. We need to know the facts and that is what Sue Gray is doing. We request patience while Sue Gray carries out her inquiry. Rescheduled national 2022 dates of Stewart’s 2020 tour, Snowflake Tornado, are on sale now; the autumn 2022 London dates of his new tour, Basic Lee, are also on sale; Stewart Lee winter hats are available hereThree years ago, Sylvia Hoffman tried out for NBC’s second season of The Next Olympic Hopeful for one last shot at becoming an Olympic athlete. After tryouts, she laid on a foam roller, stretching out, when she heard two other athletes next to her talking: “The show last year was so great,” they said to each other. Hoffman perked up. A show? She thought this was just a scouting camp. When she asked the two athletes, they told her, “Yeah, they’re going to make this into a documentary.” Still confused, Hoffman Googled what she had just signed up for. Sure enough, it’s a show with one season out already. “Wow. OK, cool,” she thought to herself. She had been so focused on the word “Olympics” that she didn’t care about anything else, much less that this was a documentary. “Well, good thing I tried my best,” she said. Despite participating in but not winning the show, she was invited to train with the USA Bobsled team. Previously a collegiate basketball athlete and Team USA weightlifter, Hoffman had been briefly introduced to skeleton but knew nothing about bobsled. When the coaches asked Hoffman to push, she did. When she was invited to the rookie camp, she won the rookie push championships. When she was invited back to the national push championships, she won again. A month later, she achieved the fastest push times at trials for Team USA, landing herself a spot on the team and a ticket to Canada, where she won her first international medal with three-time Olympic medalist Elana Meyers Taylor as her driver. After that, Hoffman went to Latvia, which led to a tour of Europe. Since then, she has won several World Cup medals, raced with Kaillie Humphries, and last week earned her spot on the team headed for the Beijing Olympics. “It’s been a crazy three and a half years but it’s somewhere that I feel like I should be,” Hoffman tells the Guardian. This might seem like an overnight success story, but that is far from true. Born in Philadelphia, Hoffman was a very active child, always playing outside. From an early age, her dad introduced her to many sports, including soccer, basketball, and softball. “I just loved the fact that I could be good at whatever I did,” Hoffman says. Like many elite athletes, her Olympic dreams were sparked by watching the Olympics on TV as a child. Immediately, she fell in love with the idea of becoming an Olympian: “I think deep in my heart, I always wanted to represent my country,” Hoffman reflects. Her family moved to Texas when she was four and by six, her parents had gotten a divorce, which led to Hoffman moving back and forth between Philadelphia and Texas, often switching schools. It wasn’t until high school that she got to stay at the same school, where her basketball team won state when Hoffman was a sophomore. She continued the sport in college, where she majored in computer information systems, but realized that while she could have played in the WBNA one day, it was not a dream of hers. Eventually, Hoffman joined USA Weightlifting. “I ended up making my first international team within a year. I thought that was just something that was a little magnificent, and it was very unexpected,” Hoffman says. For the first time, Hoffman boarded an international flight. It was to Eilat, Israel, for world championships. “I thought that was the most awesome thing that I could ever do. I knew this was something I wanted to continue to pursue,” Hoffman says. Not only did she love wearing Team USA gear, Hoffman grew a lot as a person during her weightlifting years. “I think weightlifting is a spectacular sport,” Hoffman says. “It not only supplies you with physical appearance, or stability, but it can also provide you with mental stability, something that’s overlooked in weightlifting.” Weightlifting, as Hoffman explains, is all about trying over and over again to complete a lift: “It’s the most rewarding feeling when you push yourself above and beyond and you’re like, ‘Wow, I’m stronger than I think.’” At the same time, it taught Hoffman when to hit pause. “It’s knowing when to push on the gas, and then knowing when to pump the brakes. And for me, it was more of just getting over a bunch of mental hurdles,” Hoffman explains. It was her weightlifting coach, Zygmunt Smalcrez, who first pointed out that Hoffman may benefit from taking care of her mental health. “You’re very athletic but I feel like there’s something going on with you mentally to where you’re not able to focus,” he had told her. A lot of Hoffman’s mental challenges traced back to her childhood, when seeking health for mental health was far from encouraged. “I remember back in the day, if you even talked about a psychologist, that was detrimental to anything in your career,” Hoffman recalls. Now a Team USA bobsledder, Hoffman is thankful for the sports psychologist that works with their team. “Dr Mara Smith has been amazing. She’s in tune with all the athletes, she checks up on us. She’s in our group chats when we’re competing overseas,” Hoffman explains. Hoffman discovered NBC’s Next Olympic Hopeful when she was working from home one day. She worked as an engineer for her day job until the pandemic hit and her company had a huge layoff. “I can’t wait to get back into the workforce after the season,” Hoffman says. The past two years, she’s solely focused on her sport, but she loves her job, too. “I like the work life balance. Everyone has their thing, and computer science is my thing,” Hoffman says. For now, though, her focus is the Olympics. Hoffman wears a pendant with the Superman logo around her neck, paying tribute to her nickname, Superwoman. “Providing people hope is what the symbol really means and is something that resonated with me,” Hoffman explains. The necklace used to be silver but has since been switched to gold to match her current goals. “I’m going for gold these days. I feel like it should match the tone in which I’m trying to compete at,” Hoffman explains. “I’m competing to be number one. That’s my number one goal, make the Olympic team, and go for gold,” Hoffman says. The engineer and athlete’s ambitions translate even to musical instruments. Hoffman is currently teaching herself how to play the piano. She had originally taught herself in college, but stopped when she noticed that what she gained in piano skills, she lost in Guitar Hero ability. “I don’t think Guitar Hero is going to come up anytime soon, but if it does, just let me know in advance,” Hoffman jokes. While she may not go down in history for her video game skills, NBC’s Next Olympic Hopeful may finally achiever her lifelong dream of becoming an Olympian very soon.Short-term school closures across the US amid the Omicron surge have reignited debate about how to protect the nation’s students and teachers during the Covid-19 pandemic. Public health experts have found themselves squeezed between exhausted parents and teachers, as schools try to keep children learning in-person despite the recent swell in cases. “This is such a highly charged emotional issue,” said Gigi Gronvall, a senior scholar at Johns Hopkins University’s Center for Health Security, who has helped advise Baltimore city public schools on how to return to in-person instruction. “All I can say is – there exists tools that can make the school safer and not have this kind of spread you would expect to have outside of the school.” Air filtration systems, ventilation, universal masking and most importantly vaccination reduce spread of Covid-19. Across the country, the overwhelming majority of schools are open and providing in-person instruction, as public health authorities have recommended. However, local school districts have also found themselves battling to convince both teachers and parents that school is a safe place. “I have gotten a lot of pushback on all of these things,” Gronvall said. People have said, “‘Well, the kids don’t really wear their masks all the time,’ or the air purifiers – ‘How do we know they’re working?’ or the ventilation in the building.” Multiple studies have shown schools that implement layered approaches to Covid-19 safety – such as ventilation, vaccination, cohort surveillance testing and masking – are largely safe and unlikely to drive coronavirus transmission. Nevertheless, local teachers unions have received attention for demands to return to remote learning, a strategy public health experts said will not reduce the prevalence of Covid-19. Some parents have been reluctant to send children to school, while others do not support vaccine mandates, as education is yet again disrupted. The pinch for public health experts comes as staff shortages have closed schools due to illness as the Omicron variant sweeps across the country. There are nearly 100,000 public schools in the US, according to the National Center for Education Statistics, and more than 6,200 were disrupted the week of 10 January, according to data from school closure trackers at Burbio, the highest number since school started this fall. “We have to look at the spectrum of illness we’re seeing in kids, and even adults now, and ask ourselves whether the risk to children’s education loss and accumulating mental health issues is not much more serious for families than from Covid-19,” said Dr David Rubin, director of the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia’s (Chop) PolicyLab and a professor of pediatrics at the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania. Most experts believe it is too early to relegate the risks of Covid-19 to part of everyday life. Nevertheless, Rubin said, “The pandemic is really transitioning.” When Chop issued in-person schools guidance to reflect that transition, including a call to end all testing of asymptomatic individuals, which the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) continues to recommend, the Philadelphia Federation of Teachers objected. The guidelines feel “like a very ill-advised effort to downplay Covid cases and sweep our concerns regarding a massive surge under the rug,” the federation’s president, Jerry Jordan, said in a press release. Jordan declined a request for an interview and for comment. The union later called for a “pause” to in-person education to address safety concerns. “What we’re trying to do is help people recalibrate that some of these interventions are going to be moving away,” said Rubin. “The scaffolding is going to begun coming down.” The hospital, he said, is trying to “change the public perception after a very traumatizing experience”. “Vaccinations and boosters are really the intervention,” said Rubin. “It’s not clear to me closing schools will change the risks – it will just increase the negative consequences without a clear benefit to reducing transmission risk.” The most prominent local school closures to result from union action took place in Chicago – the nation’s third-largest school district – after a dispute between the Chicago Teachers Union and the district over safety protocols. The two sides eventually struck a deal, which included provision of KN95 masks for students and staff and the availability of weekly Covid testing. The American Federation of Teachers (AFT) has repeatedly emphasized schools should be back to in-person learning, and the majority of teachers support that, as long as they feel that adequate safety precautions are in place. In Columbus, Ohio, more than 2,800 teachers, about two-thirds of the union, signed an open letter calling on the city to “immediately institute a two-week temporary remote learning pause to get us through the worst of the current COVID-19 Omicron surge”. “From a health and safety perspective, which is my lens, we do know that sending students home for two weeks is not going to change the community rate of Covid,” said Dr Sara Bode, a member of the American Academy of Pediatrics council on school health, the medical director of Nationwide children’s hospital’s school-based health and mobile clinics, and now the district medical consultant to Columbus city schools. What’s more, she said students have become the “silent sufferers” of the pandemic, and now have higher rates of mental illness as a result of isolation and the loss of a safety net school provides. In the 2020-2021 school year, Columbus students had just 19 days of in-person school. Data have shown multi-layered safety approaches ensure that “school is not an independent driver of the rate” of infection, said Bode. Meanwhile, some parents have advocated for remote education because of concerns about the Omicron variant. “The decisions parents are making about schooling right now are very much a product of the kinds of challenges and constraints they’re facing in their lives,” said Jessica McCrory Calarco, an associate professor of sociology at Indiana University who has interviewed hundreds of parents about their feelings on education amid the pandemic, and who has two young children herself. “The pandemic has not affected every family equally”. In a paper under review for an academic journal, Calarco found white and higher income families were more likely to be “desperate” to have children return to in-person education, compared with families of color. Although the correlation was not “one-to-one,” Calarco said white, higher income families were less likely to live near family, more likely to have two parents working full-time and more often cited demanding workloads. Parents of color and low-income parents were more likely to lose a job as a result of the pandemic so have a parent home, live in multi-generational households or have underlying health conditions that could increase risk of infection, Calarco said. “There are widely varied opinions among parents about what steps schools should be taking at this point,” said Calarco. Notably, a large majority support mask mandates, about 70%, while only about one-third support a vaccine mandate for children. That is reflected back in childhood vaccination data – just 18.8% of children aged five to 11 and 54.6% of children aged 12 to 17 are vaccinated. Part of the discrepancy in that rate is probably because older children became eligible for vaccination before younger children. Concerns about kids contracting Covid-19 in school and mandatory quarantines mean some teachers have faced half empty classrooms after winter break. In just one example, school authorities said 40% of students were absent in Rochester, New York, when winter break ended. In Newark, New Jersey, which temporarily returned to remote education after winter break, parents said emotions ranged from excitement to angst when children returned to the classroom earlier this month. After interviewing hundreds of parents and conducting a national survey, Calarco said one theme rang throughout: a desire to return to normal. “Parents are most frustrated by the ambiguity,” Calarco said.Kielder Art &amp; Architecture, Northumberland Over the past 27 years, the stunning landscapes around Kielder Water – and the dense forest beside it – have become home to an extraordinary collection of visual art and architecture, featuring everything from wave chambers to futuristic shelters. Highlights include Silvas Capitalis, a giant, open-mouthed head, and the Janus Chairs, three king-size rotating seats, which overlook the lake from the north shore. There are three art and architecture trail guides that can be downloaded from the website before visiting. Open daily, free entry (parking £5); kielderartandarchitecture.com Yorkshire Sculpture Park, Wakefield, Yorkshire Spanning 500 acres of parkland, the YSP was the UK’s first sculpture park, with a diverse collection of regularly changing works, with usually around 100 sculptures to discover and explore. Most famous for its world-class collection of work by Henry Moore, the park is also home to sculptures by Barbara Hepworth, Andy Goldsworthy and Damien Hirst. A great family option, there are buggy-friendly paths, baby-changing facilities and the café has child-friendly food. In recent years, the YSP has expanded to have indoor galleries alongside the park. Open daily 10am-5pm, admission £6/free; ysp.org.uk Grizedale Sculpture, Cumbria Home to the UK’s first forest sculpture trail, artists have been exhibiting across this 10 square miles of natural woodland since 1977. The visitor centre has useful maps and the trail can be explored on foot or by bike, with works encompassing everything from wood-carved figures to standing stones and seating – many using rocks, plants and felled trees from the forest itself. Beyond the trail, Grizedale has a cosy café, children’s play area and many other walking and cycling paths. Open daily, free entry; forestryengland.uk Sculpture by the Lakes, Dorchester, Dorset The creation of sculptor Simon Gudgeon and his wife Monique, Sculpture by the Lakes spans 26 acres, with over 30 large creations by Gudgeon, and works by 30 other international artists. Works range from kinetic wind sculptures to bronze animal and human figures, dotted along the paths in the woodland, and even in the shimmering ponds. The new Artisan’s Bazaar sells an eclectic mix of products from locally made gin to garden tools, while the Café by the Lake is a great choice for lunch. Note, though, no children under 14 – and tickets must be pre-booked online. Open Tuesday to Saturday 10am-5pm, £12.50; sculpturebythelakes.co.uk Fforest Fawr Sculpture Trail, Cardiff Kids will love this woodland trail, with plenty of artworks to spot – faces peering out of tree trunks, unusual animals looming up from piles of stones – all carved out of wood or hewn from the local rock. The works encourage children to discover the forest while imagining a story of a giant creature, living among the trees. The Forest Tea Room (at Forest Stoves and Fires) does slap-up breakfasts and excellent coffee and cake. Open daily, free; outdoorcardiff.com New Art Centre, Wiltshire The New Art Centre began life in a London gallery in the late 1950s as a charity to support emerging artists – relocating to Roche Court in Wiltshire in 1994, where experimental and large-scale works can be shown. The 60 acres are home to landmark works by Barbara Hepworth and Antony Gormley. There’s no café, but the Lord Nelson pub nearby in Winterslow does excellent lunches (the-lord-nelson.co.uk). Open daily, free; sculpture.uk.com Sainsbury Centre Sculpture Park, Norwich Set on the campus of the University of East Anglia, this 350-acre sculpture park surrounds Norman Foster’s landmark Sainsbury Centre. They house the art collection of the Sainsbury family, including works by Giacometti, Francis Bacon and Henry Moore. Current highlights include Anthony Caro’s monumental Goodwood Steps, spanning 33m, and Usagi Kannon, a striking bronze figure by Leiko Ikemura. The Terrace Café does good tea and cake. Open daily (inside galleries closed Mondays), free; sainsburycentre.ac.uk Leonardslee, West Sussex When this world-famous garden re-opened to the public in 2019, new owner Penny Streeter vowed to bring new life to the estate. Alongside a pinot noir vineyard and wallaby enclosure, thethis 240-acre woodland garden is now home to an extraordinary array of figures, tribal heads, colossal masks and humanesque forms by South African sculptor Anton Smit. His 7m-high Walk of Life figure overlooks the gardens. There’s an excellent café, and the main house offers afternoon tea, Michelin-starred dining and 10 sumptuous bedrooms if you want to stay. Open daily 9am-4pm, admission £13.50/£6.50; leonardsleegardens.co.uk Broomhill Sculpture Garden, Devon Set on a 103-acre estate, Broomhill combines a boutique hotel and restaurant with a garden filled with 150 artworks, curated alongside horticultural designs. The exhibition is divided into two gardens; the first exhibits permanent installations and works available to buy, while the second – set in the lower river meadows – showcases National Sculpture Prize works. The Terrace Café does sinfully good homemade cakes and Italian coffee. Both the sculpture garden and café need to be booked in advance. Open daily, £10/£5; broomhill-estate.com Loch Ard Sculpture Trail, Trossachs Another great option for kids, this trail along the picturesque shores of Loch Ard and Lochan a’Ghleannin, is dotted with fascinating sculptures and charming woodland creatures for kids to spot. Unusual seats and shelters come with listening tubes and raised letters and symbols. Find the wildlife hides for the chance to see some of Loch Ard’s live animal inhabitants – and there are five sound posts along the way. The trail can be cycled as well as walked, and there are downloadable maps available on the website. Open daily, free; forestryandland.gov.scot • This article was amended on 24 January 2022. An earlier version described the Lord Nelson pub as being in “Middleton”; that is in fact the name of the street on which it stands in Winterslow. A reference to the New Art Centre being located at Roche Court was also added.I’m a staunch believer in the dictum “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it”. Yet the passion for rebranding still burns bright. Only last year, Standard Life Aberdeen decided to restyle itself as Abrdn, to make itself “modern” and “dynamic” and quite rightly was laughed out of court. (I might have joined in on pouring ordure on this particular misstep.) And what are we to make of Facebook retitling itself Meta? Precious little, I would argue, as people will insist on still calling it Facebook, which I hope irks the shifty Mark Zuckerberg no end. Not to be left out of the game now is Defra, which in its infinite wisdom has decided that the term “area of outstanding natural beauty” is outmoded, to be replaced by “national landscape”. The government dresses it up thus: “Any name change must represent a step change for AONB teams with the ambitious new title encompassing new purposes delivered by skilled teams, sustainable funding and robust governance.” And there you have it writ large - “step change”, “robust governance”. Absolute twaddle and the meddlesome work of brand managers and graphic designers almost certainly hired at outrageous cost to deliver... well, what exactly? Sweet sod all. It sounds like something from the Soviet Union. Leave well alone, Defra, and get on with things that actually matter in the countryside. On that theme, I was amused to get a flyer from estate agent Knight Frank, “winner of six customer experience awards in 2021” (no, I haven’t a clue either): “As your local agents, we know every inch of the Wimbledon property market. For further insight or for property related advice, do get in touch. We’d love to hear from you.” As I live in Hampshire, I think I’ll pass up this generous offer. • Jonathan Bouquet is an Observer columnistThe widow of top civil servant Jeremy Heywood has accused Boris Johnson’s government of a “cynical and coordinated” attempt to deflect blame for the Lex Greensill lobbying scandal on to her late husband, after she forced it to show her documents that call into question the outcome of the official inquiry. Suzanne Heywood has revealed for the first time how she used the threat of legal action against Downing Street last year to expose what she saw as deliberate efforts to blame Greensill’s arrival at No 10 on her late husband, who had no one to defend him. The Greensill scandal broke early last year after it emerged that David Cameron, prime minister at the time of the appointment in 2012, went on to take a lucrative job with Greensill Capital after leaving office. The story became a full-blown scandal after it was revealed that Cameron had been lobbying Johnson’s senior ministers, whom he knew personally – including chancellor Rishi Sunak – via texts, emails and WhatsApp messages to try to secure special funds to support Greensill Capital during the pandemic, and prevent it sliding into bankruptcy. It left the Tory government reeling as past and present ministers and their officials faced accusations of sleaze. In a new paperback edition of her memoir of the former cabinet secretary, What Does Jeremy Think?, extracts of which are published exclusively in Observer New Review, Lady Heywood tells how the feeling that her husband was being used as a scapegoat, and Downing Street’s initial refusal to allow her to defend him, forced her to threaten to take it to a judicial review. The prospect of legal action, she says, finally forced Downing Street to agree to give her just 48 hours of access, alone, to 150 pages of her husband’s official papers. When she went through them she found a letter from an official who reported to the then Cabinet Office minister, Francis Maude, about Greensill’s appointment, dated 12 February 2012. It said: “This arrangement has been agreed by both the Minister for the Cabinet Office [Francis Maude] and the Permanent Secretary for Cabinet Office [sic].” Francis Maude told the Observer : “I have no recollection of signing this off and as the Boardman report makes absolutely clear Lex Greensill would not have come anywhere near government if he had not been pushed to do so by Jeremy Heywood.” Lady Heywood also says she saw documents showing that the same official had emailed Greensill twice in the previous months to say she was getting Maude’s permission for the appointment. Maude told a parliamentary committee last June that he had “absolutely no recollection” of having appointed Greensill in 2012. When the scandal broke last year, Maude was still working in government, as an unpaid adviser to Johnson on Whitehall reform. At the same time, he was running a company, Francis Maude Associates (FMA), which advises foreign governments on how to be more efficient. He left the advisory role last spring. The documents, says Lady Heywood, completely undermined the narrative that had been promoted through a series of media stories, based on leaks, which laid blame heavily at the late cabinet secretary’s door. She also claims they contradicted the draft conclusions of the official review into the scandal by the solicitor Nigel Boardman, who had been appointed by the government, despite concerns about his conflicts of interest including his former association with the Tory party. After seeing his draft conclusions (which said her husband was “primarily responsible” for the appointment of Greensill), Heywood confronted Boardman at a meeting. “Each time I did this, Boardman smiled again and moved on to his next conclusion,” she writes. The wording of Boardman’s final report was changed but avoided any definitive conclusion that Maude had approved the appointment. It said: “There is some evidence, albeit not conclusive, that this three-month appointment was formally approved by Lord Maude.” Lady Heywood writes in her book: “The report thus dismissed all the documentary evidence that indicated Maude’s approval.” By contrast, it made much of the only document she found referring to her husband and the appointment of Greensill. They had met when working in separate departments at Morgan Stanley Bank in 2005. “The document was a covering memo written to the prime minister four months after the appointment of Greensill but on a different issue. It said in passing that ‘Jeremy has brought him [Greensill] in to work a (sic) pro bono in the Cabinet Office.’” This was used by Boardman to conclude again that Jeremy Heywood was “the person primarily responsible for Greensill being given a role in government”. Heywood concludes that the government deliberately “tried to pin blame on a dead man” who could not defend himself, in order to deflect blame. She writes: “It was hard to accept that Jeremy had been let down so comprehensively by the institutions to which he had dedicated his life, or that people … would try to shift responsibility for their own actions on to someone who was dead.” Heywood also reveals in the chapter that she submitted a freedom of information request to the Cabinet Office asking it to reveal any potential conflicts of interest Boardman had declared. She says Boardman had previously been a member of the Conservative party and had been on the board of the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy that had allowed Greensill Capital to access one of the government’s coronavirus loan schemes. But when the Cabinet Office responded, all of his conflicts had been redacted as had any mitigating actions, leaving her none the wiser. In response to a follow-up request, the Cabinet Office said answering the questions would be too expensive. After the Boardman report was published, former prime minister Gordon Brown said the report was “so unsatisfactory” that he wanted its author to be called to explain publicly why “as a reviewer he did not interview key people, why he did not consider vital evidence from Lady Heywood and others that made clear Jeremy Heywood was implementing government policy decided by ministers”.St Lucia has not been able to hold a homicide trial for two years, because courtrooms are too small to safely seat a jury under Covid rules, the Caribbean nation’s director of public prosecutions has said. The build-up of untried cases is one of the most extreme examples of the damaging impact of the pandemic on access to justice globally. Rule of law has deteriorated around the world, the World Justice Project found. Three-quarters of the countries evaluated for its Rule of Law Index experienced a decline in 2021. In St Lucia, efforts to control Covid have contributed to a backlog of people waiting for trial, even as the murder rate has risen to record levels, the DPP, Daasrean Greene, told an online event this month marking the start of the legal year in the Eastern Caribbean States. “My office has not been able to embark on a murder trial since January of 2020,” he told senior judges, magistrates and lawyers and other legal officials from across the region. “There are over 90 persons awaiting trial for the offence of murder, while we continue to struggle with the difficulty of finding appropriate housing for our courts.” Physical distancing rules meant none of the courtrooms could accommodate the number of jurors required to try offences of murder, he added. Greene’s office did not respond to requests for comment on future plans for prosecution in St Lucia. The country is in a fifth wave of Covid-19, and was last week added to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention “avoid travel” list. Since the pandemic began, there have been nearly 19,000 infections and more than 340 deaths in a population of fewer than 200,000 people. St Lucia had struggled with courtroom infrastructure before the pandemic. It does not have a central judicial building, with courts set up in locations including a shopping mall, according to a UN report. “Courts are scattered around the city in inconvenient locations,” it said. “Among other problems, this presents logistical problems for lawyers juggling cases in civil and criminal courts. “Security, size and other concerns surrounding repurposed court buildings led to protracted suspensions of cases as recently as 2018, with the shutdown in St Lucia contributing to an over 50% reduction in the number of cases heard.” Covid-19 has turned those difficulties into insoluble problems for St Lucia and serious challenges elsewhere. Neighbouring St Vincent went several months without holding jury trials because of distancing rules. “The pandemic has been devastating to the criminal justice system in the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States,” said Dame Janice M Pereira, the chief justice of the Eastern Caribbean supreme court, who chaired the gathering. “Jury trials have been stalled in many of our member states and territories, due mostly to our inability to provide the required physical distancing protocols for a jury in many of our courtrooms.” However, there had been some benefits from the pandemic including an embrace of digital technology that would, she hoped, improve the courts’ accessibility, efficiency and effectiveness. “In just over the past year we have seen the use of digital platforms and other innovations becoming significant and essential features of our court system,” she said. “As COVID-19 lingers on and even beyond the pandemic, digitally driven courts will be critical to the continued administration of justice … There is no turning back,” she said.In death, as in life, the legendary flamenco singer Camarón de la Isla continues to confound expectations, cross borders and demand that his blistered and blistering voice be heard. The revered, beloved and sometimes controversial cantaor died of lung cancer in July 1992, aged just 41. But as the 30th anniversary of his death looms, the singer born José Monge Cruz is being reincarnated in the black-and-white pages of a new graphic novel intended as a homage to Camarón, the music he created and the comic book itself. Taking its name from one of his latter songs, Camarón, dicen de mí is the fruit of five years’ work by the writer Carlos Reymán and the illustrator and designer Raulowsky. The novel’s 190 pages focus on 10 moments in Camarón’s life, including his first performances as a child prodigy, his pivotal partnerships with the guitarists Paco de Lucía and Tomatito, and the recording of his divisive 1979 New Flamenco masterpiece, La leyenda del tiempo. Camarón, dicen de mí begins with the singer’s birth into a musical Gypsy family in the small Andalucían town of San Fernando. José, who emerges into the world with howls that foretell the plangent songs to come, sets aside his dreams of becoming a bullfighter as his vocal talent becomes inescapably apparent. His stage name – which translates as the Shrimp of the Island – was the nickname an uncle bestowed on him because of his thinness and pale skin. In the second chapter, while play-fighting a calf, he has a premonition of perhaps the most formative moment of his life – his father’s premature death. For Raulowsky, both Camarón’s Gypsy heritage and the loss the singer suffered a young boy are key to understanding the paradox of the taciturn, introverted man and the passionate performer. “Through the comic, I tried to understand why he gave himself over when he sang; why he sang with such passion,” says the illustrator. “We know very well that flamenco is about pain; it’s like the blues. But where does that pain and that feeling spring from? It has to be something personal, doesn’t it? I think the early loss of his father must have marked his character very deeply. And he was a Gypsy, and his people had been through a lot of difficulties. He had internalised all those feelings of sadness.” Raulowsky says he and Reymán opted for a graphic novel because of the form’s simplicity, visual potency and the way “it crosses the frontiers of verbal language”. As well as devouring biographies and documentaries, the pair sought out those who had known Camarón, including Ricardo Panchón, who produced La leyenda del tiempo and agreed to provide the novel’s foreword. In it, Panchón’s describes Camarón as a “magical Gypsy” who would have been amused to see his life sketched out in a comic that depicts “an adventure that started sadly and ended sadly but which was a life as brilliant as it was quick”. Despite his drug problems – and the scorn that his attempts to fuse flamenco with contemporary music elicited from purists – Camarón swiftly became an icon among Spain’s marginalised Gypsy population and beyond. “When Camarón came along, he united Gypsy and non-Gypsy cultures and he became an inspiration for all the poor,” says Raulowsky. The illustrator’s joy at seeing the book finally appear has been tempered by the loss of Reymán, who died a few weeks ago. A photographs of the pair strolling down a street on the night in June 2016 when they came up with the idea for the book is the novel’s penultimate image. “I’m excited because the reception’s been great,” says Raulowsky. “But we’d thought we’d be able to enjoy this moment together, and obviously it hasn’t worked out that way.” Although the book ends, inevitably, with Camarón’s physical decline and death, its final pages pay tribute to the transformative power of his once-mighty voice. “I think the bit where we see him singing during his tragic end really represents his spirit and the way in which, as a man and an artist, he gave himself over to that spirit,” says Raulowsky. “He gives himself over entirely and he breaks apart entirely. He was true to the very end.”There isn’t any trouble at the mill. At least as far as Alex Timbers’s production of Moulin Rouge! The Musical goes. Picture-book belle époque Paris takes over the Piccadilly: swags of red velvet and ropes of white fairy lights loop around the auditorium; one of the boxes has been made into a champagne bar. On stage, behind the ultra-bright gilt of the proscenium arch, filigree ironwork surrounds enormous scarlet hearts that contract and expand, one within the other, pulsing to almost nonstop love songs. Actually, a beating, bleeding heart is not what Moulin Rouge! has. True, John Logan’s script, based on Baz Luhrmann’s 2001 film, is sprinkled with emotional triggers. The heroine is consumptive, coughing up into her hanky a red heart neat enough to make any barista proud. The villain who wants to buy her is swaggeringly repellent, and booed panto-style at curtain call. The heroine’s true love is a young composer kept from his adored one by poverty. Yet I doubt any audiences will be squeezing out tears. The plot is not the point of this extravaganza: it’s a whirling machine in which set (Derek McLane), choreography (by Sonya Tayeh, with Sophie Carmen-Jones as the outstanding dancer) and music lavishly fuse. This mill grinds – and yes, there is a bit of that, what with the fishnets and satin and rhinestones and bustiers and long legs whipping over each other – exceeding small, delivering its songs mostly bitesize. Simon Bailey’s silky, swaggering baddie gets quite a long crack at Sympathy for the Devil; Liisi LaFontaine, the heroine who swings down (literally) sparkling all over, gives a full rendering of Diamonds Are a Girl’s Best Friend, with no Monroe ambiguity – she makes you believe those stones are indispensable buddies for her bosom. In the discovery of the evening, Jamie Bogyo – beguiling in his stage debut – gently lands Your Song, while Jason Pennycooke’s nicely edgy Toulouse-Lautrec sends up a lovelorn echo. Mainly, though, you don’t get more than – well – a snatch of each song. In Justin Levine’s speedy musical arrangement, no sooner have a few notes of one lyric been heard than another takes its place: Lady Gaga (Bad Romance), Celine Dion, Beyoncé, Bizet, The Sound of Music, La Vie en Rose and, of course, in a froth of frilly petticoats, Offenbach. The sharp idea is to create a jukebox musical that is like an actual jukebox rather than a single-authored album, and which sets continual spot-the-song challenges. The idea has a neat twist: the composer hero is dreaming them up for his breakthrough musical. He is going to call it Bohemian Rhapsody. Throughout the 70-odd minutes of Conundrum, I felt as if I was watching not so much a play as an audition speech, a series of declarations in which both writer (Paul Anthony Morris) and actor (Anthony Ofoegbu) signal their intentions and capacities rather than prove them. There is an irony here, since Morris’s play – which he directs in a co-production between the Young Vic and its associate company, Crying in the Wilderness Productions – is about the failure to fulfil potential. Ofoegbu plays an exceptionally gifted man, black in a white-run world, who has absorbed the low opinion visited on him by those who have all his life denied him prizes and turned him down for jobs. Continually told to rein in his “lofty ideas”, he has begun to curtail his own aspirations. He talks to a therapist online, is occasionally jabbed by a man in a white coat, but mostly paces around, urging himself to an existential confrontation: “Who am I?” There is pain and psychological truth, but no nuance. Nothing is merely suggested; every doubt is excavated, often more than once. Even the slate floor, covered in his handwritten comments, adds to the repetition. Ofoegbu, who, apart from rare appearances by the jabbing man, is alone on stage, is given plenty of opportunity to display his ingenuity. Patiently forceful, he clambers over imaginary obstacles, beats his arms against a hostile wind, produces a childish voice and a wild, desperate one. Yet he cannot make a compelling character out of a blizzard of abstractions. Star ratings (out of five) Moulin Rouge ★★★★ Conundrum ★★ Moulin Rouge is at the Piccadilly theatre, London, until 28 May Conundrum is at the Young Vic, London, until 4 FebruaryHigh housing costs are a disaster for living standards, costing private renters more than 30% of their income and giving London the highest poverty rate in the UK. The economists’ answer is to build more homes in high-cost areas, but that’s easier said than done. Developments are often opposed from the right, for reducing local house prices, and the left, as gentrification. Opponents accurately say city-centre developers build for richer customers. But the lasting impact of construction goes beyond the immediate effect of who moves into that property, with the new owner moving out of their existing home and creating an opportunity for someone else. As that continues, it means building in one area can help reduce costs elsewhere. But does that happen in practice? Yes, at least in Helsinki, is the answer from a new study. Examining new builds in the centre of the Finnish capital, researchers show it’s the better-off who move in. But they go on to track the moving chains that follow and surprisingly swiftly see those on lower incomes and from lower-income neighbourhoods joining the chain. Only 20% of those moving into new city-centre buildings are from the poorest half of the population – but that share reaches 50% once you’re five moves down the chain. So there are citywide benefits to increased housing supply, even if it happens in the centre. Crucially, that’s most true where cities are less segregated, so different groups move between areas and social housing developments ensure the benefits are spread faster. So we shouldn’t be opposing development – we should be building inclusive cities. • Torsten Bell is chief executive of the Resolution Foundation. Read more at resolutionfoundation.orgWhen Corey Gallagher returned earlier this month to the postal sorting facility where he works and put on an N95 mask, he was shocked when a supervisor demanded he take it off and replace it with a cloth mask. The Canadian postal worker, whose wife is immunocompromised and whose child is not yet old enough for a vaccine, refused to swap his N95 mask “I didn’t really understand. I thought it was some kind of a joke at first,” he told the Winnipeg Free Press. But the demand was repeated the next day when another higher-ranking supervisor told him to wear the cloth mask. Gallagher again refused and was eventually sent home. Canada Post initially suggested wearing a cloth mask over his N95 mask, but later determined federal requirements meant Gallagher could wear only the standard-issue masks. He is now taking paid leave until he is given a clearer sense of when he can return to work. The row has raised broader questions over which masks offer the best protection – but also the challenges facing public health agencies and large companies as they attempt to establish universal masking policies. Canada Post, with its 64,000 employees, says the cloth masks it requires employees to wear meet the recommendations of the country’s public health agency. “The company fully supports these guidelines and therefore requires all employees to wear a Canada Post-supplied face covering, which is either a reusable cloth face covering or a disposable medical mask,” the government-owned corporation said in a statement, adding that if an employee refuses to wear a mask provided by the company, they – like Gallagher – are told to leave. “Canada Post will continue to monitor best practices and recommendations with respect to face coverings, and update our requirements accordingly.” The Canadian Union of Postal Workers has come to Gallagher’s defence, calling on the postal service to give employees N95 masks – or at minimum, not to punish them for bringing their own. “It’s kind of disappointing that we are so far behind on the Canadian standards,” said Gallagher. Experts say the confusion is emblematic of the challenges facing public health agencies around the world, which are attempting to balance the evolving understanding of the coronavirus with clear messaging. “Things are moving so fast. Public health agencies really want to use science to make recommendations – but those recommendations have to apply to a virtually infinite number of scenarios,” said John Lynch, an infectious disease specialist at the University of Washington in Seattle. “They’re responding to the science as fast as they can. But that’s not always effectively and clearly communicated.” He points to the swiftly oscillating messaging over the two-year course of the pandemic, which shifted from advising against masking and focusing on hand washing in the early days to strong mask requirements when scientists better understood the aerosol spreading of the virus. The murkiness of public health guidelines has produced other seemingly contradictory scenarios in Canada. In October, three teachers in Ontario’s York school board were threatened with suspension after wearing N95 masks instead of the board-approved blue surgical masks. In the neighbouring Peel board, however, staff were given N95 masks in January when they returned to school. Earlier this week, the United States announced plans to distribute 400m N95 masks from its national stockpile, a tacit endorsement of the higher-grade masks as countries deal with the highly infectious Omicron variant. Lynch sees the shift towards respirators [N95 masks] – previously required only in higher-risk settings like hospitals – as a useful effort to “level up” the type of protection used. But he cautions that a number of variables – including fit, type and setting – come into play when determining the protection offered by a mask, meaning a poorly fitting N95 won’t offer more protection than a snug surgical mask. “If you want to wear your own respirator [N95], go for it. But we ask you just to make sure that you’re covering it up with another surgical mask so that we have a baseline covered,” he said. “There are ways to standardize things while also allowing people a degree of flexibility. We should be setting basements – we shouldn’t be setting ceilings. Organizations need to be able to accommodate people’s choices going forward.”As Madison Keys and Paula Badosa took to Rod Laver Arena on Sunday morning in Melbourne, their fourth-round match played out to the sound of frequent gasps from the crowd. With Keys, one of the biggest ball-strikers in recent memory, such noises can often be reactions to the size of her misses as well as the spectacle of her shotmaking. There is rarely a middle ground. In this case, Keys spent 69 minutes destroying every ball in sight, and her top 10 opponent in the process, beating the eighth seed 6-3, 6-1 to reach the quarter-final of the Australian Open. It would usually be no surprise to see Keys produce such a performance on the big stage. She has been ranked in the top 10 in four seasons, reached four major semi-finals and contested the US Open final in 2017. But Keys had started the 2022 season at the nadir of her career after struggling through the pandemic. Having failed to regain her form as the tour restarted in 2020, Keys’ morale was further damaged after testing positive for Covid-19 just before she was due to fly to the 2021 Australian Open. Then came the bubbles. Tennis players were mostly restricted to their hotel rooms and the tennis courts during tournaments last year. For Keys, such an arrangement meant her thoughts were often only about tennis – and she began to overthink. Her on-court issues soon bled into her personal life. “I was just at a very high anxiety level all of the time,” she said. “I wasn’t sleeping as well. It felt like there was literally a weight on my chest. I became so focused and obsessed with [tennis] that I wasn’t enjoying, really, anything because it’s all I was thinking about.” Those struggles were seen in her performances on the court. Keys ended 2021 with a record of 11-15, losing seven of her last eight matches of the season. After spending the previous five years in and around the top 10, Keys dropped outside of the top 50. Two weeks ago, she fell to 87th, her lowest ranking since she was 17. Keys says she eventually resolved to relish her time on the court. “My biggest mindset change is just trying to enjoy tennis, take some of that just internal pressure that I was putting on myself,” she said. “It was honestly freezing me. I felt like I couldn’t play at all. Just taking that away and putting tennis into perspective: that it’s a sport, something that when I was little I enjoyed doing and loved doing it. I was letting it become this dark cloud over me.” Keys started the season with another first-round loss but unexpectedly won the final pre-Australian Open tournament in Adelaide, defeating two top-20 players, Elina Svitolina and Coco Gauff, en route. And that was it. Her confidence renewed, she beat Sofia Kenin, the 2020 Australian Open champion, in the first round here and has continued rolling into the quarter-final. Her rapid momentum is a reminder of how quickly fortunes can change in tennis. Keys stepped onto Rod Laver Arena at 11am on Sunday and what followed was an utter demolition. She was on top of most points from the beginning, serving well, eviscerating returns and striking winners from all parts of the court. By the beginning of the second set, Keys had struck an incredible seven return winners, as many winners as Badosa had managed overall. One of the most in-form players on the tour, Badosa could only shake her head afterwards. “What can I say?” she said. “Sometimes I was serving 180kmh. I had to look what the serve said because I didn’t understand how a winner came back that fast. I thought I was serving bad. Then I saw it was her game, that she was playing very, very good.” Badosa noted that Keys had a day where all of her shots landed in, an fair observation of her high-risk game. Keys has the weapons to tear apart all her potential opponents but she can equally be her own worst enemy. But however her excellent comeback tournament pans out, it is far more important that she simply continues to take joy and satisfaction in her efforts on and off the court.I sent Ewald Althans a message suggesting we meet in a coffee shop, not far from my East Berlin hotel. I thought it might be a more relaxed place in which to talk. He declined. “I do not feel too comfy any more sitting in a cosy place having an intense talk about National Socialism, Hitler, Auschwitz, etc,” he texted back. “I suggest we have a nice long walk.” I felt terribly naïve. After all, he had a point. Sitting in a Berlin coffee shop, chatting openly about the Nazis, really might not be the best way to go. I agreed to wait for him at the hotel. It required patience; he sent me repeated messages apologising for being late. “No worries,” I replied. “It’s been 29 years since we last met. I can wait another hour.” Despite both the three decades that had passed and the Covid mask, I recognised him immediately. He wore drainpipe jeans ripped at the knee instead of an expensive sculpted suit, and his once straw-blond hair was now grey. Nevertheless, it was still recognisably him: the man once tipped to lead Germany to a new fascist glory. We turned out of the hotel and began to stroll down one of Berlin’s sun-dappled, tree-lined avenues. “So,” I said, “You’re no longer a neo-Nazi then?” He laughed, but did not answer. Perhaps he didn’t consider it a question deserving of a response. I first met Althans in May 1992. I had been sent to Munich by Cosmopolitan magazine to write a feature about the rise of the far right in western Europe. The now-discredited historian David Irving was being tried in Munich for having denied the Holocaust during a speech at a bierkeller in the city. Althans who, at 26, was almost exactly my age, was assisting Irving as his PR man. When it came to promoting far right ideologies the man had form. Althans had already been pursued by judicial authorities for promoting Nazi ideology, though he was the opposite of a jack-booted thug. He was tall and thin and blond, and dressed in immaculately cut black suits that called to mind Armani. He spoke four languages fluently. Many on the far right really did see him as the future, and he embraced their ambitions. He had once told the Daily Telegraph that he was “proof the Führer can happen again”. During the court adjournment, Althans and I went to eat together at the same gloomy, wood-panelled bierkeller where Irving had made the speech for which he was being tried. And so, a Jew and a Nazi sat down to lunch; a hefty one of pork knuckle and boiled potatoes and pickled red cabbage. He claimed to hate no one, but said the LA riots, which had occurred just a few days before, were proof multi-racial societies are problematic. “Human beings should be racist,” he said. “It is the acceptance of difference.” And then: “I belong to the white race. Our culture is very important to the world. I don’t remember the blacks inventing a car or a rocket. The cultures are different. I’m going to do all I can to support their removal from society.” I asked him what he thought of Jews. “Are you Jewish?” he asked. I nodded. “I thought so,” he said. “You have the looks. I can always talk to Jews. You like to argue, to discuss. Too often people close their ears when they talk to me.” He told me Jews are coloured people and, like all coloured people, brought problems to society and would have to go, too. “They have to decide whether they want to be Germans or Jews. They cannot be both.” So where should the Jews go? They could go wherever they liked, he said sharply, momentarily losing his cool. Most of the time he spoke softly, as if what he was saying was a banal statement of the obvious. Like Irving, he said he believed the Holocaust was a lie. It had been invented by a conspiracy of Jewish filmmakers in Hollywood. How then, I asked, could Althans account for the 18 members of my family who died in the camps? Who had killed them, if not the Nazis? They could have died of disease, he said. “That was a terrible thing,” Althans said coolly, “but it is not a Holocaust.” We finished our lunch quickly after that. David Irving was found guilty that afternoon and fined about £3,500. Like so many young Jews born long after the events of the Holocaust, I still felt the stain of its bleak shadow. I had an uncle with the number he was given at Auschwitz as a child tattooed on his forearm. My parents were British. Therefore, they survived and I was born. Other wings of my family had died in the gas chambers. I had attempted, not altogether successfully, to process it merely as a story from the past; as one affecting distant family members. But now here was a man exactly my age both denying the events I knew to be true, but also reinforcing the prejudice which underlay them. I felt emotionally besieged and fragile. I wrote a newspaper piece entitled “My Munich Lunch with a Nazi”, in which I described the encounter and the enduring distress it had caused me. The day after it was published, I was interviewed by a Japanese TV journalist. She told me that, being Jewish, I was too close to the story to write about Nazis in general and Althans in particular. I swore at her and slammed down the phone. My wife told me that writing about racists and fascists was doing me no good. She said I was becoming obsessed. I ignored her for many years, continued to investigate the British far right and race crime, before accepting that it was eating away at me. I had done my job. It was time for others to tackle these subjects. It was time for me to eat lunch and write about that instead. But all journalists have stories which stay with them, even if they become just a quiet itch that occasionally needs to be scratched. Sometime around 2016, as I turned 50, I began to wonder what had become of Althans. In retrospect I can see now that the interest hadn’t come from nowhere. It coincided with the election of Jeremy Corbyn as leader of the Labour party, and a massive rise in overt antisemitism both from certain parts of the hard left and elsewhere, slabs of which washed on to my electronic doorstep. (“Put the cunt on a train for a shower,” read one comment about me. “A gas shower is what he needs,” read another.) I might be a head-banging atheist. I might have ordered the pork knuckle for lunch with Althans. But I was plenty Jewish enough to be hated. After 25 years I went looking to see what had become of the man who hated me because I was a Jew. He now had his own Wikipedia entry and, while the site is notoriously unreliable, the story it told was extraordinary. In 1994, Althans had been convicted for his own crimes of denying the holocaust, as a result of comments made at the site of Auschwitz in a documentary entitled Beruf NeoNazi (literally Profession: NeoNazi). During the trial he had announced he was no longer a Nazi. Indeed, he revealed he was actually a deep cover agent inside the far right on behalf of the German intelligence services, a claim the service denied. He had also announced he was gay. Althans served his 20-month sentence in Landsberg, the same prison where Hitler wrote Mein Kampf. On release he had assumed a new identity and disappeared into the Belgian gay community. It was a great story in the pure journalistic sense, but for me there was also something deeply personal. I wanted to find him after all these years. I wanted to know how a life could turn around so sharply. I wanted to know how he felt about what he’d said to me. Damn it, I wanted an apology. My attempts to trace him through the Belgian gay community were fruitless. No one seemed to know him. For a while I gave up. Then in the depths of the second lockdown, I returned to the Wikipedia entry. I spotted something I hadn’t seen before. In 2000, a massive store of Althans’s papers had been donated to the International Institute of Social History in Amsterdam. The donation had been negotiated by a veteran Dutch journalist and expert on the far right named Frans Dekkers. I contacted Dekkers, who sent me a Dutch language interview he had conducted with Althans for a magazine, not long after he left prison. It told the extraordinary story of a man groomed for greatness by the last surviving remnants of the Third Reich. Ewald Althans was born and grew up in Hanover. “My father had lost his father in WW2,” Althans told Dekkers, “and had grown up in East Germany. He turned against anything that was totalitarian.” As a teenager Althans developed a fascination with the country’s 20th-century history. He read Anne Frank’s diaries, discussed the Holocaust with a Jewish uncle by marriage and joined a youth organisation called Aktion Sühnezeichen, whose members tended the sites of concentration camps. But he’d also become interested in Third Reich memorabilia, picked up in Hanover’s rackety flea market. Through people he met around those stalls he was slowly drawn into far right circles where he eventually met a former low-ranking official in the Third Reich. The man claimed the narrative of Nazi Germany as the great evil nation, was false, and introduced him to the revisionist organisation Deutsches Kulturwerk. “It was a community of intellectuals with a Nazi past,” Althans explained in the Dekkers interview. “Teachers, doctors, government officials and artists. They were excited to have a young man in their grey midst. And I thought it fascinating that I could talk to former Nazis about the Third Reich. That was first-hand history.” They, too, insisted Nazi Germany had been unfairly traduced. “It gave me a superior feeling,” Althans explained. “I knew more than my teacher. But when I confronted him with it in class, he told me I was a liar. It made me rebellious and I started acting provocatively. If we could have talked about these things normally at school, I wouldn’t have become a neo-Nazi or a revisionist.” When he was 17 he was thrown out of school and the family home. He moved to Munich where he met Otto Remer, a former high-ranking Nazi who had been promoted to General Major in the SS by Hitler as thanks for crushing the 1944 plot against him. Remer treated him both as son and protégé. Over the next few years, Althans encountered rising stars of the far right, like Jörg Haider of the Austrian Freedom Party and the German rabble-rouser Michael Kühnen of the Action Front of National Socialists. He went to Moscow to hang out with Russian ultra nationalist Vladimir Zhirinovsky, with whom he had a playful boxing match. He was given lessons in rhetoric by Willy Krämer, former chief of staff to Rudolf Hess. In Syria and Argentina, he met exiled war criminals who had been associates of Joseph Goebbels, the Nazi propagandist. In 1988, Althans moved to Toronto to work with the German revisionist historian Ernst Zundel. Zundel eventually dispatched him back to Germany on a hefty salary to set up a far right bookshop to advance the cause. But by this point, Althans told Dekkers, he had been visiting the gay clubs of Toronto and had started to acknowledge his sexuality. He knew his comrades would not respond well to the fact he was gay. Althans also told Dekkers that he had started to travel away from the far right. If the timeline was right, Althans was saying he was already breaking away from his Nazi past by the time he had sat down with me in the Munich bierkeller and told me the Jews had to go. Dekkers gave me an email address that led me to Althans’s visual arts PR and promotions company in Berlin, with its focus on ribald work by gay artists. He seemed to be hugely active on the Berlin gay scene. Then I stumbled across what felt like the shining climax to this redemption story. A couple of years ago Ewald Althans, a man once accused of whipping up hatred against foreigners, had married his Taiwanese boyfriend. Finally, I found my way to his rarely updated blog. It included a proposal for a book under the headline “Bestseller Possible”. Clearly, no publisher had been interested enough or comfortable with him telling his own story. But I did think Althans was on to something. There really was a book in this. The cast list of leading Nazis was terrific. There were twists and turns. There was a beautiful payoff at the end. And I was surely the man to write it? The truth was I had become obsessed with Althans all over again. I was struck by our joined overarching narrative: two men, both born in 1966, both with lives impacted by the long shadow of the Holocaust, but in very different ways. And yet, three decades on, it appeared we might have an awful lot in common. I emailed him. I told him who I was. I told him I bore him no ill will. I asked whether he might be interested in cooperating on a book. In late July, after much correspondence, he finally agreed to meet me. A couple of days later I was on a plane to Berlin. We fall into step along Metzer Strasse. Althans tells me he has no recollection of meeting me in 1992. But he must remember something of that day given the Irving trial? “Oh yes,” he says, and he laughs. “Irving was due to make a speech back at the same bierkeller that evening and the court wanted to serve him with the papers for his sentence, which would have stopped him speaking, so we had to hide him in a cupboard. It was so funny.” I’m taken aback. His memories of being a far right activist appear to be rather fond. I ask him about his journey away from the far right. “It was never one day on, one day off,” he says. “It wasn’t some sudden change. It was over time. The red line is that I have always been true to myself. I am a provocateur, always have been.” I point out that, if the timeline in the interview he gave to Frans Dekkers is correct, when we went for that lunch, he was already leaving the far right behind. And yet the things he said to me were avowedly antisemitic. He looks a little sheepish. “Ernst Zundel was paying me 16,000 Deutsch Marks a month, about the equivalent of €8,000,” he says. “I was suddenly rich. Before that I had nothing. Now I had everything. It was a great job for a provocateur.” Plus, he says, he was good at it. He says: “Didn’t I once tell the Telegraph that I was proof the Führer could happen again?” and he laughs again. Then, more seriously, he says, “The media version of Althans had got out of control.” I tell him the things he said to me over that lunch were shocking. He looks dismayed. “I didn’t mean to shock you.” I look at him. “Is that an apology?” He opens his eyes wide as if accepting the suggestion. I extend my hand and we shake. Silently I note that he has apologised only for shocking me, not for what he has said. What about the claims he was an agent for the German intelligence services? He rolls his eyes. “It was a rumour placed in [a weekly news magazine] by a friend. It was meant to help me. But it wasn’t true and the judge was too clever for that. He saw through it.” It leads us to discuss the conviction that landed him in prison. It was unfair, he says. He only agreed to cooperate with the film director Winfried Bohnengel on the documentary Beruf NeoNazi because it was meant to focus on him leaving the movement behind. “My father was interviewed for it. He wouldn’t have been involved if I was still a Nazi.” He says the statement at the site of Auschwitz for which he was convicted – “No people have been gassed here. They have all survived and are making a living in Germany” – was taken out of context. But surely, I say, there must have been hours of other footage which proved his case? Why didn’t his defence lawyers call for that to be presented to the court? He shrugs. “I don’t know.” For a while the courts ruled that the film could only be shown in Germany if it was preceded by the footage of the dead and dying discovered during the liberation of Bergen-Belsen. “I am sorry about the 18 members of your family who died in the war,” he barks. “But what the fuck is that shit?” The conviction is over 25 years old, but he is clearly still furious with the court’s decision that the documentary could only be screened after the infamous footage of Bergen-Belsen. We discuss the possibility of a book. I tell him that, for it to work, he could have absolutely no control of the contents. He dismisses this. “I accept I need someone else to tell my story, but it has to be my story,” he says. He points to the Beruf NeoNazi experience. He won’t let that happen again. It is late. We have been talking for more than three hours. He is intense and kinetic. His life now may be very different to that in 1992, his views very different, but it is clear the story of those days has come to define a lot that followed. By now Althans has warmed to the notion of the book. He tells me we must sit down together to watch a 1993 film called Another Journey by Train, in which he and other neo-Nazis talk about their love of Hitler while travelling to the site of the Auschwitz concentration camp. I am tired and tell him sharply that I really don’t want to do that. Sitting with Althans while he narrates fondly his experiences inside the far right, does not sound like a good night out to me. “You must be open to these things if we are going to write our book together,” he says. It is now our book. We go our separate ways shortly after that. The next day I email him my thanks and again explain that, while there is a great book to be written, he really could not control its contents. He does not reply. He does not reply to any subsequent messages either. I realise I had been idealising our encounter. I had wanted to meet a man who had lived a life starkly in black and white; a man who had been one person and then another. At a time when the tide of antisemitism is rising, I had focused on the idea of there being one fewer Nazi in the world. But real lives are murkier than that. For Althans it had just been a continuum. He was now deep into middle-age, but he was still dealing with the fallout from events that had occurred when he was a very young man. The day after our walk around East Berlin, I awoke to a WhatsApp message. There was no text, just a shot of a dual language poster for a Polish campaign against homophobia. Althans was the poster boy, his hair tightly cropped, his biceps bulging in a short-sleeved shirt. He appeared relaxed and smiling into the camera. The legend across the poster read simply: “Everybody Can Change.” It was the last I ever heard from him. It was time to leave both Ewald Althans, and myself, in peace. This article was amended on 25 January 2022 to reflect the fact that the historian David Irving is discredited.Sequoia Nagamatsu’s ambitious novel-in-stories was written long before Covid. Nevertheless, when melting permafrost reveals a Neanderthal corpse, which in turn disgorges an ancient plague, the repercussions feel initially familiar. Only initially, because the Arctic plague will turn out to be far deadlier, while Nagamatsu’s zany vision extends, via a succession of first-person narrators, thousands of years into the future, incorporating interstellar travel, advanced cryopreservation and alien shape-shifters. The plague first targets children, transforming their organs into approximations of other bodily organs (squeamish readers take note: Nagamatsu isn’t one to shy away from the physicality of disease). Soon, all aspects of human life revolve around death. “Mortuary cryptocurrencies” are the only money worth having, high-rise cemeteries sprout and theme parks become euthanasia centres. It’s at such a park that one of the novel’s more affecting episodes is set. In the “before times”, its narrator was an aspiring comedian. Now, he dons a mouse costume and escorts kids on to the last ride of their short lives at the City of Laughter. When he grows close to a mother and her dying son, he finds himself mourning a future he might never have known he wanted. The boy’s father is the focus of another of the novel’s stronger chapters. Overseeing an operation to farm donor organs from pigs, he and his team accidentally breed a pig that’s able to talk. Nicknamed “Snortorious P.I.G.”, he’s a whimsical beast, ravenous for knowledge and poised to teach his human carers much about mortality. As the losses pile up, Nagamatsu succeeds in assembling a book that feels energetic despite its base note of mainly muted, sometimes maudlin despair. A little over halfway through, tales of endings give way to visions of new beginnings, albeit not here on Earth. It closes with a somewhat corny solution to a mystery whose seeds were planted in the first pages: how did the cavern in which the Neanderthal girl was found come to be inscribed with advanced mathematics? Many of these chapters have been published as short stories in the past decade. While they don’t convince as a novel, they’ve undeniably found their moment with their sustained message that love and hope continue to flicker even in the face of catastrophic pestilence. • How High We Go in the Dark by Sequoia Nagamatsu is published by Bloomsbury (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyEvery small business owner I talk to has the same problem: we can’t find enough people to do the work we need. Well, I have an answer: perhaps we should be offering a four-day workweek. “What? A four-day workweek?” I’ll often hear when I propose this. “I need my people to work more, not less!” Sure, it sounds a little crazy, particularly for the typical small business owner – who, according to the Small Business Administration – is generally over the age of 55. But to those people – many of whom are my clients – I say, keep an open mind. The reality is that a four-day workweek is steadily becoming a workplace reality. And leveraging it could be a huge benefit for a small business owner. The four-day workweek concept is already growing in acceptance. A test of this model from 2015 to 2019 in Iceland of more than 2,500 workers (which represents more than 1% of the country’s working population, or the equivalent of more than 16 million workers in the US) proved to be an “overwhelming success”. Iceland’s experiment has motivated governments in New Zealand, Singapore and Spain to consider four-day workweek models in their countries. The Icelandic test is also behind a group of more than 100 progressives in Congress – led by Congressman Mark Takano – to introduce legislation requiring US companies to limit their workweeks to 32 hours. And although it’s unlikely that this legislation will see the light of day here in the near term, many US companies are already taking it upon themselves to try out their own versions of the four-day workweek. And for good reasons. For example, a San Francisco-based e-commerce company called Bolt started the policy for its 550 employees this year. “It’s actually not about trying to cram five days into four days,” the company’s chief people officer told a local news outlet. “The way we think about it is actually changing the way we work, and being more effective and efficient during those four days.” Panasonic is also offering a four-day workweek as an option to its employees. Microsoft did the same in Japan, and claims a 40% increase in productivity as a result. Kickstarter is testing the concept this year. Thirty companies in the United Kingdom are participating in a pilot program to test its effectiveness. This is clearly a trend, and like all trends it has early adopters and naysayers. But is this something that only big brands should consider? Absolutely not. A four-day workweek should be seriously considered by smaller businesses and for one big reason: it would help to solve our current labor woes. Just think about it: if you’re a small business owner, you’re having a very difficult time finding people and keeping your best people around. It’s the Great Resignation, right? You’re competing against bigger companies with more resources. And yet here’s a benefit that more than two-thirds of workers want and yet only 17% of employers are offering, according to a recent study from employment recruiter Robert Half. And some studies have shown that these types of working arrangements also increase productivity, effectiveness and morale. Small businesses are particularly well-suited to offer a four-day workweek because, as a small business owner, we simply have more flexibility than our larger counterparts. We can tailor our four-day workweek program to whatever we want it to be. Those “four days” could be four 10-hour days. Or it could be four eight-hour days, as long as employees meet their agreed-upon deliverables, rather than just logging in time. It can be implemented during certain less-busy times of the year. We can eliminate – or curtail – our current vacation plans. We can make the program available in lieu of a work from home arrangement – or to complement it. Within reason, we can offer it to some employees but not to others, based on their job requirements. If it’s not working out for certain people you can change the rules. The biggest attraction? Unlike most other employee benefits, it doesn’t have to cost us anything. Because in the end, if we’re getting the work we need out of our people then what do we care whether they do it in four days or two days? This is just compensation for a job performed. And smaller companies have much more flexibility in how we can apply these rules compared with our larger competitors. And let’s not forget: being the first small business in your town to offer a four-day workweek is going to generate quite a lot of positive PR too. The four-day workweek is trending. It’s an attractive, no-cost benefit to offer (if done correctly). It’s a great recruiting tool for a small business. And it’s a great way for that same small business to retain its best workers in these times of tight labor supply.Directed by Denzel Washington, this solemn romantic drama is based on Pulitzer prize-winning journalist Dana Canedy’s 2008 memoir. Its title refers to the notebook of advice that her partner, Charles Monroe King, a soldier who died during the Iraq war, left for their young son. Portrayed here by Chanté Adams and Michael B Jordan, the couple’s fairytale courtship is detailed in extended flashback scenes, though the journal is a reminder that their happy ending is ultimately doomed. The film seems aimed at female audiences, emphasising Canedy’s struggles to balance being a single mother with her job at the New York Times, and luxuriating in their date nights across New York City. There’s even a gratuitous shot of Jordan’s bare bum. Washington appears to be drawn to the old-school ideal of masculinity embodied by King. Adams is a vivacious screen presence with a twinkle in her eye, and Jordan can’t quite match her, unable to draw out any real inner turmoil in a character who is respectable to a fault.A familiar theme tune is playing in my ears as I step out of my front door and start running. It is a cold, frosty day in Cambridge but as I make my way towards Midsummer Common and the River Cam, I am transported to a much warmer climate. A desert island, where I know I will find exactly eight tracks of music, the Bible, the complete works of Shakespeare and an incongruous luxury. I am, of course, listening to Desert Island Discs, which will celebrate its 80th anniversary next weekend. First broadcast on 29 January 1942, it is the jewel in BBC Radio 4’s crown, to the extent that being on it is “kind of like getting a people’s knighthood”, observes the Observer’s radio critic, Miranda Sawyer. “There is no better radio show,” she says. “And I think, because it’s been for so long, there’s a status attached to getting picked – like, if you get asked to be on Desert Island Discs, that means somehow that you’ve made it.” There are now more than 2,300 episodes of the show available online from the BBC archive. The oldest available dates back to 1951, when Roy Plomley interviewed the actress Margaret Lockwood and the famous theme tune was heralded by squawking seagulls and the crash of waves. I became a fan of the show shortly after I started running a few years ago. I’ve discovered that firstly, the interview takes my mind off the boredom – and pain – of pounding the pavements. And secondly, when the music comes on, it feels very uplifting: I enjoy the craziness of trying to find a beat to run to, from whatever random assortment of songs I am confronted with. Often, I assess the interviewee’s choices and try to predict: which track would they choose to save from the waves? Most people, I have noticed, save the track that reminds them of someone they love – a dead parent, their child, their wedding day. It is not the music they are saving, but the memories. For Cathy Drysdale, who was the series producer between 2012 and 2020, the programme’s enduring appeal is that it taps straight into the emotions of its guests via their musical choices. “Everyone invited on is asked to chart their life’s journey and they have to really think about music in the context of their life. It accesses parts of their story and what’s important to them that other interview formats and programmes just don’t.” Most people, she points out, have a piece of music that can reduce them to tears or take them back in time. Guests of the programme are no different: “It’s essentially so human.” “I think, also, it’s about love. It’s really about the people they have loved, what or who they love now and what’s important to them in their lives.” She remembers the moment the footballer Ian Wright broke down in tears while talking to Lauren Laverne about his former teacher. “He said: ‘I loved that man,’ and it was just an incredibly special moment. When you’re recording something like that, you sort of stop breathing for a bit because you know – you just know – the listeners are just going to absolutely love it and be really moved by it. And it’s really going to cause a stir.” There was a similar occasion with the actor Tom Hanks, she says, when Kirsty Young asked him to find the vocabulary for what he’d said was “rattling around his head” as a child. “He was stopped in his tracks by his thoughts. There was a really long silence. And he said it was the vocabulary of loneliness.” It was a very special moment in the studio, she said, which she knew would be “radio gold”. But not all great episodes include a weeping man. My personal favourite is Laverne’s 2020 interview with the indomitable disability rights activist Sinead Burke. At 11, she decided that if the other children didn’t want to be her friend because she was a “little person”, they weren’t the kind of friends she needed in her life. “I told my parents: I’m not getting the surgery. If people don’t like me, that’s their fault. I’m great.” Sawyer is particularly fond of a 2010 interview with comedian Kathy Burke, in which Burke declared her luxury item should be a laminated life-size picture of James Caan from Dragons’ Den. Burke wanted this, she told an astonished Young, to “body-surf on him”. A more recent highlight for Sawyer came last month, when the author Richard Osman chose to save an Erasure track from the waves. “I quite liked that his music choice was a bit naff.” He wasn’t interested in pretending to be cooler than he actually is. “That’s quite revelatory.” Inevitably, one of the biggest difficulties a long-running programme has to face, periodically, is the inauguration of a new presenter. “People get very upset about it, but you just have to get used to the new presenter,” says Sawyer. She has nothing but praise for Laverne, who took over from Kirsty Young in 2018 and was criticised for being “lightweight” shortly afterwards. “Lauren, I think, is very good at making people relax. And that’s really important.” When guests relax, she says, they start to enjoy themselves – and that’s when they let their guard down and those revelatory moments of “radio gold” occur. By contrast, listening to episodes in the archives, Sawyer is struck by how class-ridden some of the previous presenters have been. In a snooty tone, “they literally ask: how did you make it? As in: how did you, you little pleb, get up to the great height you’re at now?” Unlike these presenters of the past, “the questions Lauren asks are pointed but not disrespectful – I think she’s really good.” One reason the conversations often feel so intimate and intense is because they go on for a lot longer than listeners realise. It takes about an hour and a half of interviewing to create the 40-minute programme. Drysdale says: “That’s one of the difficult things: what I can I leave out? It’s a hard show to edit.” Working on a programme that “means so much to so many people”, she found herself protecting the format like a tiger: “I probably made myself a right pain in doing so. But you can’t avoid doing that, because you’re holding it in trust. You’re doing the very best that you can while you’re looking after it. And then you’re passing the baton on.” Five key shows Louis Armstrong, 1968 Lost for decades, the recording of Armstrong’s appearance on the show was eventually found in Armstrong’s personal collection in 2015. He chose five of his own discs, including What A Wonderful World, but saved Blueberry Hill from the waves. As for his luxury? “Got to be my horn.” Spike Milligan, 1978 The great poet and comic told Roy Plomley how after the second world war he drifted into writing. “What did you write?” Plomley asked. “Oh. Cheques,” replied Milligan. He chose Yesterday as his favourite song, and when it finished playing, started singing his own verse: “Yesterday, someone came and took the cat away…” “Don’t go and wreck it,” said Plomley. Maya Angelou, 1988 Chose Roberta Flack’s song Killing Me Softly, then described being raped by her mother’s boyfriend at the age of seven. He was kicked to death after she revealed what happened to her. “Somehow, with my seven-and-a-half year old logic, I decided that my voice had killed him. I decided I’d better not talk because anyone who heard me might die.” She stopped speaking for five years until a lady called Mrs Flowers convinced her to read poetry aloud. George Michael, 2007 Cast away to the island shortly after completing his community service for driving while unfit through drugs, he spoke about his self-destructive tendencies, his insecurity, his hunger for fame and the reasons he hid his sexuality during the Aids pandemic. He chose Love is a Losing Game by Amy Winehouse as the track he would save from the waves, praising her talent and stressing that she needed support. Having lost his driving licence, he picked an Aston Martin DB9 to drive in the privacy of the island as his luxury. Helen McCrory, 2020 Confessed that she “lived life at 150 miles an hour” and cheekily described her husband, Damian Lewis, as “naughty”. She chose the complete works of Spike Milligan and the entire Victoria and Albert Museum in London as her luxury item. “I shall wear all the jewels, all the costumes. I shall take out the samurai swords – some of the greatest swords ever made – to make my hut,” she told Lauren Laverne. “And I shall enjoy myself on my desert island, surrounded by what I love most, which is humanity.” She chose Stevie Wonder’s Don’t You Worry ‘Bout A Thing as her final track, and died a few months later.Last week the British political establishment was shaken by a rare MI5 alert warning of a Chinese party-state agent operating in parliament. Christine Lee, who, according to MI5, has engaged in both overt and covert activity in support of the Chinese Communist party, cultivated links to British politicians for more than a decade (the Chinese embassy in London has denied these claims). It’s tempting to consider this revelation as yet another sign that we are entering a new cold war. In fact, the international landscape differs radically from the power struggle that defined the period after the second world war. To be sure, the world of spying and espionage still exists, but the current relationship between liberal democracies and authoritarian states is more like a phoney peace. Globalisation has entangled these opposing political regimes in complex and, at times, contradictory ways. The political culture built around the ruling party in China centralises power in a way that would be inconceivable in the UK. The CCP boasts an astonishing reach into myriad aspects of society as well as retaining an armed wing in the form of the People’s Liberation Army. At the same time, some British and international businesses now depend on access to Chinese markets, and appear willing to do whatever Beijing demands in order to sustain their presence in China. The global economy is not easily understood through the lens of the cold war, when these international links were present but far less developed. Today, supply chains and financial markets ensure nations are far more interdependent. If the cold war was defined by hostility short of direct military conflict, the phoney peace is an era in which interconnected nations are embroiled in growing hostility. These new conditions produce new challenges. First and foremost, liberal democracies must address an increasing risk to Asian communities. As last week’s case in parliament demonstrates, scrutiny of Chinese party-state activity is necessary. But there is always a danger that legitimate concern could spill over into irrational suspicion. Australia is a case in point: the country has experienced a rise in anti-Chinese and anti-Asian sentiment in the wake of party-state-linked scandals such as that of political donor Huang Xiangmo. Any attempts to shore up resilience to authoritarian interference must begin by considering overseas Chinese communities, acknowledging that they are frequently targeted by the Chinese party-state. One of the most prominent geopolitical hazards that liberal democracies now face is increasing dependence on authoritarian states. Britain’s decision to allow Chinese party-state involvement in the country’s civil nuclear energy sector is a useful microcosm of this wider situation, and it brings us back to Lee. While the decision to involve the Chinese party-state in Hinkley nuclear power station through a partnership with EDF was primarily financial, it was the first step to a Chinese-operated reactor on UK soil. In my own PhD research, I found documents showing that at a UK-China energy summit held in 2014, the British government acknowledged to Chinese officials that Hinkley was a pathway to a “majority led Chinese new build project including the use of Chinese reactor technology”. This was set to be the Bradwell site, led by China General Nuclear Power Group, using the Hualong One reactor. How does Lee fit into this picture? She has donated significant sums to Labour MP Barry Gardiner since the mid-2010s and has donated to his constituency office since 2009. Gardiner would play an important role in shaping the Labour party’s response to Hinkley as the official opposition. The Times reported that Gardiner “strongly opposed internal party criticism of Chinese involvement in the Hinkley Point project”, although Gardiner has said Lee gained no political advantage from him. In February 2013, Lee made a single donation to the Liberal Democrats’ Kingston borough office, the constituency of Ed Davey MP, who, at the time of the donation, was the secretary of state for energy and climate change. Davey would play a vital role in securing the future of Hinkley, not least by almost singlehandedly convincing the Liberal Democrats to back nuclear energy. Davey says he does not remember Lee. Yet Chinese party-state involvement in UK civil nuclear energy wouldn’t have been an option without support from the Conservative leadership, most enthusiastically from George Osborne. A year after the 2014 discussions, Osborne publicly asserted that Hinkley “opens the door for majority Chinese ownership of a subsequently nuclear project in Bradwell”. Multinational and transnational corporations play a significant role in this new landscape. Their reliance on markets and manufacturing sites in authoritarian states makes them potential channels of authoritarian influence in liberal democracies. Additionally, the channels such groups have forged can be employed by authoritarian states. This was what happened in the Hinkley case. The all-party parliamentary groups in Westminster represent one of these channels through which companies pay into the British political system. The China APPG, the Nuclear Energy APPG, and the Energy Studies APPG have all received sponsorship from French energy giant EDF – CGN’s partner in the Hinkley project. In addition, members of the Energy Studies APPG were taken to China by CGN to visit their Taishan nuclear power station at a cost of more than £52,500 to the Chinese party-state energy group. After the trip, the APPG’s chair, Ian Liddell-Grainger MP, reported back to parliament that CGN was working “hand in hand with EDF to develop as a major nuclear player, as well as develop its own reactors”. He said the Taishan power station was “very good” and “does the job”. As well as providing CGN feedback, Liddell-Grainger also intervened when ZTE, effectively a Chinese state-owned technology group, was labelled a national security risk in official UK intelligence advice. The MP supported ZTE’s “Whitehall lobbying campaign”, backed by consultants from the PR firm Sovereign Strategy, according to reports at the time. Such links are not uncommon in British politics. Since we tolerate channels through which commercial interests can influence political actors, we shouldn’t be surprised to hear allegations that adversarial states such as China employ the same means. The UK is not an outlier in this regard. Germany also risks greater dependence on an authoritarian state in the form of the controversial Nord Stream 2 project and the Russian gas it will supply. Predictably, here too we see some of the same patterns, most notably in the form of ex-chancellor Gerhard Schröder’s position as chairman of the Nord Stream AG shareholders’ committee, as well as chairman of the board of directors of Russian oil producer Rosneft. Where cold war conditions generated energetic discussions about ideology and military activity, the phoney peace demands that we pay greater attention to transparency and accountability. Growing scrutiny of British engagement with the Chinese party-state reminds us that better regulation of political donations and revolving-door appointments is not just good governance – it is a matter of national security. Martin Thorley is a postdoctoral research fellow at the University of Exeter, studying international engagement with ChinaIn the months leading up to the arrival of a strict new animal welfare law in California, headlines warned of a “Great California bacon crisis”. The law sets minimum living-space requirements for breeding pigs, which restaurants said could make bacon more expensive and harder to get. But so far, the pork apocalypse has yet to arrive. “There seems to be little disruption,” said Ronald Fong, the president of the California Grocers Association, of the law that took effect this month. “We just have not seen a pork shortage.” California voters approved the law, known as Prop 12, in 2018. It creates minimum space requirements for animals raised to be sold in California, including pigs, calves and chickens. A vital element of the law is that even if a producer is based outside California, they have to follow the rules if they want to sell inside the state. Breeding pigs must have at least 24 square feet per sow – the size of two large bath towels. While it doesn’t sound like a lot, it’s a big change from the crates many animals live in. “This is a giant leap forward,” said Vicky Bond, a veterinarian with the non-profit international animal advocacy group the Humane League. “It’s the strongest law we’ve ever seen,” adding that the law puts California ahead of the European Union in terms of animal welfare. The lack of disruption in California’s pork supply chain so far could be due to the fact that pork produced before 31 December 2021 is considered compliant, and grocers and restaurants can keep inventory for five to six months before it needs to be sold. That means the final supply of 2021 pork is due to arrive in June. Industry groups, however, have continued to protest against the law, saying it will destabilize the multibillion-dollar US pork supply chain by raising the cost of raising animals. California consumes about 14% of the country’s pork yet only 4% of existing sow housing nationwide meets Prop 12’s standards, according to a 2021 report by the financial services company Rabobank. Big pork producers have already pulled some products out of the state. And a legal challenge is snaking its way up to the supreme court, filed by the National Pork Producers, though the court rejected a similar challenge last June. “This will cost the average family farm $15m to $17m,” Michael Formica, the general counsel for the National Pork Producers Council, told a news station in San Diego. “We believe it’s entirely unconstitutional.” A second legal challenge has been lodged by the grocers, restaurants and the Hispanic chamber of commerce. The suit says that the exact rules haven’t yet been drafted by the California department of food and agriculture, leaving them with little clue as to what actual compliance will mean. “We’re not against Prop 12,” said Fong, one of the plaintiffs in the challenge. “Our issue is: give us clear regulations and ample time to comply and we will.” The plaintiffs point out that Proposition 2 – another animal welfare law, passed by California voters in 2008, that said animals must be able to turn around freely in their living spaces – was much more narrow in scope in that it applied only to California farmers, and yet it still took more than six years to be implemented. They are asking for 28 months to get into line with the new regulations. Right now, Fong said, the law is in place but he hasn’t heard of any enforcement around pork products sold in California. Not everyone is concerned, though. A Whole Foods Market spokesperson told the San Francisco Chronicle that the grocery chain doesn’t expect to see any price increases or shortages of pork as a result of Prop 12 this year because Whole Foods already maintains animal welfare requirements. A University of California Davis study estimated Prop 12 would raise production costs about 15% per market hog, but that the cost passed to the consumer would be less. The researchers predict an 8% increase in the price of uncooked pork, equal to about $0.25 per pound, which would work out to Californians paying $3.55 for a pound of pork compared with an average retail price of $3.30. Rebecca Boehm, an economist with the Union of Concerned Scientists, said she found it curious that profitable Fortune 500 companies like JBS, Tyson and Smithfield haven’t figured out a way to adapt to the new rules – especially since they are clearly what voters want. “This competitive business spirit, how is that not driving a change?” she said. “People can vote with their dollar or with a ballot, and they voted for this. They should meet that demand.” Bond said that similar animal welfare laws were in force, including in states like Massachusetts. “As people become aware of factory farming, they absolutely vote to ban these systems. This form of intensive farming can’t continue.” She noted that the pork industry and the egg industry had acted very differently in the face of the new legislation. According to an analysis by the Humane League, in 2015, just 6% of US hens were raised cage-free. Now, 29% are, as consumers have pressed for higher welfare standards. “The egg industry saw the writing on the wall, that now is the time to invest in the systems of the future,” said Bond. “Whereas the pork industry spent the last three years fighting instead of preparing.”From fancy toys to smartphones, when technology breaks, it often seems simplest to ditch it for a new model. But now experts are hoping to challenge the status quo, launching a citizen science project to explore attitudes to repair, and pinpoint parts of the UK where the mending mindset is thriving. The Big Repair Project comes in the wake of campaigns to reduce the vast quantities of electrical and electronic waste produced each year, as well as the environmental impact of new products, by ensuring that consumers can fix broken or damaged products – a rarity in the consumer world. “It got to the point where most products ended up being put on to the market with no real viable route to repair,” said Prof Mark Miodownik of University College London, and who is leading the project. Last year new laws were passed in the UK around the “right to repair”, meaning spare parts must now be made available for a number of household items including washing machines and TVs, and stay available for up to 10 years, depending on the part. Meanwhile companies including Microsoft and Apple have recently announced their own moves to allow consumers to repair their own tech. “It’s clear that the writing’s on the wall that actually from an environmental perspective, and from a market perspective, this is the direction of travel,” said Miodownik. But there has been pushback. At a recent roundtable event, hosted by the Royal Academy of Engineering and chaired by Miodownik some manufacturers argued that people could be injured attempting repairs, that the approach may make it harder to protect intellectual property, and that storing spare parts without trying to sell them is not necessarily in a company’s interests. Some manufacturers also said they were waiting for customer demand to produce products with a lower environmental impact. Laura Selten, of the appliance manufacturer Beko, said keeping products in use by increasing their longevity and repairability was one of the key ways to minimise products’ carbon footprint, adding that increasing the use of universal spare parts was one area the industry could work on. But, she added, one issue was that the cost of new appliances was now closer to that of repairing old ones. “Also at the point of purchase consumers tend to pay more attention to the price, functionality and aesthetics of the appliances rather than being concerned with the repairability of the appliances,” she said. The citizen science project, said Miodownik, was in part a bid to explore whether the public really cared about being able to repair products. As part of the Big Repair Project, participants will be asked to complete a survey about different appliances, gadgets and tech, including how important it is to be able to repair them and how long they would typically expect such items to last. The team will also collect partial postcode data to gather information on when items break, such as whether they are repaired and how much the process cost, allowing researchers to gather granular data on whether there are “repair hotspots” around the country. “It is of interest to us, with the levelling-up agenda, to know whether there’s a repair economy that’s thriving in a certain locale,” said Miodownik. “It is important to emphasise that we are just as interested in the stuff people can’t repair because it is too expensive to do so, and whether this makes them frustrated,” he said. The data could also provide the opportunity to test ideas around the impact of the approach. “We’ve got this hypothesis that actually repair isn’t just an economic good, an environmental good, but also social good,” said Miodownik.The chief of Germany’s navy has resigned after arguing at a livestreamed event that Putin “deserves respect” and Kyiv will never win back annexed Crimea – comments that Ukraine’s ambassador in Berlin said “massively” called into question Germany’s trustworthiness. Vice-admiral Kay-Achim Schönbach, who has led Germany’s naval force and represented it externally since March 2020, made his comments at a talk organised by a thinktank in Delhi on Friday. Taking questions after a short presentation, Schönbach seemed to downplay the possibility of a military conflict with Russia and Ukraine. “Is Russia really interested in having a tiny strip of Ukrainian soil, to integrate into their country?” the 56-year-old said. “No. Putin is putting on pressure because he knows he can do it, he splits the European Union.” What Putin really wanted, Schönbach argued, was respect. “On eye level, he wants respect. And my God, giving him respect is low cost, even no cost. It is easy to give him the respect he demands, and probably deserves.” The comments come at a time when Germany’s stance in the conflict between Russia and Ukraine is under increased scrutiny, and Europe’s largest economy is increasingly isolated in its refusal to supply Ukraine with lethal weapons, a position the government reiterated on Wednesday last week. The navy chief also said the annexed territories of Crimea were “gone” and would “never come back” to Kyiv, arguing in favour of closer economic ties with Russia to contain China’s rise. “Having this big country, even if it is not a democracy, as a bilateral partner … probably keeps Russia away from China.” Describing himself as “a very radical Roman Catholic”, Schönbach said Russia was also a “Christian country, even if Putin is an atheist, it doesn’t matter”. The comments drew heavy criticism from Ukraine’s ambassador in Germany when they emerged on social media. Andriy Melnyk told Die Welt newspaper that Schönbach’s comments had “put the entire Ukrainian public in deep shock” and “massively called into question Germany’s trustworthiness and reliability, not just from a Ukrainian point of view.” He said: “This patronising attitude subconsciously also reminds Ukrainians of the horrors of the Nazi occupation, when Ukrainians were treated as subhuman.” In a statement released on Saturday night, Schönbach said he had asked Germany’s defence minister, Christine Lambrecht, to relieve him of his duties with immediate effect, and the minister had accepted his request. “My careless comments in India on security and military policy are an increasing burden on my office,” his statement said. “I consider this step necessary to avoid further damage to the German navy, the German military, but especially the Federal Republic of Germany.” According to a report in Der Spiegel, Lambrecht had decided at a meeting on Saturday morning to call in Schönbach for a meeting on Monday, where it is likely he would have been fired.The title of Jean-Daniel Broussé’s solo show is a pun on the French word for bread and, of course, the English word for suffering. Over 55 minutes, Broussé – or JD, as he calls himself – gives a practical demonstration of how to make baguettes while sharing the pain of having to choose between continuing the family business or becoming a performer. A batch of lively scenes, devised and developed by JD with director Ursula Martinez, deploy dance, music, film and acrobatics to tell the story, in this fourth-ever performance (not all are oven-ready). JD comes from a line of bakers. His father, grandfather and great-grandfather ran a boulangerie in the south of France. Donning an apron, he mixes his ingredients: “1kg patriarchy, 750ml Christian values, 70g sentimentality, 20g small-town mindset”. As a voiceover narrates the process by which dough is formed, JD climbs into a white, stretchy, fabric sack, Martha Graham-style, and mimes being kneaded, thrown, twisted, turned. The making of bread as a metaphor for the shaping of a life is unforced and very funny. We are introduced to the area where JD grew up, its dances and customs (he delivers a tale in the regional language Occitan to his own bagpipe accompaniment). On screen, his mother gleefully sings a scabrous lyric she devised to describe past dissatisfactions with her life; his father, packing up the business his son will not carry on, philosophically contrasts endings and beginnings. We meet the doctor who diagnoses JD’s gluten intolerance – the rejector rejected. The darker side of JD’s experiences, as a queer man in a small town, is suggested in his mischievous comparisons between himself and Jesus – naughty, but nicely done. This comparison is implicit also in the conclusion. JD invites the audience to eat the six loaves baked in his on-stage oven; his sharing of self through performance is also a celebration of our communality. The bread tastes good. This performance was part of the London international mime festival, which runs until Sunday 6 February. (le) Pain is at Warwick Arts Centre (1 February) and the Studio, Edinburgh (4 February)Teenage girls are taken seriously in Joana Hadjithomas and Khalil Joreige’s lively coming-of-age drama. In Montreal, a blizzard rages as Alex (Paloma Vauthier) pores over her mother Maia’s “memory box”, a trove of correspondence from her youth in 1980s Beirut. Notebooks, photographs and cassette tapes form a self-portrait of Maia’s adolescence, detailing her vices (smoking), secret boyfriends (“Raja”) and favourite songs (Fade to Grey by Visage). They are also a portal to her memories of the Lebanese civil war, a painful experience she has chosen not to share with her daughter. Hadjithomas and Joreige thoughtfully explore trauma while remaining joyful, animating Maia’s photos, which fizz, crackle and dance to life on screen.England captain Heather Knight has said that her side will be going all out to win the Ashes Test in Canberra, after consecutive wash-outs in the second and third T20s at Adelaide left both sides frustrated at the lack of opportunity to get early points on the board in the series. Australia won the first match by nine wickets but the second game on Saturday was called off after 4.1 overs, while Sunday’s final T20 was abandoned without a ball being bowled. The series scoreline stands at 4-2 to Australia, and with the Test worth four points, a win is crucial to England’s hopes of regaining the Ashes. “It’s been a very frustrating couple of days,” Knight said. “We didn’t have the chance to try and get back in the series with the two games. With Test match cricket you have to earn the right to be aggressive. It’s about getting ready mentally. We’ll sit down as a group and try and work out the best strategy to try to win us the game and take that four points. If we can get a win in the Test match, it puts us in a strong position going into the ODIs.” Knight also spoke on how reserve days should be introduced into the Women’s Ashes schedule and repeated her call for five-day Tests. “I’ve been pretty clear that when you play Test matches so rarely, it should be at least five days,” continued Knight. But the Test is obviously going to be four. If we lose a day to rain - or even half a day - we’ve seen how hard it is in previous Test matches to force a result.” England’s last visit to Australia – for the T20 World Cup in 2020 – was also hit by rain, with a semi-final washout controversially ending their tournament due to a lack of contingency options in the playing conditions. “I think reserve days in Ashes and World Cups would be very useful,” Knight said. “It would be useful if they could be worked in and potentially a five-day Test match would make things better for everyone, the players, the viewers, and make sure you don’t miss the contest that you want to see. In a hotly-contested series that might be tight, you don’t want the weather to be the main story, do you? I’d be open to looking at different things.” Australian morale has been dented by the news that fast bowler Tayla Vlaeminck will miss the remainder of the Ashes and the World Cup in New Zealand with a stress fracture in her right foot – a recurrence of the injury which kept her out of the 2020 T20 World Cup. “It was a pretty quiet changing room when we found out the news last night,” teammate Rachael Haynes said. “We’re so disappointed for her.” In happier news, Australia coach Matthew Mott confirmed that Beth Mooney would be returning to the squad for the remainder of the series. Mooney, who only days ago underwent surgery to mend the fracture in her jaw, was spotted at the Adelaide Oval jogging around the outfield and has been described by Mott as looking “in good nick”. “It’s pretty incredible,” Haynes added. “The swelling around her face has gone down quite substantially and she’s feeling really confident. She had a hit today in the nets and a run around and by all accounts she’s not in any pain. Without a doubt she’s definitely got her eye on [playing in] that Test match.” Both teams fly to Canberra on Monday and will immediately commence preparations for the Test, which begins on Thursday.In her new memoir, I Came All This Way to Meet You, the American novelist Jami Attenberg describes meeting a man who is not on any social media at all, and who therefore has no idea what it’s like to receive a like or retweet. Attenberg considers this state wildly unusual, not to say bizarre; she’s all over Instagram and the rest. But her amazement is tempered with what sounds like envy. “You goddam beautiful unicorn,” she writes of him. “What’s that like, being entirely self-validating? What’s it like to wake up every day and not worry what anyone else thinks?” As it happens, I’ve spent the past 18 years of my life with just such a unicorn, though the man I’m talking about is – or was – an even rarer beast than hers. So, a guy isn’t on social media. So what? Lots of people aren’t. Facebook is for dinosaurs. The more important fact by far when it comes to my mythical creature is that, until three weeks ago, he did not, in a Britain in which around 87% of adults own a smartphone, even have a mobile. Not only had he never used social media, he had never sent, let alone received, a text. The exquisite torture that comes of WhatsApp and its blue ticks was entirely unknown to him, a man whose body is very far indeed from being hard-wired to respond to alerts. Nothing pinged in his pocket as he strolled along. When he was lost, he had to ask a stranger, not Google Maps. When he was out late, he had to rely on his legs, not an Uber. Calls? You’d be surprised. The last time he needed urgently to contact me while out and about, he walked into a hotel bar and, drawing on all of his great David Niven-like urbanity, casually asked a waiter if he might “use your telephone for a moment”. Unsurprisingly, friends and strangers alike professed themselves astonished by this refusal to get with the programme (I mean the programme that involves being available 24 hours a day, seven days a week), their manner hovering between amusement and exasperation. Do you, people would ask sarcastically, still recite your number when you answer your landline? But I always found irritation the more interesting response, suggestive as it was of feelings of exclusion and hurt (“Don’t you want me to call you?”). Sometimes, it bordered on anger, a low-level rage that might possibly – I’m only guessing – have been connected to a sense of unfairness. While T had escaped the constant hassle, the stress and the surveillance, they had not, and never would. (Not that they would ever admit to this. Far too much – their entire existence! – was, is, at stake for that.) What about me, though? At some point, eyes would inevitably glide in my direction. Wasn’t I the long-suffering one! How did I cope? I’d be lying if I said it wasn’t sometimes annoying. A couple of months ago, I left a party before him only to find that I didn’t have my keys with me; I had to wait on the doorstep for an hour. I used to roll my eyes if he asked to use my phone, not least because I would then have to explain how to use it. “Useful, aren’t they?” I’d say, jaw clenched. But, like Attenberg, I was admiring, too. Such a refusal spoke of confidence and ease; in his stubbornness, he reminded me usefully of a past in which we all survived perfectly well without being contactable at any moment. His phone-less state also, I think, helped to maintain the privacy that is vital for peaceable coupledom. Even if I wanted to check up on him, I couldn’t, and he, in turn, had no interest in my phone because, well, phones were not something he cared about. I watched others being pestered by – or pestering – those closest to them and found that I was relieved to have been exempted from this regime, however unwillingly at first. But the biggest benefit of all was undoubtedly to him – and this is where envy sets in. All that extra time! When people asked how he managed to write so much – in the first lockdown, while I stared at my tiny screen, he began, and finished, his recent memoir – the answer was blindingly obvious. Unlike the rest of the world, he never wasted a single moment wondering why someone hadn’t answered his last message; nor did he indulge in doom or any other kind of scrolling. For his time to be his own, he required so little discipline. His in-between times were calm and quiet, to be used for good things like reading or listening to music. Mine were – they still are – punctuated by incoming fire I’m seemingly forbidden to ignore (“Didn’t you see my email?”). My phone has the capacity to make me deeply unhappy. But as you’ll have noticed, this piece is written in the past tense. At Christmas, T asked me to give him a phone and this I duly did, sneaking it into his stocking so as not to make too big a deal of it. What had penetrated his defences? I had told him a hundred times – usually as I printed out yet another boarding pass – that he was in danger of becoming disenfranchised in a world where the phone is the key to everything, and yet still he would not crack. In the end, there were two things. First, his beloved iPod was obsolete; he wanted to be able to use Spotify while he was running. Second, there was Covid, which requires so much paperwork, all of which is best kept on a mobile phone. Outwardly, I was triumphant. “It’s for the best,” I said, in the level voice I reserve for these situations. But inwardly, something else was going on. My goddam beautiful unicorn was about to disappear. When the Christmas post went to pot, and not one but two sim cards went missing, and the shiny new phone could not be used, there was no ignoring it: relief rose inside me. A stay of execution for us both. Soon after this, the sim having finally arrived, there came a moment when I found him in an armchair, AirPods in his ears, utterly absorbed in the black rectangle in his hand. For how much longer would he remain a free man? Never such innocence again, I thought, mournfully. But there is hope. Having spent all of his adult life phone-less, some rules have been set; some habits are hard to break. T is not your typical phone user, and perhaps he never will be. Only me and his sister have his number, and I’m forbidden to give it out to anyone else. The other night, a friend begged for it – the phone is the talk of our circle; everyone wants to be the first to break the long silence/ruin his life – and thumb screws having been applied, I relented. The friend sent a text, but there came no answer – not then, or for the rest of the evening. “It’s probably switched off,” I said. “What?” said the friend. “No one switches their phone off.” Hmm. When I got home, I inquired after the text that had been sent. Had T received it? He proffered his phone, showing me his reply, sent the following morning. “Automated message,” it read. “This number is no longer available.” It was very convincing; he’d added dashes to the words “automated message”, and somehow this made it look official. “I feel a bit guilty,” he said, shoving it in his pocket. But his face, which wore a smile, told a different story – of a phone that is not quite a phone. Or not yet. *** Anthony Quinn: ‘A bus ride is now a bedlam of performative monologuists’ People were often incredulous that I’d never had a mobile. They talked to me about it as if I were missing a limb or afflicted with a serious illness. But it truly wasn’t that difficult to live without one. Thirty years ago nearly everybody did, and life was fine. Why, though? I suppose because I never wanted one. From the outside, looking in, I noticed the way mobiles changed everyday behaviour. Insidiously, the sleek pocket devil became what a pack of cigarettes was to a previous generation: something to occupy your hand, hugely antisocial, bad for your health. At some point it became acceptable to interrupt a conversation by raising a finger and saying, “I just need to take this”; to place your phone on a dinner table and check your incoming, surreptitiously or not; to stalk along a pavement, head down, eyes absorbed by your screen (so I have to step out of the way for you?). I travel mostly by bus, which used to be a good place to daydream, to mooch, to worry about the next chapter of my book. Solitary mooching must be a cornerstone of any civilised society. Alas, the upstairs deck is now a bedlam of jabberers, droners, performative monologuists. The dream was over after the pandemic. It no longer felt viable – or fair to Rachel – to have someone nannying me with NHS apps and Covid passes on a phone that wasn’t mine. It’s not all bad. No more trouble over entry at galleries, theatres, football stadiums. And I have Spotify when I go for a run – genius. For the rest, though, I’m hoping to maintain a low block on access. I don’t intend to give out my number. Email is the saviour. Honestly, I love my friends! I just don’t want them to call me – ever. Anthony Quinn’s most recent book is Klopp: My Liverpool Romance (Faber); his novel London, Burning is out in paperback next month (Abacus)Rolling Stone journalist Jason Fine is driving around southern California. Beach Boy Brian Wilson is in the passenger seat. A camera mounted on the dashboard observes as they play Wilson’s back catalogue through the car’s speakers. Wilson doesn’t like interviews. Formally diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder, the singer-songwriter and producer has survived addiction, family loss and an abusive relationship with a quack doctor. It’s no wonder he’s reluctant to rehash the details of his life. The gentle approach taken by director Brent Wilson and co-writer Fine here shows they are keenly aware of their subject’s vulnerability, less interested in extracting anecdotes than they are creating a safe space for the 79-year-old to reflect on his remarkable legacy. Archive footage of a round-faced, 22-year-old Wilson flirting with a newsreader makes for a poignant contrast with the artist today. Still, there remains something boyish about the septuagenarian. Cultural context is provided by celebrity talking heads including Elton John and Bruce Springsteen. Linda Perry, formerly of 4 Non Blondes, is the film’s sole female contributor, and its most insightful too. “You can tell this man is troubled, and trying to escape something,” she says. When Fine encourages him to elaborate, Wilson isn’t especially articulate, but his emotional responses to the individual songs are often lucid and revealing. It’s heartbreaking to see him look back on the evergreen innocence of his songbook, from the winter of his life.The big idea in Femi Elufowoju Jr’s reading of Rigoletto for Opera North is so powerful and so current and at the same time so true to the artistic force of Verdi’s setting of Victor Hugo that it is somehow surprising that it has taken until now for someone to put it on the stage. Elufowoju Jr’s production rediscovers the otherness of Rigoletto and his daughter Gilda for the 21st century. In Hugo and Verdi, the title role is a 16th-century hunchback court jester, who keeps his daughter hidden away to protect her from philandering aristocrats. Here, however, Rigoletto’s otherness is as a black man with a vulnerable daughter existing on the margins of an entitled bunch of rich white party animals who cannot be trusted around young women. Sound familiar? The political topicality is never explicitly stated, but it gives the idea searing extra credibility. Believe me, this new take on Rigoletto really works. It does so, in the main, because of the two black artists – Eric Greene as Rigoletto and Jasmine Habersham as Gilda – who don’t just inhabit their demanding roles vocally, Habersham in particular, but who constantly convey how everything in their lives is precarious, with danger (and excitement) lurking literally just outside the door. All this is elevated by the luxury casting of Willard White as Count Monterone, dressed in a shining agbada, who curses the corrupt court, and – crucially for the drama that unfolds – curses Rigoletto’s collusive involvement with it. It is important to say that not everything about this conception of Verdi’s opera comes off. The revelatory impulse of this production sometimes struggles to make its point. There is some overly fussy stagecraft. A pantomime setting, in which an infantilised Gilda, guarded by a pistol-packing chaperone, sleeps on a stuffed zebra exemplifies the show’s occasional overstatement. And the final act confirms the rule that sticking a car on the stage is generally more hindrance than help. Overall, though, Opera North achieves its customarily high musical standards. Garry Walker conducts very idiomatically, and the wind writing, in which Verdi achieved such breakthroughs, is particularly well played. Roman Arndt is a stylish Duke of Mantua, delivering his big numbers reliably, and Callum Thorpe a chillingly excellent Sparafucile. Greene is a light-voiced Rigoletto, and his Italian diction could do with more rasp, but the warmth of his singing is beguiling. It’s Habersham, though, who provides most of the special moments, not just in her big scenes but in the ensembles that are such a notable feature of this opera. Rigoletto is at Grand theatre, Leeds, until 19 February, then touring until 1 April.Rishi Sunak is the Covid chancellor. Few outside Westminster had heard of him when he replaced Sajid Javid in the role in early 2020, but since then he has spent two years in charge of the government’s economic response to the pandemic. Now, as restrictions are lifted, he is the bookies’ favourite to replace Boris Johnson if the prime minister is forced to quit over partygate. It is a meteoric rise. Since the second world war, only three former Conservative chancellors have made it to 10 Downing Street, and one of them, Winston Churchill, had left the Treasury more than a decade before the exceptional circumstances of 1940 won him the premiership. Indeed, the list of postwar prime ministers Britain never had includes a long list of chancellors – both Conservative and Labour. Rab Butler, Roy Jenkins, Denis Healey and Ken Clarke were all big beasts who didn’t make it to the top job, suggesting the Treasury is not always the best government department to be running if you want to make and keep friends. In the early part of the pandemic, Sunak’s political stock rose as quickly as one of Wall Street’s must-have technology stocks. It wasn’t just that he seemed to know what he was doing; what he was doing – spraying the economy with money – was popular. Not many chancellors say money’s no object, which was Sunak’s message when the economy went into its first lockdown. In truth, he had no choice. Shutting people up in their homes in late March 2020 caused the economy to shrink by a quarter in just two months; without the furlough scheme and a variety of business support measures the damage would have been not just massive but permanent. There are times, normally when things are looking really bad, when the British state functions well – and this was one of them. Life has become tougher for the chancellor since those early months in the job. He was keen to end the furlough in the autumn of 2020 but was then forced to extend it in one of a series of mini-budgets. The eat-out-to-help-out scheme in August 2020 was a gimmick that may well have reseeded the virus. The stamp duty holiday for property was unnecessary and has helped fuel a house price boom. Even so, the fact that unemployment is back to pre-pandemic levels and never reached the double-digit levels predicted by the Bank of England and the Office for Budget Responsibility is a real achievement. Sunak had a good war, which explains why he is the frontrunner to replace Johnson. Peacetime brings its own set of challenges, though, especially for those who see themselves as the custodian of the nation’s finances. By the autumn of last year, it was no longer a case of “money no object” but rather of trying to reduce the government’s record deficit while providing scaled-back support for the economy. As a result, furlough came to an end, the £20-a-week uplift to universal credit was removed and it was announced that extra money for the NHS and social care should come from raising national insurance contributions. The first of these – winding up wage subsidies – was a gamble that paid off; the UC and NI changes look a lot less clever against a backdrop of soaring energy prices, inflation at 5.4% and falling real wages. It is never good news for governments when prices are rising faster than incomes, which is why Sunak – assuming he has not moved next door by then – will be stumping up extra money in his latest mini-budget on 23 March. So much has happened in the past two years that it is easy to forget this is still midterm in the current parliament, a time when governments tend to be unpopular. Even if 2022 is the stinker it threatens to be, there is still time for the Conservatives to pull things round by the time of a 2024 election. By then, the Bank of England expects inflation to be back close to 2%, there could be scope for tax cuts, and memories of Downing Street parties will be fading. The political calculation of those Tories who want Sunak to replace Johnson is that Labour’s opinion poll lead is a function of public unhappiness with the prime minister rather than any great affection for Keir Starmer. That said, the longer Johnson clings on, the worse it will be for the chancellor’s hopes of being the first Tory since John Major to move from 11 to 10 Downing Street. There is a lot of talk about the UK being on course for a period of 1970s-style stagflation (a period when the economy is stagnant and prices are rising rapidly), but it looks more likely that in 2022 there will first be a period of surging inflation and then a period of stagnation. Rising energy bills, higher taxes and falling real wages are all going to put the brakes on the economy in the second half of the year, and if Sunak is still chancellor he will be blamed. One of those who did move next door from 11 Downing Street, Gordon Brown, used to quip that there were only two sorts of chancellor: the ones who failed and the ones who got out in time. Looking at the prospects for the economy for the rest of this year, Brown’s advice would presumably be for Sunak to get out while the going is not too bad or risk being the political equivalent of the Omicron variant: someone who bursts on the scene, is everywhere for a while, but fades away just as quickly. Sunak is smart as well as ambitious. He has probably worked that out for himself.The UK is past the worst of the Covid pandemic but should be braced for some “possible bumps on the road”, according to the scientist who helped shape Britain’s lockdown strategy. Prof Neil Ferguson, an epidemiologist at Imperial College London, said things were looking up as the country passed the peak of yet another wave of coronavirus infections. “I am optimistic that the bulk of the pandemic, in terms of deaths and hospitalisations, is behind us. Though we should still be prepared for some possible bumps on the road,” he said, adding that any new variants – which were highly likely to arise – may have a less dramatic impact than Omicron. “The very high level of immunity in the UK population – acquired via both vaccination and infection – means that the risk of a new variant causing unmanageable levels of healthcare demand is much reduced,” he said. “An additional positive is that if any new variant arises from Omicron – not a certainty – there is a fair chance it will retain the reduced severity of that strain.” Ferguson said a key development was Covid vaccines, in particular those based on mRNA technology, while important lessons had also been learned, such as the need for data to make informed decisions. “Compared with now, in March 2020 we were basically blundering around in the dark in terms of our real knowledge of how much infection was in the country.” Another lesson was the need to tailor the speed of policymaking to the speed of the virus. “That means in particular you may have to make decisions before you have the full picture on severity,” he said. With Omicron spreading rapidly in the UK late last year, ministers were faced with a stark message from scientific advisers: to avoid the potential worst-case scenarios, measures needed to be brought in quickly. But while the UK government introduced plan B in England, it resisted calls to go further, despite stronger measures in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Ferguson said the political stance had evolved over time. “I think we’re in a different place, in terms of how policymakers think about this two years in than we were back in February, March of 2020,” he said, adding that the change had led to more nuanced and difficult decisions. On Wednesday the prime minister announced that plan B measures in England would be lifted as cases were now falling. But Ferguson does not believe this will cause Omicron to come back in force. “Restrictions are always a trade-off between infection control and economic cost,” he said. “However, given that case numbers are in decline in all regions and that hospitalisations are starting to drop, I don’t think lifting restrictions poses a large risk of causing a major resurgence. Though obviously trends will need to continue to be monitored closely.” According to Ferguson, scientists rarely interact with politicians, with Sir Patrick Vallance and Sir Chris Whitty acting as mediators. But at times there were frustrations, such as in autumn 2020 when the Alpha variant took off. “Because then we were seeing case numbers go up. There was a lot of misinformation around, frankly, at that point,” he said. Covid was evolving to become more transmissible and was not yet in a classic endemic disease scenario in the UK, he said. Flu mutated each year and could cause seasonal epidemics, but the immunity we have acquired over our lifetimes means it is manageable. And, as experts have noted, endemic does not necessarily mean mild. “[Covid] is going to become an endemic disease, which unfortunately kills people every year,” said Ferguson. But, with careful management and building immunity, he hoped waves of infection would bring a lower toll of hospitalisations and deaths – although it may be necessary to expand hospital bed capacity. But politicians had short memories, he said, and he worries that we may stop preparing for the next pandemic once the immediate shock of coronavirus starts to fade from the national consciousness. “I’m sure for the next 10 years, pandemic preparedness will be a top priority for governments, for research funders around the world,” Ferguson said. “What I worry about is in 15 or 20 years’ time, does that memory fade? That’s the real risk.”And there we go. Day seven is in the books, but day eight is almost upon us. Join us then – Halep v Cornet looks tasty, likewise Fritz v Tsitsipas and Kanepi v Sabalenka; Medvedev and Swiatek are also in action. Berrettini had to withdraw injured from his quarter last term, so he’s hoping to make up for it here. He’s also got his cap off, so we get a better view of his luscious handsomeness. He doesn’t think Carreno Busta was reading his serve, and so many easy holds meant he had plenty left when it came to trying to get breaks. Because of injury, he had to do a short but intense pre-season, so hopes he’s fit enough to keep going, remembering that he beat Monfoi 7-6 in the fifth last time they met in Melbourne. Finally, we’re told that he’s yet another honorary Australian – there’s no one who isn’t, it seems – and off he pops to prepare for his debut Aussie Open quarter. It’ll take something serious to beat him. Carreno Busta goes long on the forehand, and that’s a terrific performance for Berrettini, who dominated a fine and game opponent. The serve and forehand were just too much - I don’t think he faced a single break point, serving 28 aces, and he meets Monfils next. That’s going to be good. Serving to say in the match, Carreno Busta helps Berrettini come back from 40-0 to 40-30, netting a backhand, then can’t return a return! Berrettini is two points away, but Carreno Busta has played the pressure points well; he’s losing because he’s not as good. But he then nets to give Berrettini match point! The love holds are back, Berrettini sealing this one with ace number 28. Not bad. A net cord gets Berrettini 30-all, but Carreno Busta puts a forehand onto the back of the baseline and it shoots below his racket; he quickly closes out, and this is the tightest of our three sets in terms of levels. Carreno Busta 5-7 (4)6-7 4-4 Berrettini More from Calvin on Berrettini: “He’s good at breaking the sideline with the slice which means the opponent can’t really go line on it, so he can edge over to the BH side and hit a big FH next shot.” I’d not be surprised if he broke in this next game, given the disappointment Carreno Busta will have felt at how the last panned out. Hello! For what seems and might be the first time in the match, Carreno Busta gets 0-15 and 15-30; can he capitalise? Er, not in the first instance, a thunderous forehand forcing a moon-ball stretch; it actually drops onto the line, but Berrettini just whacks it to the corner, and when Carreno Busta gets a go at a second serve that’s right in the slot, he’s so eager and frazzled that he puts too much pop on it and goes long, after which he nets a backhand. 4-3 Berrettini, who leads by two sets to love. On Berrettini, Calvin Betton, our resident coach, messages to say that “If he had any sort of serviceable drive backhand he’d be winning slams regularly. His slice BH is also good but the best players can pressure it too much.” Now another net cord, taking it away from Carreno Busta who tries an impromptu tweener-volley that doesn’t work; 15-all. Berrettini then lands a forehand right on the paint and Carreno Busta goes long, putting him under yet more pressure at 15-30, but he plays a terrific point for 30-all. He can’t sustain it, soon forced to save yet another break point with a well-directed service winner at 30-40, but from deuce he quickly closes out for 3-3. Another simple hold from Berrettini, and the relative energy, physical and emotional, that he’s expending for it versus that he’s demanding Carreno Busta expend, must be exerting a physical and emotional toll. Carreno Busta 5-7 (4)6-7 2-3 Berrettini Reading a tame cross-court backhand, Berrettini flicks wrists to send back one of his own across the face of the net, then springs downwards - is such a thing possible? – to direct a drop-volley that Carreno Busta can’t return. Again, he’s under pressure for his hold at 0-30, and though he makes 40-30, he then goes long and faces deuce ... riding out three big Berrettini forehands to climb over a short one and cane one of his own a for a clean winner. On advantage, though, that aforementioned Berrettini forehand is too much, and he saves two more game-points before Carreno Busta eventually nudges over the line for 2-2. Berrettini – who, I should say, is clad in all black, with a black baseball hat on backwards to keep the sun out of his eyes – rushes through a love hold. Carreno Busta 5-7 (4)6-7 1-2 Berrettini Eeesh! At 0-15, Carreno Busta again gets a net-cord, and this time, Berrettini tries to be too precise with his forehand slice, hitting the top of it. But at 30-15, Carreno Busta panels a forehand well long ... then lamps a brilliant inside-out winner to redeem himself. He quickly closes out, and he’s into the set. Carreno Busta will be wondering. Doubtless, he thinks he can play better, but he’s not really been close – I don’t think he’s had a break point in the match while surviving a fair few, and Berrettini holds to 15 in the first game of set three. Berrettini will, I think be one of those players who beats almost everyone at the majors almost all of the time. Whether he’s quite deft enough to beat the best in the biggest matches, though, remains to be seen – Medvedev and Tsitsipas are well-placed to combat the power and have better hands. Well! Berrettini serves well, races to the net, and Carreno Busta returns well into the body, forcing the resultant volley to drop long. Yeah, alright then mate. A service winner follows, of course it does, and that’s enough for the set! Carreno Busta 5-7 (4)6-7 Berrettini Berrettini clumps an ace onto the outside of the line, and his ability not just to do that but to do that when he really needs to, is sensational. At 5-2, he’s two points away from set two, then Carreno Busta sends a forehand long! 6-2 Berrettini, and no chance of a comeback from here – though it’s soon 6-3. Serving at 0-1, Berrettini opens his account with an ace ... er, and another. Good luck with all this, Pablo old mate. At least the net-cord has turned, allowing him a forehand winner, but unable to quite decide what to do, he’s late on a forehand and it sails long to hand Berrettini a mini-break he didn’t really have to work for. He leads 3-2 and quickly consolidates for 4-2. Now then. Carreno Busta draws Berrettini to the net and reads where his backhand’s going, sending one of his own up the line for 0-15; then a decent backhand return, onto the line, cramps Berrettini who can’t respond. Naturally, an ace follows, then another; in between times, a mere big serve sets up a simple put-away. That’s excellent play, and a breaker will now decide set two. A rare comfy hold for Carreno Busta guarantees him a breaker, and Berrettini will serve to stay in the set at 5-6. Ahahahaha! Serving to stay in the set, Berrettini opens with a 14th ace ... and follows it with a 15th. What a weapon, in the nicest possible way! And there’s another, such that though Carreno Busta wins the next two points, the first of them via double, we’re due another service winner, which duly arrives to seals the deal. 5-5 it is. The net-cord thinks Carreno Busta is a mug, flipping up a forehand that allows Berrettini an easy put-away – not dissimilar to the one he missed on break point. This time it gives him 30-all, and when a forehand goes long he has another; you’ve got to hand it to him, his pressure has been relentless in this set, but so has Carreno Busta’s resistance, and a decent forehand forces Berrettini to net. We end up at deuce and finally the net cord helps the Spaniard, in a brilliant rally that has both men charging about the court; eventually, Berrettini can’t quite get behind a ball he’s pursuing, his forehand sailing long, and Carreno Busta quickly closes out. It’s hard to see him breaking or winning a breaker, but you never know. Carreno Busta 5-7 5-4 Berrettini Berrettini is playing nicely, not just serving well but slicing well too, and his forehand is doing its usual. Carreno Busta does find a very nice return, backhand down the line, but it’s 40-0 at the time, and obviously an ace follows. Again, Berrettini gets ahead on the Carreno Busta serve, but at 0-15 yerman finds a fine volley, stretching onto the forehand side to angle it across the face of the net. Berrettini, though, sorts him at the net for a 30-all, chasing down an ill-executed drop, and you wonder for how long Carreno Busta can handle this pressure - every hold is a battle. He finds a nails forehand for 40-30, though, then a serve out elicits a return into the net. Berrettini is the better player at the moment, but the set remains in the balance. Carreno Busta 5-7 4-3 Berrettini I’ve recently come to love the Italian flag – the precise shade of the green in particular. Another easy hold for Berrettini, and that’s 3-3. Ultimately, Carreno Busta’s groundstrokes aren’t reliable enough or penetrating enough to compensate for the difference in serve, and a long forehand followed by a netted backhand give Berrettini – who’s hitting monstrously – 15-30. And have a look! At 30-all, he turns up the power on his forehand, dematerialising one down the line that opens the court for a clean-up ... except he nets, and a brutal forehand of his own sees Carreno Busta through another hold, just. He leads 3-2 in set two. A love hold for Berrettini; his serve is one of the great weapons, men’s or women’s game, and there’s not much Carreno Busta can do about it. But if he can keep holding his own, you never know. Carreno Busta 5-7 2-2 Berrettini Again Berrettini gets ahead of the Carreno Busta serve at 15-30, but after dominating the next rally he goes fractionally long on the forehand and Carreno Busta cleans up for 2-1. Berrettini looks much the better player now, and he holds to 15. Carreno Busta is good, but I don’t think he’s good enough to override the power he faces; in a sense, it’s an inverse of Barty v Anisimova, a match in which hands and nous trumped athleticism and velocity. Carreno Busta 5-7 1-1 Berrettini When it goes it goes quick, as Alex Ferguson once said, and a careless game from Carreno Busta sees him facing 0-40. If he can’t sort this, it’ll be hard to see a way for him, but at 15-40 he plays a a fine backhand cross-court followed by a delicate backhand volley; lovely stuff. Berrettini then nets a backhand slice, an unnecessary oversight, Carreno Busta comes in again to despatch an overhead, and another superb point gives him five in a row and 1-0 in set two. That’s excellent behaviour. Yeah. A fine forehand winner gives Carreno Busta 0-15, so Berretini finds two aces, then another then another facing a break point at 30-40. A further brute sends Carreno Busta out wide, he just about gets a return back, and there’s Berrettini at the net to put way the set. Carreno Busta 5-7 Berrettini Now then. A net-cord leaves Carreno Busta with few options, and a nothing pick-up is quickly speeding back past him; Berrettini has his second 0-30 of the set, then another net cord, this time on that dies, gives him three break points and Carreno Busta thrashes a desperate forehand long and wide! Berrettini will soon serve for set one at 6-5! Serving to stay in the set, Berrettini comes to the net and slices a backhand long when he absolutely didn’t need to. Yeah, whatvez – his serve and forehand do the rest, and at 5-5 we’ve yet to experience a break point. Back on your Lavers, Carreno Busta has just served his first ace for 40-0 at 4-4 ... then Berrettini climbs all over a fractionally short ball, unleashing a forehand down the line with terrifying speed and power. It makes no odds – Carreno Busta quickly closes out – but it hints at how a breaker might go: in favour of the man with the bigger weapons. Carreno Busta 5-4 Berrettini Kecmanovic was a really good junior, which doesn’t always mean he’ll be really good on tour, but he will be. Monfils says he tried to be really aggressive and not let Kecmanovic dictate; seving well hoped. He’s not lost a set so far and hasn’t made the last eight in Australia since 2016 – he’s not finished, he reckons, and hopes it goes better. He knows both his potential opponents are very good, but he’ll be ready, and we should be too – he’s so watchable and so likeable, and looks to have found the balance in his life and game. Brilliant from Monfils, a forehand winner capping a tremendous display and a really enjoyable match – to which Kecmanovic contributed muchly. At 22, he’s got serious prospects, but today belongs to Monfils, who meets Berrettini or Carreno Busta next. If he plays like this, whichever it is is in for a helluva tussle. Monfils has spent a lot of time showing how tired he is, and he’s bent double again ... after earning a match point. Kecmanovic, though, spanks a forehand into the corner then a backhand onto the sideline to save it, only to tamely go wide shortly afterwards; can he do it again? Berrettini floats a tremendous backhand winner down the line – when I said he didn’t have hands as good as Carreno Busta, I wasn’t insulting him – but it’s the only point he wins in the game, and neither man is making much impression on the other’s serve. Monfils is nearly there, consolidating for 5-3; he’s a game away. Berrettini has just rushed through a hold, landing an ace on the outside of the centre-line. He doesn’t have the hands of Carreno Busta, but you’d fancy him in a breaker and I daresay we’ll be seeing one or two of those. It’s 2-2 in set one. Oh yes! Monfils raises break point and absolutely spanks a forehand winner from the middle of the baseline into the forehand corner! The handspeed there, oof madone! Kecmanovic 5-7 (4)6-7 3-4 Monfils Monfils and Kecmanovic are 3-3 in set three, but as I type that, Monfils makes 0-30 on the Kecmanovic serve. Kecmanovic, though, wins four points in a row ... only to be diddled by an incredible lob; deuce it is, then again when Monfils nails a blazing forehand. Meantime, Carreno Busta has started well against Berrettini, a love hold giving him 2-1. Berrettini had to survive a four-hour-plus thriller in the last round, beating Carlos Alcaraz 10-5 in a tiebreak decider. That’s no mean feat – Alcaraz is going to be very serious – so much so that there was a school of thought saying if Berrettini was going to win a major, it’d have to be soon, because Alcaraz and others have even more talent than him, so he needs to get it done before they’re at the necessary level. Kecmanovic gets himself to deuce on the Monfils serve, so Monfils clouts down an ace and quickly closes out. He leads 7-5 7-6(4) 2-2. Next on Laver: Carreno Busta [19] v Berrettini [7]. That should be decent... “I’m enjoying the AO coverage you and your colleagues give us,” emails Craig McEwan. “I see Madison Keys beat Paula Badosa earlier. That’s a big result I think. Keys getting back to her best maybe?” I hope so. I really enjoy her, and Badosa too, but her problem has always been the mental game – I can’t get her US Open final against Sloane Stephens out of my mind, where she just couldn’t settle playing so big a match against a good mate and totally collapsed. But she’s gorra lorra talent, and women’s tennis being women’s tennis – the least predictable sport in the world – I’d not be totally shocked if she did something spectacular. At 26, she’s still got time. Oh go on then, more Barty, speaking to Europsort. “No pressure, just fun,” she says, and she loved seeing a dog in the crowd helping a member of it. She’s trying to serve towards her opponent’s weakness or to set up the next shot, and is especially pleased she broke back immediately after being broken herself “and put Amanda under the pump.” Asked who she learns from, she says she doesn’t watch that much tennis apart from the match before her to see when she’s on – there’s another sport in Australia that she’s into, she reminds us, having previously been a cricketer. How much talent is too much talent? Er none, especially when its purveyor wears it so beautifully. She’s just trying to do her thing, she concludes, and yes, that definitely appears to be the case. Barty says it’s much better playing in front of fans – does every player get asked that after every match? – and that Anisimova is an incredible athlete and competitor, able to play every point seriously. She could be describing herself there, then notes that all she can do is be her and she’s pretty good at it. She reckons Pegula played really well today, toughing out big points from the back. She doesn’t think they’ve played before but they’ve definitely practised together so “No secrets, come in here, compete, enjoy it.” She is a spectacularly pleasant, charismatic person, with the tennis to match. Monfils has taken a brilliant breaker and now leads Kecmanovic 7-5 7-6(4). If I’m honest, Anisimova looked a long way off. She’ll get better quickly, but the nous and hands gap is significant. Anisimova swipes a forehand long, and that is that! Barty is just brilliant, so clever, so calm and so consistent. She meets Pegula next; good luck, Jessica old mate. Excellent dee-fence from Monfils earns him 4-4, while a forehand return onto the line gives Barty two match points. Kecmanovic gets the first mini-break, and just as it looks like Monfils has retrieves it via backhand slice zoning over the net, he finds a terrific volley for 4-3. Back on Laver, Barty consolidates to 15 and is a game away at 6-4 5-3. A banging forehand arranges Barty a deuce, and break point down, Anisimova folds under pressure – not necessarily the stage of the match, but the pressure of playing someone you know rarely misses. She goes long, and this is nearly over. Barty 6-4 4-3 Anisimova Two set points saved and a big forehand earns Kecmanovic a second-set breaker. This development pleases him. Kecmanovic is serving to stay in the second set at 5-6, having lost the first 7-5. At 0-15, he’ll have been having flashbacks, at 15-all he nets a backhand for no reason whatsoever, and at 30-all he goes long on the forehand for no reason. I say no reason, I mean P-R-E-S-S-U-R-E, but Monfils then nets on the run, and we’re at deuce. Not for long, first Kecmanovic misses a game point then Monfils earns a set point, setting it up with an excellent backhand only to net that same forehand on the run. Back to deuce we go while, on Laver, a hold each means it’s 3-3 in set two. Is Barty about to be broken again? Er no. At 30-40, she finds a big serve, and on advantage, Anisimova slips when poised to unleash a big forehand. Barty 6-4 2-2 Anisimova Oh dear. Barty is so consistent, a consequence of mental equanimity and a rounded game. She quickly makes 15-40, and though Anisimova saves one break-back point, she then swipes a backhand wide and plenty. That is going to sting, and I’d not be surprised to see Barty accelerate away from here. Monfils has broken Kecmanovic back in set two and now leads 7-5 4-4. Now then: Anisimova gets to 15-40 and lands a really good forehand on the line, but Barty gets it back and when she tries the same again, she drops fractionally long. However! Anisimova gets a second serve to go out, she wallops a forehand return, and Barty can’t respond! That’s the first time she’s been broken in the competition, and do we got ourselves a ball-game?! Ooh yeah! Barty coaxes a luscious forehand down the line and into the corner for deuce, then clouts a forehand winner for break point; Anisimova is hanging on here, but a forehand error from Barty gives her deuce and she closes out well enough. Courtside, Barbara Schett notes that a big difference between the players is the spin Barty’s able to impart on the ball – but she’s also won 63 consecutive service games, which is ridiculous. Barty 6-4 0-1 Anisimova Ach, Barty is just so good. An ace out wide gives her 40-0, then a serve down the middle allows a clean-up forehand at the net. She takes the first set 6-4, but the difference between the players is chasmic. Barty 6-4 Anisimova Anisimova finds her groove with consecutive aces but still finds herself at 40-30, whereupon another biggie forces Barty to serve for it. Hello! Barty seems to lose concentration and a netted forehand hands Anisimova an immediate break-back point at 30-40, followed by a second serve to go at. Understandably, she unloads the suitcase when it arrives, but the length was decent and the backhand return goes long – way long. A rueful smile follows, and seconds later the game is done. Barty 5-3 Anisimova Meantime, Kecmanovic has broken Monfils and leads 2-1 in set two, Monfils having taken set one 7-5. A fantastic forehand return from Barty, cross-court and breaking the sideline, sets up a gorgeous backhand-slice winner from the opposite corner and that’s 0-15. 0-30 follows, and Anisimova is being gradually broken down here, the broadsword to Barty’s rapier. Another point follows that’s typical of the match, Barty directing her opponent around the court before unfurling that backhand-slice winner again; 0-40. Anisimova gets the power going to claw back two break points, but is then incited to go long on the forehand, and that was coming. Barty leads 4-3 and looks great out there. Barty holds to love for 3-3 while, on Cain, Kecmanovic is struggling to hold, trailing 5-7 0-1. Yup, Barty is working this out. She’s mixing up spins and speeds, and at 15-30 comes to the net again, sending an underarmer to the corner then putting a way a volley. But she wastes her first break point, sending a forehand return long, then nets on the backhand; neither was necessary, but Anisimovic did well to get her first serves in and eventually secures another hold with the help of an ace. I guess if she can keep doing that, she can reduce the contest to a few points here and there, in which case she’s a good chance of winning it, but already it’s clear that the style match-up suits Barty. Anisimova leads 3-2. First break point of the match and it goes to Anisimova, but she makes a hash of a backhand from the corner when she didn’t need to, and Barty quickly cleans up. She’s much the better mover of the two, and based on what we’ve seen so far, I’d be surprised if she didn’t find a way to win this. Barty 2-2 Anisimova There we go! More set points for Monfils, and this time he doesn’t let them (all) slip away, thunking down a shoulder-high winner to the delight of Elina Svitolina, his wife, in his box. Kecmanovic 5-7 Monfils A lovely exchange at the net, Barty hanging in there via lob, before clattering down a smash, is the best point of the match so far – it looks like she’s got the touch and tennis-brain advantage – but Anisimova holds easily enough for 2-1. Barty nets a forehand, then redeems it with that kick-serve of hers – her ability to do so is doubly impressive given her height, which is to say Stefan Edberg she is not. An ace follows, and it’s quickly 1-1. Tennis is the winner. On Laver, Anisimova has again started slowly, facing a break point first up; she saves it with a booming serve and an inside-out forehand from mid-court. She quickly cleans up for 1-0, and we’ll now get a look at Barty’s serve. Back on Cain, Kecmanovic has just saved three set points at 4-5 in set one; Monfils was as chuffed by this development as you’d expect. And play... I’m looking forward to the Barty match, partly because how can you not look forward to watching such ray of sunshine, but also because Anisimova can play – just ask Naomi Osaka, who she beat the day before last. Though Barty beat her in Paris the year before last, it was from a set down and a break down and she was playing well enough to win the thing then; she might be now too, but those who know more than me are certain Anisimova is going to win majors. On Cain, Monfils leads Kecmanovic 4-3 on serve. “Not much I can say that’s positive about today,” Zverev has just said with his head in his hands. He says Shapovalov has worked hard and improved, but that was the worst he’s played since Wimbledon – “awful from myself”. Greetings! It’s already been a decent day in Melbourne: just when he looked to be over the hump, Alex Zverev [3] was whacked by Danie Shapovalov [14], the rejuvenated Madison Keys whacked Paulo Badosa [8] and Barbora Krejcikova [4] whacked Victoria Azarenka [24]; Jessica Pegula [21] despatched Maria Sakkari [6]; and Rafael Nadal [6] survived a epic first-set tiebreaker to get by Adrian Mannarino. But, as Jimmy Cricket would say, there’s more: Gaël Monfils [17] and Mimir Kecmanovic are just underway, in a few minutes Ash Barty [1] and Amanda Anisimova will be too, then when they’re done, we’ve got Pablo Carreño Busta [19] and Matteo Berrettini [7]. On we go!Sonita Gale’s impassioned documentary draws necessary attention to the “hostile environment” the UK government has created for migrants. She draws a through line from the British empire to today’s refugee crisis, connecting it to the Windrush scandal and Brexit. Case studies filmed during the early days of the pandemic highlight the impossibility of the situation: a Pakistani family of four have British-born children who are ineligible for citizenship; the parents have been granted leave to remain but with “no recourse to public funds”. Elsewhere, an immigrant-led charity that provides hot meals for the NHS receive a commendation from Boris Johnson but no support from the council. An overpowering score is sadly distracting and labours the point; the subject alone is grave enough.“Pastor, do you think we could hold a service at my house next Thursday?” the peroxide-haired gangster wondered, cradling an AK-47 in his lap as he took a seat beside the man of God. A few months earlier, the 23-year-old had bought his first home with the fruits of his illegal work as a footsoldier for one of Rio de Janeiro’s drug factions. Now, he wanted to give thanks for the blessings he believed he had received from above. “I’ve dodged death so many times. It was He who delivered me from evil,” the drug trafficker reflected as he began another 12-hour night shift on the frontline of the Brazilian city’s drug conflict. That Christian conviction was echoed all around the young outlaw, on walls adorned with frescoes of the Old City of Jerusalem and an extract from the Epistle to the Galatians: “Walk by the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh.” The gangster’s body celebrated his religion, too. One wrist carried a tattoo of a cross and the words “Jesus lives”. The other featured the motto: “May my courage be greater than my fear and my strength as great as my faith”. “They know theirs is a cut-throat world so they seek something to believe in,” said Elias Santana, a favela-based preacher who has made it his mission to save the souls of Rio’s ever more evangelical gangsters. When Rio’s drug conflict exploded in the 1980s, Brazil’s evangelical revolution was still gathering pace and many gangsters looked to Afro-Brazilian deities such as Ogum, the God of war, for protection. Drug bosses frequented Afro-Brazilian temples, built shrines to Orixás and wore necklaces to show their devotion to the Umbanda and Candomblé faiths. Four decades later, many of those sanctuaries have been replaced with sculptures of Bibles and murals of the Last Supper, as a new generation of born-again criminals takes power, influenced by a brotherhood of pentecostal preachers. The sway those pastors hold over Rio’s so-called “narco-pentecostals” is unmissable in the hundreds of favelas controlled by gunmen from its three main gangs: the Red Command (CV), the Friends of the Friends (ADA) and, perhaps the most evangelical of all, the Pure Third Command (TCP). Drug lords, some regular churchgoers, have incorporated Christian symbols into their ultra-violent trade. Packets of cocaine, handguns and uniforms are emblazoned with the Star of David – a reference to the Pentecostal belief that the return of Jews to Israel represents progress towards the second coming. Gang-commissioned graffiti offers spiritual guidance and heavenly praise. On one recent evening, a senior trafficker wandered into a service in suburban Rio, unarmed and unannounced, as a preacher read from the Book of John. “I have come into the world as a light, so that no one who believes in me should stay in darkness.” Surrounded by local children and their smartly-dressed parents, the gangster took a white plastic chair in the corner, bowed his head and began to pray. Nowhere is the evangelisation of Rio’s underworld more visible than the Complexo de Israel, a cluster of five favelas near the international airport governed by Peixão (“Big Fish”), a preacher turned drug peddler who takes his nickname from the ichthys “Jesus” fish. (The drug lord’s second-in-command is named after the Judaean prophet Jeremiah, while their troops are known as the Army of the Living God). In tribute to the area’s boss, a mural of the cartoon character Fishtronaut has been painted at one entrance, framed by a line from Psalm 33: “Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord”. A neon Star of David, at night visible for miles around, sits on a water tower at one of the complex’s highest points. Nearby, on an outcrop looking south towards Rio’s Christ the Redeemer statue, a Bible sits in a display case. “Rescue me, O Lord, from evil men,” reads its inscription, from Psalm 140. “Protect me from men of violence who devise evil plans in their hearts and stir up war every day.” Police call Peixão, who is wanted for dozens of crimes including torture, murder and concealment of death, one of Rio’s most ambitious and iron-handed villains, whose fast-growing criminal empire makes a mockery of his purported Christian faith. In 2019 he was accused of leading the Bonde de Jesus (Jesus Crew), a gang of rifle-toting extremists who allegedly ransacked a succession of Afro-Brazilian temples. Afro-Brazilian celebrations have reportedly been outlawed in the Complex of Israel. But some residents say the bling-averse gangster’s Bible-infused “doctrine” – which includes keeping the community’s streets tidy and well-lit, acts of charity to impoverished locals, discouraging swearing and drug use among gang members and a military-style focus on discipline – has improved life in a ghetto long neglected by the state. “There’s order in the favela,” said Juju Rude, a local rapper whose songs describe life in a community ruled by God-fearing gangsters. The Afro-Brazilian musician, who identifies as an evangelical Christian and has an Uzi tattoed on her belly, said she was troubled by Rio’s surge in faith-related bigotry and violence. “It’s not cool to see people prevented from practising their faith in the place where they live.” Overall, however, she thought life had improved under the favela’s current churchgoing administrator: “It’s new for everyone, an environment like this.” Rio’s narco-pentecostals admit their often brutal line of work clashes with the scripture they profess to follow. As one top trafficker in another gang-run part of town lounged on top of a Honda motorbike surrounded by bodyguards with automatic rifles, he acknowledged the drug trade was an “evil” business that sometimes entailed horrific violence. But the gangster claimed his faith inspired him to minimise the barbarity, by trying to persuade fellow criminals to spare those who crossed them. “Those I can save, I save,” he said, remembering how he once persuaded a colleague not to murder a trafficker who stole a weapon and defected to a rival group. Instead, the traitor was forced to clasp his hands together, as if in prayer, and shot at close range, shattering his metacarpal bones but preserving his life. In another favela, a footsoldier with a Bible tattooed on to his chest spoke of how he enjoyed attending services at the God is Love pentecostal church, a fundamentalist congregation with temples across the US and Europe. “It makes me feel lighter,” he said, before racing away on his motorbike with an AR-15 slung over his shoulder. Christina Vital, an academic who has spent nearly 30 years studying evangelism’s advance into gangland Rio, said it was inevitable traffickers had embraced Christianity, given the breathtaking evangelical tsunami that has swept over Brazilian society during that time. Evangelicals now occupied key positions in the world of crime, just as they did in the media, politics, judiciary and culture, she said. Nor was it surprising that vulnerable, marginalised young men sought guidance and compassion from the preachers searching Rio’s favelas for souls: “It’s such an awful, fragile life. They live in fear.” Vital said the consequences of the improbable fusion between crime and Christianity were unclear. There was evidence of “a certain containment” of bloodshed, she said, but the blending of religious intolerance with “staggering” gang violence was disturbing. Pastor Elias said he respected all faiths and believed his Godly crusade was helping pacify a city where hundreds of mostly young, black lives are lost each year. “This is Christianity’s duty: to save.” A week after being invited to bless the footsoldier’s first home, the preacher donned a garish magenta shirt and set off down winding, muddy passageways to the modest first-floor abode for which the criminal had paid 8,000 reais (£1,000). He squeezed inside, accompanied by half a dozen Bible-carrying helpers, and the group began to sing an anthem called “Oh! Jesus Loves me”. “Far from the Lord, I walked, on the path of horror. Never did I ask about Jesus. Nor did I seek His love,” they sung as the gangster bowed his head. When the singing stopped, a female church member stepped forward and clutched the host’s arm as his girlfriend and mother – a cleaner just home from work – looked on. “God has chosen you. God is here right now!” the woman told him. “Just look at my goosebumps! God is here!” she proclaimed, her voice trembling as she summoned an angel to watch over the trafficker’s life. After 20 minutes of prayer and a reading from Psalm 23, the trafficker thanked his visitors over hotdogs and led them outside, visibly moved by their words. “It’s a life of loneliness,” said the pastor, “and Christ has come to free them from this servitude.” A warm breeze coursed through the favela’s narrow back alleys and for a moment the world seemed at peace – but the calm lasted only two hours. Shortly after midnight the crackle of gunfire woke residents, as traffickers stormed a nearby neighbourhood in the hope of expanding their domain. Another night of chaos and heartbreak in a city crying out to be saved.When Amanda Anisimova was 16 she was touted as the next Maria Sharapova, partly for her marketability but also for her pacy groundstrokes. More recently, Serena Williams’ coach, Patrick Mouratoglou, likened her to Lindsay Davenport for her impeccable timing. Sunday night was in some ways an exhibition of both, and against other opponents that might have been enough. Two days ago, against Naomi Osaka, it was. This time, though, while Anisimova became the first player at this year’s Australian Open to break Ash Barty’s serve, she merely won the battle and not the war. The scorecard read 6-4, 6-3 to Barty, an apt summation of a match in which the unseeded American demonstrated her increasing grand-slam clout but was well beaten by a world No 1 who, based on her form across the opening four rounds, appears on the right path to claiming her country’s first home major title in 44 years. Last week Rod Laver called Barty “unbeatable” at her best. Anisimova did her utmost to prove him wrong. Until now no one had pushed her past the one-hour mark in a match; the 20-year-old lasted one hour and 14 minutes. She ended the Australian’s tournament serving streak of 63 straight holds to lead 2-0 in the second set, and in all provided the first real test of her first-seed credentials. But Barty broke her straight back, then set about winning five of the remaining six games to close out the match. And where Anisimova’s offensive-mindedness got her part the way there, her inability to neutralise Barty’s sheer range had her on the back foot for much of the contest. “She’s an incredible athlete, an incredible competitor,” Barty said of her beaten opponent. “One of her best attributes is she turns up point after point after point. It’s just nice to see her back playing her best tennis. She’s a champion. She’s going to be in a lot of deep stages of a lot of majors in her future, that’s for sure. “I enjoy sharing the court, testing my game against her – she has an incredible game. It was nice to be able to hold firm and bring the points back into my patterns more regularly, and the big ones when it mattered most.” They were sincere words from a player at the top of the sport about one who is fast heading back in that direction following a heavily disrupted two years. Anisimova was 17 and already a junior US Open champion when she rattled Barty in the 2019 Roland Garros semi-final, leading by a set and three games before the Australian turned the tables en route to the title. The abrupt death of her father and coach, Konstantin, shortly thereafter put her tennis on pause, and her career-high ranking of 21 has since slipped to 60. The recent revival has coincided with coaching from Darren Cahill on a trial basis, which bore fruit this year when Anisimova won her second WTA title at the Melbourne Summer Set warm-up event. Even so, Barty is the more vastly improved since that French Open final. She changed up her shots at will and yielded an incredible return on a serve that topped out at 182km/h. At 3-3 in the first set she had Anisimova scooting between the tramlines like she was doing a beep test and earned three break points for her troubles. The 25-year-old will play her fourth consecutive Australian Open quarter-final on Tuesday against another American – 21st seed Jessica Pegula, who beat Greek fifth seed Maria Sakkari in straight sets on Sunday – with a view to becoming the first local to win the tournament since Chris O’Neil in 1978. “She’s able to hold baseline really well,” Barty said of Pegula. “Her swings are quite linear and she gets a racket behind the ball and swings through the path. The ball comes at you at a different trajectory, and her ability to absorb pace and then add to it when she wants to is exceptional. “It’s going to be a challenge for me to try and push her off that baseline and make her uncomfortable and feel like she has to create. But I know that she’s also going to be doing the exact same thing to me and trying to make me uncomfortable. That’s the chess game that we play. You go out there and have fun with it, see who can execute better on the day, and that’s about all there is to it.”Much has changed for electropop practitioners Years &amp; Years since 2018’s Palo Santo album. Not only are they two members lighter – it’s now a solo vehicle for occasional actor Olly Alexander (It’s a Sin) – but that second album’s convoluted conceptual framework has been shaken off in favour of 14 sweat-soaked bangers that focus on pent-up carnal desires. “Give me it now,” Alexander purrs on the undulating Intimacy, a classy tale of lust that suggests a hotel was involved (“tie me to a four-poster,” he requests). The pulsating Crave and the cheeky Muscle (“don’t want to leave without your body”) drag the listener on to sticky nightclub floors. Sex is also explored on 20 Minutes, with its urgent need for pleasure after months of isolation played out over a keening, surprisingly delicate melody. All that transience throws up its own problems, however, with Sweet Talker – a disappointingly lightweight slither of dance-pop playlist catnip – mourning a lack of honesty. Alexander is better channelling any introspection into songs that reflect the morning after, with late album highlight Make It Out Alive giving Night Call a narrative arc via a post-big-night-out soother.A lifesize trompe l’oeil painting of the real-life lift at Camden Arts Centre opens this exhibition by the Canadian artist Allison Katz. Its doors are agape, revealing a deep silver box within. Its metal sheen gives the work a sense of photorealism, but it’s the 3D depth that implores you to step inside. It’s a fitting welcome for a show entitled Artery; the lift instantly stirs up thoughts of transportation, liminality and portals. Katz, 41, was born in Montreal and now lives in London. Her whimsical work, thematically fluid and exploring the conventions of traditional painting, has seen her become a rising figure in contemporary art. She was shortlisted for the Max Mara art prize for women in 2020 and featured in last year’s acclaimed Mixing It Up: Painting Today show at the Hayward Gallery. Artery, previously at Nottingham Contemporary, is Katz’s first solo UK exhibition, and arrives with bags full of her favourite recurring tropes and motifs: monkeys, eggs and more. Katz has a thing about cockerels. In The Cockfather, a chicken’s body has been restructured to the shape of a dish that holds three eggs, a comical rumination. There are also lots of cabbages. She paints them in varying luminous green shades and sits them upright on tables. At the side of each veiny vegetable is the silhouette of a man’s face. They’re pretty images, but the joke is in working out what they are. Are these actually still lifes or portraits of the artist’s shy partner? Katz’s strange and mischievous storytelling recalls Paula Rego; the cabbage in The Artist in Her Studio by Rego comes to mind. Cabbages lack the pop-cultural currency of avocados, but they are significant in the history of painting. Leonora Carrington and Stanley Spencer both painted them. Perhaps this explains Katz’s interest? There’s an inherent humour in Katz’s paintings; everything is glazed with a sense of trickery, works like banana peels waiting to trip you up. Blue and gold brushstrokes make a face, reminiscent of Matisse’s visage paintings, in Akgraph (Tobias + Angel), but closer inspection reveals that the eyes, nose and mouth spell out the word “mask” – Katz’s initials (Ms Allison Sarah Katz). A small dog, fish skeleton and birds encircle the face, all of which sit atop a foggy, reimagined Tobias and the Angel, a 15th-century altar painting by Andrea del Verrocchio. Ceaselessly playing with illusion and perception, Katz’s dreamlike works exist somewhere between the fantastic and the familiar. Some paintings are detailed, like Posterchild, a collage of random images akin to the experience of online scrolling. Others are basic and unfussy, which can be jarring. Someone Else’s Dream, depicting a naked man in a field of bulls, feels unspirited and lacks the energy present in the surrounding works. Katz is at her best when layering ideas. One series of works is painted from the vantage point of a throat, so that teeth and gums frame the subject. MASK is a self-portrait from a Miu Miu advert that Katz starred in last year. It’s interesting to see the mouth presented as a tool of observation. If these works form their own vascular system, it isn’t obvious where the heart is. Her primary interest is in art itself and the conventions and power of painting. That isn’t to say this is a show devoid of epiphanies, but it’s futile to read into it too deeply. Much more fun to just give in to the bizarre. In the adjacent gallery, works by the French-Caribbean artist Julien Creuzet are on display in his first major UK show since winning Camden Art Centre’s emerging artist prize at the 2019 Frieze art fair. Creuzet, 34, grew up in Martinique and now lives in Paris. His practice encompasses sculpture, wall-based works and digital films, but here, it’s free-standing and suspended sculptures that take precedence. From the show’s lengthy title alone – “Too blue, too deep, too dark we sank, meandering every moving limb. In the den, in the womb. Too bèlè, too gwo-ka, too biguine, too compas, too kadans, too calypso, too mazurka, too makossa, in my joyful sadness (...)” – it’s clear that Creuzet is preoccupied with language (Derek Walcott and Linton Kwesi Johnson feature in the reading list of the exhibition’s File Notes). Though more poetic than expository, the title does hint at the show’s themes: the sea, musicality, the Caribbean, colonisation. Blistering reds, greens and yellows are the first thing to strike you, especially on an icy January day. Creuzet turns the space into a kaleidoscope of colours and patterns, but it’s the twisted configurations of the sculptures that are the most compelling; they look like relatives in conversation with each other. All these asymmetrical forms, resembling everything from knobbly skeletal bones and architectural frameworks to coats of armour, are made from found objects – plastic, metal, wiring, rope, carpet, synthetic plants and torn fabric. It’s hard not to see Creuzet’s work as symbolic renderings of Caribbean islands whose histories overlap but whose postcolonial identities are still distinctive. We derive from it…, a large suspended sculpture whose shape reflects the insignia on various Caribbean flags, is engrossing, but these works function better when viewed as a collection. Drifting between the sculptures, music by the French-Senegalese singer Anaiis fills the gallery with an ethereal energy. A new film by Creuzet shows a digital figure dancing in the traditional bèlè style that evolved on Martinique after colonial rule. Something about these sculptures also conjures up images of wreckage washed ashore. The found plastic speaks to the climate emergency and capitalism; the Caribbean countries are the biggest plastic polluters per capita in the world, and much of that waste is deposited into the sea. Detritus aside, Creuzet’s sculptures feel secretly alive – as though, if you close your eyes and open them, they might have crawled across the room, morphed into a new shape, or developed a new leg. In that way, these speculative works aren’t just about colonial history but also evolution, construction and creolisation. Here are sculptures about the formation and survival of diasporas amid globalisation. Star ratings (out of five) Allison Katz ★★★ Julien Creuzet ★★★★ Allison Katz and Julien Creuzet are at Camden Arts Centre, London, until 13 MarchAudience-ology Kevin Goetz Tiller Press, £18.99, pp240 “I’d rather be beat in the face with a donkey penis than watch this film!” Test screenings of new films are Hollywood’s method of turning cinematic lead into money-making gold. Focus group head Kevin Goetz’s hugely readable, if self-aggrandising, account of the process reveals how haphazard it can be. For every film saved by last-minute intervention, there are others ruined by unhelpful feedback from “ordinary” audiences, but Goetz mixes insightful anecdotes with would-be inspirational stories that offer insight into how desperate a multibillion-dollar industry can be. The Sentence Louise Erdrich Corsair, £20, pp400 The Pulitzer prize-winning novelist returns with a new book that takes a wry delight in upending the reader’s expectations. At first, it appears to be a comic novel revolving around the hapless ex-con Tookie, before metamorphosing into a quirky ghost story set in a bookshop. But then Erdrich broadens and deepens the narrative to encompass everything from George Floyd’s murder to Covid’s socially destructive effects. It might be overambitious, but it’s a fascinating and unorthodox exercise in metaphysical fiction. London, Burning Anthony Quinn Abacus, £8.99, pp344 (paperback) Anthony Quinn’s latest impressive novel elegantly depicts a city and an era – the London of the late 1970s – on the verge of seismic change. An impresario named Freddie Selves (a thinly disguised Peter Hall) is about to launch the National Music Hall; a journalist chases a barely believable story; a Northern Irish academic finds himself the victim of mistaken identity; and a policewoman learns her colleagues might be corrupt. Somehow their fates will all be intertwined in a book full of suspense and wry social commentary. • To order Audiency-ology, The Sentence or London, Burning go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyLike many of my millennial peers, I believed that I would be stuck in a doom-loop of precarious housing for ever, handing over huge portions of my income every month to a landlord who happened to own the floor I was sleeping on. Across many countries, and big cities in particular, the prospect of homeownership or access to socially rented housing is a pipe dream. Median house prices have risen to more than seven times median incomes in the Anglo-Saxon economies. In the UK, the proportion of 25- to 35-year-olds on middle incomes who owned a home plummeted from two-thirds to just one-quarter between 1996 and 2016. Meanwhile, the costs of renting, from Sydney to San Francisco, have soared. Then, in July 2021, I moved with my Danish partner into one of Copenhagen’s many andelsboliger, a co-operatively owned block of flats where we neither have a landlord nor pay rent, and which is not subject to market prices. Today, about 7% of the Danish population live in a form of co-operatively owned housing – and it accounts for one-third of the housing stock in Copenhagen. It soon became clear to me that there’s a lot that other countries could learn. Rather than buy an apartment, people who live in andelsboliger purchase a share in an association that owns the apartment building, equal to the value of the apartment. The prices of the 158 apartments that make up our co-operative have not increased much since it was founded in 1975, meaning we could afford the deposit and subsequent mortgage instalments without support from our parents – even though we together were earning below the median income when we moved in. We don’t expect to make money on our apartment in the time that we live here, but we aren’t losing anything through rent payments either. If we move out, we will leave with roughly what we have put in over the years. As members of the co-operative, we not only have an apartment to live in and a garden to share with our neighbours, but also a voice in decisions about how the building and our common spaces, like the launderette, are run. Once a year, we elect fellow residents to the co-operative’s board, who become responsible for overseeing building maintenance, responding to emergencies, and the administration of new households moving in. The andelsbolig system has its roots in the wider Danish co-operative movement, which began in farming and consumer goods in the 19th century. In the postwar decades, housing co-operatives flourished with the support of trade union groups and social democratic governments. In the 1970s, a legal reform was introduced that granted tenants in the private rental sector the right of “first choice” to collectively buy their building if a landlord wanted to sell it, and by the 2000s thousands of andelsboliger had been established in this way across the country, including the one we live in. For many years, andelsbolig apartments offered an affordable means of housing that provided security, autonomy and community for hundreds of thousands of people. But since the early 2000s, broader changes in the housing market and in finance have put pressure on the system. Co-operatives like ours, which has mostly maintained the financial and social structures it was founded with, are increasingly hard to come by. Like the capitals of its western European neighbours, the private sector housing market in Copenhagen is in crisis. House prices have soared in the country over the past 20 years owing to a combination of tax reforms, mortgage liberalisation policies, and homeownership incentives, also driving up the costs of renting. The increased demand for the more affordable andelsboliger may be exacerbating problems of race- and class-based exclusion in some co-operatives, which have come to rely solely on internal networks to find new tenants rather than external waiting lists. There is also anecdotal evidence that under-the-table payments are offered and accepted to secure co-operative shares. Marketising reforms to the andelsbolig system itself have further undermined the principles on which it was founded – and even led to the dissolution of many co-operatives. Legislation that prevented boards from increasing the price of apartments above the founding amount has largely been repealed and, over the years, many co-operatives have voted to hike the value of shares, enriching existing members while rendering membership more expensive for newcomers. There are also instances where boards have inadvertently run their co-operative into the ground, owing to financial mismanagement in the absence of meaningful government protection. In recent years, co-operatives have even come to be seen as a promising investment opportunity for real estate companies, pension funds and financial institutions. The rapid transformation of the andelsbolig system at large over the past 20 years suggests that alternative forms of housing in other cities would also struggle to survive, as long as there are powerful financial interests that can extract ever-growing rents from tenancies and price increases in the private housing sector. In other words, the experience in Copenhagen supports the economist Josh Ryan-Collins’s contention that western Europe’s housing crisis cannot be solved while housing remains primarily a financial asset, instead of a source of shelter. The principles on which the first andelsboliger were founded, and the sense of freedom that they provide, are nonetheless worth fighting for. Not so long ago, I had lived in 10 different houses within the space of five years, sometimes moving for work or study, but mostly because the landlord had decided to up the rent to an unaffordable amount or sell the apartment. Back then, my home was not something I had any control over. But my housing co-operative in Copenhagen has proved to me that it doesn’t have to be this way. Housing can be, and should be, a path to joy and mental peace, to autonomy and community. These conditions, and not the potential for financial extraction, should be at the heart of housing for everyone. • Rosie Collington is a PhD student at University College London’s Institute for Innovation and Public PurposeA Florida man has pleaded guilty to threatening to kill Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and Nancy Pelosi, two leading Democrats in Congress, and Kim Foxx, a prominent district attorney in Illinois. The US attorney’s office for the southern district of Florida said Paul Vernon Hoeffer, 60, entered his plea in federal court in Fort Pierce on Friday. Hoeffer admitted calling Pelosi’s Washington office in March 2019, threatening “to come a ‘long, long, way’ to rattle her head with bullets and cut her head off”. He admitted a call to Foxx on the same day, saying bullets would “rattle her brain”. In November 2020, Hoeffer called the office of Ocasio-Cortez, a leading progressive from New York. This time, the DoJ said, Hoeffer “threatened that he would ‘rip her head off’, and told her to sleep with one eye open”. Citing the plea agreement, NBC News reported that Hoeffer also “warned of ‘all-out war’ and a ‘civilian army’” and made racist remarks in his call to Foxx. Hoeffer made his calls before the attack on the US Capitol on January 6, 2021, in which supporters of Donald Trump sought to overturn his election defeat. Some looked for lawmakers to capture or kill. One rioter, from Texas, faces charges including a threat to “assassinate” Ocasio-Cortez. His case has yet to be tried. Capitol police have reported an increase in threats against lawmakers. NBC cited the chief of Capitol police, J Thomas Manger, as saying there were about 9,600 threats in 2021, up from more than 8,000 in 2020. As prominent Democratic women, Ocasio-Cortez and Pelosi are common targets for threats, from within the walls of Congress as well as without. Ocasio-Cortez was elected in 2018, as Democrats took the House in opposition to Trump. She quickly became a national star. In 2019, Time magazine began a profile by describing nerves in her Washington office. “Every 10 minutes or so,” the magazine said, “someone knocks on the big wooden door of Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez’s office on Capitol Hill. The noise makes staffers stiffen. “It’s almost always a harmless fan, one of dozens who arrive each day, leaving neon-colored Post-it notes as devotional offerings. “But in her first three months in Congress, aides say, enough people have threatened to murder Ocasio-Cortez that Capitol police trained her staff to perform risk assessments of her visitors.” This, the magazine said, was “the daily reality for America’s newest human Rorschach test. Wonder Woman of the left, Wicked Witch of the right”. At sentencing in April, Hoeffer will face up to 15 years in prison.John Lewis has told staff they will get full sick pay regardless of their Covid vaccination status, saying that it doesn’t “believe it’s right” to treat jabbed and unjabbed workers differently. The retailer’s high-street rivals including Next, Ikea and Ocado are among the companies that have introduced sickness policies that differentiate between vaccinated and unvaccinated employees who have to self-isolate. However in a blogpost on LinkedIn, John Lewis’s group operations director, Andrew Murphy, told its 70,000-strong workforce: “We’re not going to make any change of this type.” He added: “We just don’t believe it’s right to create a link between a partner’s vaccination status and the pay they receive.” He said the company – which is owned by its employees, called partners, who receive an annual profit share – was “hugely supportive of the UK vaccination programme” and had given staff time off to get their jabs. “We cast no judgment on the decisions of any other organisation; in fact we’ve enjoyed how united businesses – retailers especially – have been in the face of these huge corporate and societal challenges,” Murphy said. “However, when life increasingly seems to present opportunities to create division – and with hopes rising that the pandemic phase of Covid may be coming to an end – we’re confident that this is the right approach for us.” Current rules in all UK nations now make a clear distinction in self-isolation requirements for vaccinated and unvaccinated people if they come into contact with someone who has tested positive for Covid. In all four nations the unvaccinated must self-isolate for 10 days even if they do not test positive for the virus. This requirement does not apply for people who are fully vaccinated. Unvaccinated workers at Next and Ikea are only eligible for statutory sick pay – which is set at £96.35 a week – during their 10 days of isolation, unless there are mitigating circumstances. This compares with weekly pay of more than £400 before tax for an average store worker at Ikea. The supermarket chain Morrisons announced in September that it was cutting sick pay during self-isolation for its unvaccinated workers, as part of a move to cut its pandemic-related costs.Between his pure shotmaking, his dynamic athleticism and the all-court style that ties his game together, there are few sights in men’s tennis as spectacular as Denis Shapovalov at the height of his powers. The question surrounding the Canadian and his future prospects has never been about his ability, but rather whether he can harness those talents and consistently replicate a high level on the biggest stages. On Sunday afternoon Shapovalov took a step forward in his progression as he produced statistically the best win of his young career by toppling Alexander Zverev, the third seed, 6-3, 7-6 (5), 6-3. It was a notable performance not because of any delirious shotmaking, but rather the calm, disciplined manner in which he dismantled a top player. Afterwards Shapovalov, 22, stressed his satisfaction about the patience and intelligence with which he played. His discipline was reflected in the statistics. Shapovalov won only one more point than Zverev in nought-to-four-shot rallies, 66 to 65. However he outscored Zverev by a combined 15 points in rallies played between five and eight shots, and nine-plus shots. “It’s definitely something I’ve been learning to do,” he said of his patience. “Hasn’t come natural to me, unfortunately. I’ve always wanted to play quick and go for my shots. But it’s difficult when you play a guy with the calibre of Sascha [Zverev]. You can’t go through him in one or two shots. You have to stay in the rallies, you have to work for the points. Then when you have an opportunity you can swing in and go for it.” Shapovalov’s success in Australia is even more impressive considering the ordeal that preceded it. He was one of the players who tested positive for Covid-19 in December, his pre-season seemingly ruined. He emerged from quarantine and played in the ATP Cup shortly afterwards, joining forces with Félix Auger-Aliassime to win Canada’s first ever top-level team tournament. Shapovalov says he had picked up some niggles as a result of his unhelpful preparation and he did not practise much in the days before the Australian Open. Despite those obstacles, he is 7-0 in 2022. “Obviously every day is different,” he said. “But I feel with every match I have gained a little bit of confidence and comfort playing on these courts. I’m just pleased overall with my game so far and my fighting spirit. Yeah, just battling out in every single match. Hopefully I can continue going this way.” Across the net, it was a dire performance from Zverev, but it fitted into one of the most notable patterns in his career. Despite reaching the US Open final in 2020, he has never beaten a top-10 player at a grand slam tournament and he tends to struggle against elite players in these events. Beating Shapovalov, ranked 14th, would have been the second best grand slam win of his career by ranking. He did not come close. Zverev is still under investigation by the ATP after his ex-girlfriend, Olya Sharypova, alleged that he was physically and emotionally abusive to her. Zverev denies the allegations. With Zverev’s loss, the implications for the men’s draw are significant. He was the second favourite to win the tournament, meaning Daniil Medvedev is now an even heavier favourite. In his quarter-final match, Shapovalov faces the unenviable task of playing against the new second favourite, Rafael Nadal. Nadal advanced to the last eight in straight sets, but only after enduring some genuine tension early on. His manic first-set tie-break against Adrian Mannarino turned into one the moments of the first week as they ended up duelling for 28 minutes. Mannarino saved six set points, mostly with supreme shotmaking, while Nadal saved four set points himself. The tie-break ended with an appropriately absurd final point, at 15-14 to Nadal. Mannarino was in complete control but he tried to finish the point by attacking a forehand behind Nadal. Nadal had held his ground and he reflexively responded with a winning drive volley to snatch the set. Nadal eventually won 7-6 (14), 6-2, 6-2. “It is a victory with a lot of value, especially the first set, so very happy for that,” Nadal said. “I was able to resist the tough moments in the first set. So, yeah, a very important victory for me.”Britain’s sickest children are being treated in intensive care units that are struggling with severe shortages of the specialist nurses needed to look after them, a report says. The shortages in the UK’s 30 paediatric intensive care units (PICUs) are so severe that healthcare assistants are covering the work of nurses in an attempt to ensure that staffing levels are maintained. Only one of the PICUs – at the James Cook University hospital in Middlesbrough – was found to have enough nurses to guarantee the standards of care expected. About 15,000 children and young people a year, often with life-threatening conditions, are cared for in PICUs. Clinical standards that prevail in PICUs require them to ensure that seven nurses are on duty for each bed in a 24-hour cycle. However, the report by the Paediatric Intensive Care Audit Network (PICANet), a group of experts from Leicester and Leeds universities, found that 29 of the 30 had too few nurses to do that, and that all 30 had vacancies, sometimes large numbers of them. “Parents will find this extremely alarming”, said Patricia Marquis, the Royal College of Nursing’s England director. “Most people wouldn’t believe that only one paediatric intensive care unit across the whole UK has enough staff to function properly, but this is the reality of the workforce crisis. Key roles in specialist nursing teams are lying vacant for years.” The PICANet team identified nurses’ salaries and the cost of living in urban areas as key reasons. It found that three of the five hospitals with the lowest number of PICU nurses were in London: the Portland private hospital and Royal Brompton and Royal London NHS hospitals. Oxford’s John Radcliffe and Glasgow’s Royal Hospital for Sick Children were the others. “The nursing shortage is crippling,” one paediatric intensive care doctor in London told the Guardian. “It means that we are routinely cancelling elective surgery that requires a PICU bed. Literally every single hospital in London with a PICU has had to do that recently.” The post-Brexit loss of PICU nurses from EU countries such as Spain and Portugal has exacerbated the situation. A leaked NHS memo about three London hospitals shows that on 12 December there were just nine nurses on duty to look after 12 children in the PICU at King’s College hospital, seven to care for 11 young people at St George’s hospital, and 19 to look after 18 patients at Evelina children’s hospital. “Clearly [the nurse-to-patient staffing] ratio isn’t being provided, so yes, kids are getting substandard care.” A second paediatric intensive care doctor said: “The shortage of PICU nurses is awful. Healthcare assistants can be very good. But their main strength is in soft skills stuff, like being a shoulder to cry on. But they can’t set up a renal haemodialysis machine or calibrate a ventilator for a child who is on oxygen, for example. Only a nurse can do that. “Units try to stretch a smaller number of nurses to look after more patients. You try to deliver the same level of care with a lower number of staff, which is a patient safety issue,” he added. Carli Whittaker, a nurse and the president-elect of the Paediatric Critical Care Society, said fewer PICUs were meeting staffing standards. Understaffing had led to an “erosion of morale” among PICU nurses and was affecting their emotional and psychological health, she added. But she welcomed PICANet’s finding that despite the widespread nurse shortage, the quality of care children and young people receive in PICUs had not been affected. The Department of Health and Social Care has been approached for comment.The temperature is dropping to below zero in western Afghanistan and Delaram Rahmati is struggling to find food for her eight children. Since leaving the family home in the country’s Badghis province four years ago, the Rahmatis have been living in a mud hut with a plastic roof in one of Herat city’s slums. Drought made their village unliveable and the land unworkable. Like an estimated 3.5 million Afghans who have been forced to leave their homes, the Rahmatis now live in a neighbourhood for internally displaced people (IDP). There are no jobs. But the 50-year-old has hospital fees to pay for two of her sons, one of whom is paralysed and the other who has mental illness, as well as medicine for her husband. “I was forced to sell two of my daughters, an eight- and six-year-old,” she says. Rahmati says she sold her daughters a few months ago for 100,000 afghani each (roughly £700), to families she doesn’t know. Her daughters will stay with her until they reach puberty and then be handed over to strangers. It is not uncommon in Afghanistan to arrange the sale of a daughter into a future marriage but raise her at home until it is time for her to leave. However, as the country’s economic crisis deepens, families are reporting that they are handing children over at an increasingly young age because they cannot afford to feed them. Yet, selling her daughters’ future was not the only agonising decision Rahmati was forced to make. “Because of debt and hunger I was forced to sell my kidney,” she tells Rukhshana Media from outside her home in the Herat slum. Afghanistan is on the brink of “a humanitarian crisis and economic collapse”, according to the UN. The agency’s ambassador to Afghanistan has said it is “experiencing the worst humanitarian crisis of its contemporary history”. Drought, Covid-19 and the economic sanctions imposed after the Taliban seized power in August 2021 have had catastrophic consequences on the economy. Dramatic rises in inflation have resulted in soaring food prices. The kidney trade has been growing in Afghanistan for some time. But since the Taliban took power, the price and conditions under which the illegal organ trade takes place has changed. The price of a kidney, which once ranged from $3,500 to $4,000 (£2,600 to £3,000), has dropped to less than $1,500 (£1,100). But the number of volunteers keeps rising. Rahmati sold her right kidney for 150,000 afghani (£1,000). But her recovery from the operation has not been good and now, like her husband, she is also sick, with no money left to visit a doctor. More than half of the country’s estimated 40 million population face “extreme levels of hunger, and nearly 9 million of them are at risk of famine”, according to the UN refugee agency, UNHCR. For a growing number of Afghans, selling a kidney is their only way to get money to eat. “It has been months since we last ate rice. We hardly find bread and tea. Three nights a week, we can’t afford to eat dinner,” says Salahuddin Taheri, who lives in the same slum as the Rahmati family. Taheri, a 27-year-old father of four, who scrapes together enough money for five loaves of bread each day by collecting and selling recycled rubbish, is looking for a buyer for his kidney. “I have been asking private hospitals in Herat for many days if they need any kidney. I even told them if they need it urgently, I can sell it below the market price, but I haven’t heard back,” Taheri says. “I need to feed my children, I have no other choice.” In the past five years about 250 official kidney transplants have taken place in the hospitals in Herat province, with a very limited number being a family member donating their organ, says Asif Kabir, a public health official in the province. The cost of a kidney transplant is 400,000 afghani, plus the price of the kidney, according to Kabir. But the true number of kidney operations may be far higher. A doctor working in one of the hospitals where most of the transplants take place, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, says: “Recently the number of people who want to sell their kidney has increased in Herat and most of them live in the displaced camps, in Herat’s slums. The customers also go to the displaced camps to find a cheap kidney.” Sayed Ashraf Sadat, a civil society activist in Herat, was a member of a delegation assigned by president Ashraf Ghani to investigate the illegal kidney trade in May 2021. “We found that the hospitals were not working according to the law. People are working inside and outside the country to encourage people to sell their kidneys. These people get them visas and send them to the other side of the border. There is more demand for kidney transplants outside Afghanistan. Countries like Iran need kidneys, and poor Afghans are forced to sell them.” Sadat says the investigation he was part of identified two hospitals in Herat where kidney transplant operations take place; one of them said it had completed 194 operations and the other said 32, but more than 500 people were claiming to have sold their kidney, 100 from a single village in Herat. “This shows the kidneys were taken outside Afghanistan,” says Sadat. “For example, a kidney is purchased for 300,000 afghani (£2,100) inside Afghanistan, and it is sold for more than £7,500 to £11,000 outside the country,” says Sadat. “We found evidence that some are encouraged to sell their kidneys, taken outside the borders, and their kidneys are sold for 200,000 to 400,000 afghanis ,” says Sadat. “It seems that the doctors are involved in the illegal trade. But unfortunately, our investigation was stopped due to a worsening security situation.” Two months have passed since Rahmati’s kidney operation, and the money has already gone to pay off medical debt. Her recovery from the operation continues to go badly. “I am so sick. I couldn’t even walk because the wound has been infected. It is very painful,” she says, adding that the recipient of her kidney only paid for the operation fee, two nights in hospital and her first medicine bill. On the day of the transplant, Rahmati was sick and the doctors refused to operate. “I couldn’t breathe properly, so the doctors took me down from the hospital bed, but I returned. I told them ‘I am happy with my own death, but I can’t tolerate seeing my children hungry and ill’,” she says. ° As told to Rukhshana media Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Why are the Tories pulled to the right by fringe parties, but Labour are pulled to the centre? Barry Kington, Worcester Send new questions to nq@theguardian.com. Readers reply “The centre is where the votes are,” apparently. Evidence (SDP, TIGgers, LibDems) suggest otherwise. But there again, the rightwing media keep telling us differently. JoeRobson It’s the centre where one finds voters who might change their opinion. Both the Tories and Labour have a bedrock of supporters (roughly 25% of voters) who will vote for them come what may. About 25-30% on the electoral roll don’t vote (regrettably), that leaves about 20%-25% who are not strongly committed to one party or another, might change their minds, and thus can change the outcome of the election. Mark_MK Because Labour is constantly led by people who don’t really have principles, they just have a desire for power. Most of the media want rightwing policies, so they attack anyone on the left, tolerate those in the centre, and support those on the right. Rather than stand up for socialist policies and principles that benefit ordinary people, the likes of Starmer and Blair think that they need the support of Murdoch and his cronies in the media, so they do what’s necessary to “win” their support, which is basically to offer us a “lite” version of the Tory brand. donpittodrie I suspect there are a lot of reasons. The longstanding parties of the left (eg SWP, SPEW etc) don’t stand against Labour as getting the Tories out is seen as the priority. The Labour left has also been seen as the fringe of polite society, and may concentrate in Labour strongholds, and so pose less of an existential threat. Centrist parties, on the other hand, are more likely to take existing MPs and floating voters with them. Money is also a factor: any rightward drift, for either party, will take donors. A left/right spectrum oversimplifies things, too. In 2015, many Labour voters defected to Ukip, without going through the Tory party, because they shared a social conservatism, as well as a distaste for the EU. When the Tories were seen to move to the right, rejecting a certain kind of metropolitan elitism, it was easy for them to hoover up those votes when Ukip’s vote collapsed after the referendum. JasonJdo The question frames the argument badly. A clearer and more truthful formulation would be “why do both parties drift rightwards?” There are various answers to that, but one is certainly the nature of our media, largely owned by a small coterie of billionaires who are so patriotic they take good care to minimise their tax in the UK, but still never hesitate to lecture us about patriotism. Left-leaning policies will be attacked ferociously, as will those who espouse them. Right-leaning policies will be seen as “sound, grown-up and realistic”. Whispering_Ned The Tories are being pulled to the extreme right and Labour are moving to the centre-right to take up the space vacated by the Tories as the “moderate” wing of the Tory party has disintegrated. Only politics to the right of centre are now acceptable to the UK establishment, with anything even vaguely to the left being aggressively dismissed as leftwing extremism. By today’s standards, the postwar Attlee government, with its creation of the NHS would be labelled as communist. emmasdad The concept of right and left go back to the those on the right bank of the Seine being wealthy and those on the left being more politically progressive. That seems to have become hopelessly outdated – it is more down to the Tories’ politics being more appealing to the authoritarian wealthy who want to keep the less wealthy down while having direct access to their money and labour. Those in Labour are greater in numbers but have less access to the one thing that makes a difference, wealth. Labour therefore has to compromise to attract enough of the Tory heartlands than is comfortable for those in the more “progressive” parts of the party and this inevitably creates tensions and inevitably leads to more infighting. The Tories have no problems like that, they just do greed and they find that alone holds them together. MadorKallan No. It refers to the seating position of the MPs (députés) in the first national assembly in 1789 on each side of the president of the assembly (supporters of the king to his right; supporters of the revolution to his left). ceciler Because we let the prevailing rightwing media define the field of play Because we focus on “winning”, not on transformative ideas and actions Because we have failed to tell a better story than either the old bankrupt socialist story or the negative smug neoliberal story or the imperialist Britain first story Because we allow Peter Mandelson and his ilk to replay the Blair years Because we have a system the has polarised and leaves no room for the margins Because we do not have PR, but stick to first-past-the-post voting. thisfragiletent Part of the problem is that the centre of gravity for British politics is in Washington not London. Clinton begat Blair, and Trump spawned Johnson. It is not right or left but British politics itself that is pulled whichever way the Americans move. Splutterer When I was an undergraduate at Manchester in 1978, I snook into a Conservative Students meeting with Sir Keith Joseph. What he said was etched into my memory partly because at the time I thought he was bonkers and then later mainly because I had the painful experience of living to see that he was horrifically portentous. “The problem with British politics is that it is too leftwing,” he said. “When we get into office we are going to change that. We are going to slowly ratchet the parameters of the debate to the right. We will arrange it so that what is the centre now will become the extreme left and the centre will be way over to the right. This will have the effect of pulling Labour from where it is now to the right of where Ted Heath’s government was. We will make socialism impossible.” The rightward drift is/was a deliberate act. EJCribb Some people who post on here think people don’t read the papers any more. Many of the very poor buy papers because the majority don’t have access to the internet. Tabloids – mostly rightwing – still carry a lot of weight in working-class areas; even when people don’t buy them, the huge headlines are sending a subliminal message every time people walk past a newspaper rack. sydney1894 Because there are two orthogonal spectrums and neither Labour, nor Conservative MPs are a good fit to the UK population. Economically, the population sits a little to the right of the typical Labour MP but the Conservative economic view is a far-out minority opinion. But on the authoritarian spectrum, the population is, if anything, more extreme than the Conservative MPs. So Labour MPs need to move a little right on economics, and a lot right on “liberal values” to pick up more voters, while the Conservative MPs need to move right on the authoritarian spectrum but very left on the economic spectrum to align with the median population. But Conservative MPs are attracted to the party on economics, so their choice is to “betray” why they’re conservatives and move left or adopt a more authoritarian stance. Hence the “war on woke”, “longer sentences” etc. DeeplyDepressed The left haven’t learned to communicate in the way the right does. Rightwing views are based on looking at the world in the most simplistic way possible. The left tend to try to educate people instead of finding simple slogans and images that carry the messages they want to pass on. rockyrex It really does bear repeating to the majority it seems (pace Emmasdad), Corbyn-era policies would have sat comfortably within any Labour government until Thatcher, Liberals until the LibDem schism and the arrival of Clegg, and indeed to a few one-nation Tories. Corbyn was and is a left-of-centre democratic socialist, and utterly unremarkable in European terms. What IS remarkable is the bizarre lack of any wider view by those so indoctrinated or opinionated, to see him as “far left” or even “communist”. NotANiceSocialistIf you are an alcoholic or addict of some kind and you get amnesia, would you remain an alcoholic? Jane Ricard, Autun Post your answers (and new questions) below or send them to nq@theguardian.com. A selection will be published on Sunday.Aaron Rodgers heads into another offseason of uncertainty after one more frustrating finish to a brilliant year. Rodgers drove the Packers to a touchdown on the game’s opening possession, then couldn’t get them back in the end zone the rest of Saturday night. Their season ended with a stunning 13-10 NFC divisional playoff loss to the San Francisco 49ers. “A little numb, for sure,” Rodgers said after game. “I didn’t think it was going to end like this.” But was this just the end of Rodgers’ season? Or is it the end of his remarkable tenure in Green Bay? The upset loss capped a turbulent year in which Rodgers skipped the Packers’ mandatory minicamp; missed a game due to a positive Covid-19 test after making misleading comments about his vaccination status; but still earned All-Pro honors and put himself in position for a possible fourth MVP award. Rodgers didn’t want to speculate on his future. He said last month that he hadn’t ruled out any possibility, including returning to Green Bay, requesting a trade or retiring. “I’m still super competitive, still know I can play at a high level, so it’s going to be a tough decision,” Rodgers said after the game. “I have a lot of things to weigh in the coming weeks. But man, just so much gratitude for this city and this organization and such a long, long career here that I’m proud of and really thankful for all the men and women that work here, the men I’ve gotten to cross paths with, coaches and players over the years.” Rodgers did say on Saturday night that his relationship with general manager Brian Gutekunst had improved this season. “There’s a lot of players whose futures are up in the air, so definitely will be interesting to see which way some of those decisions will go,” Rodgers said. “But I’ll have the conversations with Brian in the next week or so and get a little bit more clarity and think about my own future and how much longer I want to keep doing this.” The Packers are $44.8m over their projected salary cap for next season, which means they will almost certainly have to shed key players. That would hurt their chances of contending for the Super Bowl. At the age of 38, Rodgers knows his chances of a second championship to add to the one he won with the Packers in February 2011 are limited. He has been linked to a move to teams such as the Denver Broncos and the Pittsburgh Steelers, who both have strong defenses but lack a threat at quarterback. Rodgers on Saturday said he would make a decision on his future by the time the free agency window opens on 16 March. “I don’t want to be part of a rebuild if I’m going to keep playing, so a lot of decisions in the next couple months,” Rodgers said. Rodgers entered Saturday having thrown 20 touchdown passes with no interceptions over his last seven regular-season games. But he once again wasn’t spectacular in the postseason. He went 20 of 29 for 225 yards with no touchdowns or interceptions. He was sacked five times while working behind an offensive line missing injured tackle David Bakhtiari. When the Packers had the ball in a tie game in the closing minutes, they went three-and-out and punted, which eventually led to the 49ers’ winning field goal. “I think Aaron did everything he could,” Packers coach Matt LaFleur said. “He was under a lot of duress. I think it’s more to do with I didn’t put our guys in position to make enough plays. I take that very personally.” The Packers had a brutal night on special teams, with a blocked punt leading to a 49ers’ touchdown. The Niners also blocked a Mason Crosby field goal, which would have given the Packers a 10-0 lead. However, Rodgers admitted he could have played better himself. “I didn’t have a great night tonight,” said Rodgers. “They did a good job of kind of getting me off the spot, and a better job of taking away some of the quick game we got going last time we played them. I missed a couple reads. I probably should have taken a couple hole-shot chances a couple times. Obviously, if I hit Allen [Lazard] on that deep in on the last drive, that probably gets us out to about midfield and then we’re a couple first downs away from being in field-goal range.”Joe Biden marked his first anniversary in office with a gaffe over Ukraine that undid weeks of disciplined messaging and diplomatic preparation. The president’s suggestion that a “minor incursion” by Russia might split Nato over how to respond sent the White House into frantic damage limitation mode. Officials insisted Biden had been referring to cyber-attacks and paramilitary activities and not Russian troops crossing the border. That failed to entirely calm nerves in Kyiv and other European capitals, especially as Biden also raised eyebrows by predicting that Vladimir Putin would “move in” to Ukraine because “he has to do something” and would probably prevail. The analysis of Nato’s weaknesses and Putin’s intentions was no doubt widely shared but Biden had said the quiet part loud, contradicting what his own officials had been saying. Jake Sullivan, the national security adviser, had just been telling Foreign Policy that one of the great successes of the Biden administration was “the 30 allies of Nato [were] speaking with one voice in the Russia-Ukraine crisis”. Aides who have shadowed Biden through his long career as senator and vice-president are used to his prolix ways, and his tendency to draw on his deep foreign policy experience to over-explain, but the stakes are immeasurably greater as a president, trying to stare down Putin as Europe stands on the threshold of war. The stumble distracted from some of the foreign policy achievements of Biden’s first year – the mending of transatlantic ties, the bolstering of US support for the embattled government in Kyiv, and the development of a consistent policy towards Moscow – which combined a openness to talks with a readiness to inflict punitive measures and a refusal to be divided from Nato allies. None of those gains were a given in US foreign policy after four years of Donald Trump, a president who frequently put domestic political and business advantage ahead of strategic national interests, particularly when it came to Russia. Mending alliances, returning to multilateralism and restoring predictability to US policy after the volatile Trump era is widely regarded as Biden’s greatest success so far in foreign policy. His claim on taking office that “America is back” was backed up by a quick deal to extend the New Start treaty in Russia and thereby salvage the only major arms control agreement to survive Trump. The US rejoined the Paris climate accord and the United Nations Human Rights Council, re-engaged with major powers in nuclear talks with Iran, and convened a virtual Summit for Democracy in December. All those steps were in line with a broad strategy which Nathalie Tocci, director of the Rome-based Institute of International Affairs, describes as a Biden doctrine. “I think it’s a strategic reorientation towards competition/conflict with China and, the other side of that coin, strengthening relationships with partners in Europe and in Asia, both bilaterally and multilaterally,” Tocci said. “And relying less on the military instrument in order to pursue US foreign policy goals.” The Ukraine stumble was not the first time that strategy has been impaired by its execution. The withdrawal from Afghanistan was intended to be a decisive break with the past, extricating the US from its longest war so it could focus on its most important geopolitical challenge, the rapid rise of China. The departure turned to chaos when the Afghan army, which the US had spent $83m and 20 years trying to build, collapsed in a few days in the face of a Taliban offensive. The scenes of desperate Afghans trying to cling to departing US planes, some dying in the attempt, are an inescapable part of Biden’s legacy. Biden has argued he was boxed in by the Doha agreement the Trump administration signed with the Taliban in February 2020, under which the US was due to leave by May 2021. Biden was able to stretch that deadline by four months but maintained that staying any longer would have led to renewed attacks on US troops. Nathan Sales, an acting under secretary of state in the Trump administration, argued that the Doha deal was no longer binding on Biden, and he could have left a force to maintain US leverage. “When one side of an agreement breaches it serially and flagrantly like the Taliban did, I think the Biden administration would have been well within its rights to say: ‘We’re not bound by it either,’” said Sales, now a nonresident senior fellow at the Atlantic Council. Current US officials argue that whether the US declared the Taliban had been in violation or not, there would have been renewed attacks on US troops, forcing a decision to cut and run or send large-scale reinforcements. The status quo, they say, was not sustainable. Even considering the constraints imposed by the previous administration, the withdrawal was a fiasco. US planners failed to anticipate the speed of the collapse even though a government watchdog, the Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction, had warned in 2021 that without US contractors to service planes and helicopters, the Afghan air force would no longer be able to function, depriving troops on the ground of a key advantage. For Afghans who worked with the US and its allies, and for the country’s women and girls, the departure seemed like a betrayal, raising a serious question mark over the administration’s claims to have restored human rights to the heart of US foreign policy. Its record in that regard was already mixed. On one hand, the administration had taken a firm stand against China’s mass persecution of Muslim Uyghurs, declaring it a genocide. Furthermore, the assembly of a coalition of some 130 countries to establish a global minimum tax was, according to Matt Duss, foreign affairs adviser to Senator Bernie Sanders, “a step toward addressing global economic inequality which is one of the drivers of conflict and authoritarianism”. “It’s an important first step and a courageous one,” Duss said. He also pointed to the sanctions against surveillance companies like the Israeli NSO group, whose software was used by authoritarian regimes to target dissidents. “That was a very consequential move, and there has been a massive pressure campaign trying to get them to roll it back, but they’ve stood firm,” he said. However, the steps taken against the Saudi monarchy for the heavy civilian toll from its air war in Yemen and the murder of Washington Post columnist Jamal Khashoggi felt well short of what human rights campaigners and progressive Democrats had hoped for. The Biden administration continued to sell Riyadh substantial quantities of advanced weaponry. “We’ve basically returned to the traditional US approach of supporting human rights in countries that don’t buy our weapons,” Duss said. “I very much hope that changes.” ‘A lot of bad blood’ Another way in which the manner of the US exit from Afghanistan undermined the administration’s wider objectives was by alienating European allies, who felt left out of a decision they were obliged to follow. “The pull-out really caused a lot of bad blood unnecessarily,” Elisabeth Braw, a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, said. “You can call it the root cause of unhappiness within the alliance.” The formation in September of Aukus, a partnership with the UK and Australia to help the latter acquire nuclear-powered submarines, was another sweeping move in the pivot towards Asia. But the protagonists had omitted to inform France, who discovered on the same day that their contract to sell Australia diesel submarines had been cancelled. Biden was forced to acknowledge the “clumsy” way it had been handled, and the rift clouded bilateral relations for months. Putin’s threat to Ukraine has helped rally the transatlantic alliance but as Biden revealed in his own public reflections, there are still serious divisions below the surface, limiting his room for manoeuvre. The president’s freedom of action on other global issues, like making progress in climate action or finding a nuclear compromise with Iran, will be hindered still further if Republicans gain control of Congress in this year’s midterm elections. In that case, the administration’s record until now, mixed as it is, may prove to be the high point of the Biden doctrine.After becoming Britain’s newest – and perhaps most unlikely – World Cup winner, Dave “the Rocket” Ryding, a 35-year-old slalom skier from Chorley in Lancashire, has set his sights on surprising the world again at next month’s Winter Olympics. Until Saturday no British skier had ever won a gold medal in the 55-year history of the Alpine World Cup. But Ryding’s stunning victory in Kitzbühel changed all that – and earned him 100,000 euros in the process. When asked about what went through his mind on the start line before his remarkable second run, which took him from sixth place to first, Ryding was disarmingly honest. “I thought: ‘Bugger it, I’ll just try and get down and ski as well as I can and see where that gets me,’” he replied. The performance made Ryding the oldest ever winner of a men’s World Cup slalom event, but afterwards he was too tired to celebrate with a few drinks. “I am too old for that,” he said, smiling. “I am absolutely shattered. We had a nice meal.” The popular skier will soon travel to Beijing for his fourth Winter Olympic Games – where he admits, to borrow a phrase from Sir Alex Ferguson, that it will be “squeaky-bum time”. “Of course I’m going to have pressure and of course people are going to expect I will do well,” he admitted. “At my last Olympics I got to the start gate and it was squeaky-bum time. “And I’ll be nervous again because it’s the biggest race in the four years. It’s the pinnacle. I’ll be expecting myself to ski well but whatever happens I can go home knowing I’ve got a World Cup victory.” That win was the culmination of a near 30-year journey, which began when Ryding started learning to ski aged six on the 50m Pendle dry slope in Lancashire. However it was only when he was 12 that he tried skiing on snow for the first time – after his working-class parents promised they would take their first family skiing holiday if he and his sister, Jo, got to a decent level. His father Carl, a market trader who retrained as a gas engineer to help fund their son’s dreams, and his mother Shirley, a hairdresser, then spent weekends driving Ryding around the country to race. However, they made him pass his A-levels before agreeing he could spend a year trying to make his love of skiing into a career. “I had to learn everything later as I wasn’t exposed to the mountains until I was older,” he admitted. “It was a tough learning curve but I wouldn’t change anything.” Ryding’s road to the top continued to have nearly as many sharp twists and turns as an Alpine pass. But he believes years of living on the breadline helped make him the skier he is today. “In 2010 when the old federation went bankrupt and we had nothing, that was a time where it was tough, really hard,” he said. “It was just me and my coach on the road. But it made me as well and gave me the determination, it gave me the work ethic and just that nothing is given for free.” “Doubt is always there,” added Ryding, who made his World Cup debut in Alta Badia in 2009 and was competing in his 97th race on Saturday. “You do one race and you’re not happy with it, you’re down in the dumps again, you pick yourself up, you get slapped back down again. It’s relentless but you learn to deal with it, to push out of the gate and go for it.” When asked if he had plans to spend his 100,000 euro prize money, his reply was blunt: “No, I am a tight arse!” “I’m fortunate since I’ve been in the top 15 in the world to make a living,” he added. “Footballers earn more in a week than I do in a year. But I’m not complaining. I was absolutely fine with coming away with nothing at 30 if it didn’t work out. That’s what I was prepared to do. And now Kitzbühel. If you are going to win one for prize money it is this one.” Ryding also hopes that his victory and the support of GB Snowsport can inspire the next generation of British skiers to come through. Meanwhile he also has a wedding to his fiancée, Mandy, to look forward to in May. But, for now, his focus is the Olympics. “When you win a World Cup three weeks before the Olympics it’s natural for everyone to talk,” he admitted. “Obviously the pressure and expectation will have ramped up but I won’t be defined by an Olympics. I’ve had an amazing career that I’m proud of. To win one has taken the weight off my shoulders. “It was a crazy day and it’s been a crazy journey. But I never stopped believing that I could do it.”A group of survivors and relatives of people who died in the infected blood scandal are suing a school where they contracted hepatitis and HIV after being given experimental treatment without informed consent. A proposed group action lodged by Collins Solicitors in the high court on Friday alleges that Treloar College, a boarding school in Hampshire that specialised in teaching haemophiliacs, failed in its duty of care to these pupils in the 1970s and 80s. The claim could result in a payout running into millions of pounds, and is based on new testimony given by former staff at the school to the ongoing infected blood inquiry. Gary Webster, 56, a former pupil who was infected with hepatitis C and HIV after being treated with contaminated blood at the school in the early 80s and gave evidence to the inquiry last year, is the lead claimant of the 22 survivors in the group. Speaking to the Guardian, he said: “We were lab rats or guinea pigs. We always thought that we may have been experimented on for research purposes, but we had no proof until the evidence given in the inquiry.” Last year in testimony to the inquiry, the former headteacher of Treloars, Alec Macpherson, confirmed that doctors at the school were “experimenting with the use of factor VIII”, an imported pooled plasma that was later discovered to be contaminated with HIV and hepatitis. He said he and other teaching staff did not question doctors about the trials. He told the inquiry: “We didn’t have any authority or reason to interfere. You can’t – doctors are god, aren’t they?” Macpherson said he consented to the treatment because he trusted the doctors, and he could not recall if parents were informed and consulted. Webster said: “None of our parents were ever informed. I’m damn sure my mother and father would have asked why my treatment was changing, and by 1983 they would have known there were problems with imported factor VIII.” He added: “I am really angry, especially after hearing evidence from the school. It should never have happened. The staff had a duty of care and I think they were negligent.” Webster was 18 in 1983 when he was told by school doctors he been infected with HIV – and was given two years to live. He said: “I was with my best friend, Stephen, who died of Aids in 1990, and we told just told by doctors at the school that we were infected and we would probably be dead in two years.” Two years later Webster was told he also had hepatitis C as a result of the infected blood given to him to at the school. He said: “I had full-blown Aids in my late 20s early 30s. It was only because of the treatment that came out that I managed to pull through. Many others didn’t.” The public inquiry heard last year that of 89 haemophiliac children who attended Treloar in the 70s and 80s, less than a quarter were still alive. Webster said the survivors had been left psychologically scarred and received no counselling at the time. “We are all damaged mentally as well as physically. I went off the rails and started drinking a lot. I stuck a car through a wall once trying to kill myself. A lot of us had suicidal thoughts with the stigma of Aids and the news that you weren’t going to live long anyway, and relationships were a nightmare.” Despite his problems, Webster said he had been one of the lucky ones, because he survived and managed to work, first as tailor and then as a manager for Red Cross before he was forced to retire on health grounds at the age of 46. “It is the hep C that has really done me damage, my liver is absolutely shot, and I physically can’t work any more,” he said. Desmond Collins, a senior partner at Collins Solicitors, said: “This is a straightforward breach of duty case. The school was acting in loco parentis, yet failed in its basic duty of care to these already vulnerable boys. We are determined that they receive recognition and due recompense for the trauma that and their families have suffered over decades.” He added: “There was a fatal lack of curiosity from the school about what was going on. The boys were treated as a dataset which medics decided to experiment on. The parents were entitled to an explanation of what was going on. The school didn’t tell them anything because they didn’t know anything – it just handed it all over the medics.” In a statement, the college – which has since changed its name to Treloar’s – said: “We are truly saddened that about 100 of our former pupils are amongst the 4,500 men, women and children across the UK who were infected with hepatitis and/or HIV from infected blood products supplied within the NHS treatment programme. “We are unable to comment on the legal action taken against Treloar’s at this point, but we will continue to cooperate with the public inquiry into these issues and await its outcome.”Despite hitting the headlines in recent weeks, when Mark Spencer was appointed as Boris Johnson’s chief whip in 2019 he was described as a relative unknown outside Westminster. The website ConservativeHome said he had “contrived to remain one of the least-known major players” in SW1. The exception may have been in his constituency of Sherwood, Nottinghamshire, where his family have lived for four generations. Before his election as an MP in 2010, Spencer joined the family farm business after qualifying at Shuttleworth Agricultural College in Bedfordshire. Spencer, who celebrated his 52nd birthday last week, is married with two children and attended local comprehensive schools in the village of Calverton. A member of various select committees, he was appointed as parliamentary private secretary to Liz Truss when she was secretary of state for environment, food and rural affairs, before joining the whips’ office. In 2015 Spencer was accused by the Spectator of “rigid tribalism” after appearing to defend a benefits system that sanctioned a jobseeker with learning disabilities because he was four minutes late for a jobcentre appointment. In January 2016 he was one of 72 MPs who were themselves landlords who voted against proposed new rules explicitly requiring rental properties to be “fit for human habitation”. Despite supporting the remain campaign in the EU referendum, Spencer’s promotion to chief whip – a role he described at the time to Farmers Weekly as the “grease that makes parliament work” – was met with broad approval from different wings of the parliamentary party. Heralding his appointment, the former Tory MP Nick Boles said Spencer was “one of the nicest people in the Conservative parliamentary party … firm, fair, with his feet planted firmly on the ground.” He also said Spencer “makes great pies”, in reference to his family’s farm shop, which boasts of selling three kinds of pork pies – a culinary reference more recently seen as a byword for alleged plots against Spencer’s boss.Comoros will be forced to start an outfield player in goal for their Africa Cup of Nations round of 16 clash against hosts Cameroon on Monday, as their three goalkeepers are all absent. First choice Salim Ben Boina is missing through injury after being stretchered off in their win over Ghana, while his understudies, Moyadh Ousseini and Ali Ahamada, have tested positive for Covid. It is a huge blow for the team as their build up to arguably the biggest match in their history. They have a total of seven players absent due to Covid, severely depleting their ranks. An unnamed outfield player has been training as a goalkeeper in recent days to prepare him to face the tournaments top scorers, who scored seven goals in their three group matches. The Comoros assistant manager Daniel Padovanni said: “We’ve already chosen an outfield player who will start as keeper. It’s a player who in training has shown that he can play as a keeper.”Four-and-a-half decades into a constantly evolving career, Elvis Costello seems to have come full circle. After the lavish reissue of 1979’s Armed Forces in 2020, and last summer’s reappraisal of This Year’s Model with Spanish-language guest singers, The Boy Named If also locates itself very firmly in Costello’s late-70s/early-80s purple patch. There’s a real punch to most of the 13 songs here, the Imposters rocking hard and rolling back the years to infuse the taut arrangements with real urgency. Winning melodies abound, particularly on Mistook Me for a Friend and the title track, about an imaginary friend who can be blamed for all of one’s misdeeds. As ever with Costello, there is a richness to the lyrics, and as on 2018’s Look Now, his protagonists are on occasion female: the pretty tune of The Difference conceals a kernel of darkness, with an abused daughter committing patricide. Equally thought-provoking is Paint the Red Rose Blue, which details the death of a relationship (this time from a male perspective). Even when the tempo drops, the quality doesn’t, the rich imagery of Trick Out the Truth being a case in point. Effortlessly classy.Saturday Night Live opens by going back to a (very dry) well with a new edition of Fox News’s Ingraham Angle. Laura Ingraham (Kate McKinnon) celebrates “year one of Biden’s presidency” by listing some of his big failures: rising inflation, high gas prices, the green M&amp;M being “cancelled just for being a whore”. Her guests include Senator Ted Cruz (Aidy Bryant), who reminds all his fellow Texans that “February’s gonna be a cold one, so you might want to book your vacay to Cancún now”; her “one black friend” Candace Owens, there to “continue to fight for African Americans, no matter how many times they ask me to stop”; and finally, former president Donald Trump (James Austin Johnson). Trump uses Wordle to free associate on random topics, including John Mayer (“I’d rather be mayor of anything than be Governor Ron DeSantis – I’d beat him so senseless if he went against me, just like I beat Hillary”), How I Met Your Father (“It doesn’t have the charm and sparkle of, frankly, Mother, but we love Duff”), Lisa Bonet and Jason Momoa (“Momoa is a very big boy … he looks like a sexy devil”), before making a pitch for re-election in 2024. As with every Ingraham sketch, it feels cobbled together at the last minute. Austin’s Trump’s impression remains aces, but he’s given little to work with here. Former cast member Will Forte returns after 12 years away to host for the first time. Forte passive-aggressively celebrates his former alumni – Kristen Wiig, Jason Sudeikis, Andy Samberg, Fred Armisen, Seth Meyers and John Mulaney – all hosting before him, claiming they “saved the best for waaaay last”. His spotlight is quickly stolen by his MacGruber co-star Wiig, who shows up to support him, only to be quickly dismissed. Forte attempts to give a heartfelt speech about how much the show has meant to him, but he’s cut off by Lorne Michaels, who informs him that there was a mix-up and the night’s host was supposed to be Willem Dafoe (Dafoe, who pops up for a silent cameo, will actually be hosting next week). Given that it’s the only SNL character of the last 21 years to make the jump to the big screen (and now streaming), it was a foregone conclusion we’d get some new MacGruber adventures, and the show wastes no time getting to them. The mulleted gadget master and man-of-action has to dismantle a bomb in a “small room with limited airflow” before it explodes and kills himself and his partners (series co-stars Wiig and Ryan Phillippe). However, the Covid-pandemic has thrown a monkey wrench into things, and he lets his anti-mask, anti-vax stance (“I don’t want the government putting a tracking device up my scrotum!”) distract him, leading to the inevitable explosion. Next, Forte plays Mark Zazz, the host of Kid Klash, a Nickelodeon-style gameshow where kids compete in messy challenges for the chance to win pizza for life (“You get to keep this one pizza for your entire life”). Contestant Tatum (Bryant) is tasked with finding a flag in a giant bowl of whipped cream. She’s unable to complete the challenge, but Zazz forces her to stay in and finish, using the game to cruelly impart a harsh life lesson: “I didn’t start this gameshow to encourage children to quit like whiney little babies!” Forte’s hilariously menacing vibe and the impressive prop work combine to make one of the best sketches of the season We then immediately return to the adventure of the new, alt-right MacGruber, who tries to reassure his teammates that he’s following the science and safety protocols for Covid, before immediately ingesting ivermectin and hydroxychloroquine to treat his “Covidifillis”– a combination of Covid, syphilis, free-standing herpes and horse worms. After eating some horse-worm-infested spaghetti he’s kept hidden in his underpants, he attempts to spout some QAnon nonsense, but is interrupted by another detonation. On a new episode of Cinema Classics, host and perpetually miserable husband Reese De’What (Kenan Thompson) introduces the classic 1944 noir Gaslight, starring Ingrid Bergman (McKinnon) as a woman being driven insane by her evil husband, played by Charles Boyer (Forte), and her maid, played by a young Angela Lansbury (Chloe Fineman). Cinema Classics is always good for a few laughs – De’What may be the most reliably funny recurring character in the show’s repertoire at the moment – but this one is disappointingly slight. A planned threesome between a married couple (Mikey Day, Fineman) and “experienced third” Gannon – a platinum blonde, goateed Forte – immediately goes off the rails when Gannon makes it clear that he intends to cut the husband out of the action (“This dog gets greedy with his treats!”). Forte makes for a perfect sleazebag, but as with the previous sketch, things wraps up before it really gets going. On Weekend Update, Michael Che welcomes back Chinese trade minister/Olympic games organizer Chen Biao (Bowen Yang). Biao could care less about NBC’s decision to cover the games remotely, as well as diplomatic boycotts over China’s human rights violations: “It’s our party and we’ll spy if we want to.” Biao is followed by Sarah Sherman. Ostensibly there to talk about her favorite season, winter, she spends all her time trying to cancel Colin Jost, turning his innocuous comments into scandalized headlines such “Local Female Body Inspector Colin Jost Prefers Hairless Genitals”, “Wealth-Hoarding Hollywood Husband Colin Jost-Hansson Has Not a Dime to Spare”, and “Local Sex Bigot Rejects Queer Love”. Che and Sherman’s big, intentionally abrasive personalities have proven divisive among viewers, but they both bring an undeniably palpable energy to Update. They’re followed by the smarmy Guy Who Just Bought a Boat (Alex Moffat), who congratulates “bro-bro from a ‘no ho” Jost, along with Pete Davidson, on their recent real-life purchase of a retired Staten Island ferryboat. Davidson joins the proceedings, but it’s Moffatt’s show all the way. He makes Davidson and Jost break continuously. Then Forte and Wiig return to play washed-up country stars who sing bizarre and disturbing tunes about “the four things they know best: spaceships, toddlers, model-T cars and jars of beer”. It’s a Forte specialty: a late-in-the-night, go-for-broke blast of weirdness (see also: the classic potato chip sketch from 2009). Then we’re treated to one final MacGruber sketch. Despite an intervention from friends and family, MacGruber has only fallen further into the rightwing rabbit hole. Dressed like the QAnon Shaman from the Capitol Insurrection, he rants about baby-eating Hollywood elites, ignoring another ticking time bomb until it’s too late. There was never any doubt that Forte would nail his hosting duties, but luckily, the show let him get as weird as he wanted for most of the episode. Much of it played like a long advertisement for Peacock’s MacGruber series, but that’s hardly something to complain about. Along with Sudeikis’s episode from October, this is the best SNL has been all season. It’s only too bad every episode can’t be handed over to a cast member from that era of the show.When international forces left Afghanistan so abruptly over the summer, we knew the risks of humanitarian catastrophe. Sadly, we are now seeing the consequences. The speed with which humanitarian indicators are plummeting is dramatic, even compared with other serious global crises. The freezing of state assets and the cut in international funding for health and education risk tipping the country into famine: not seen before in Afghanistan’s 40 years of conflict. Economic collapse will cause death and suffering, and increase terrorism and migration. The UK government has announced £286m of humanitarian assistance and supported the UN security council in the careful relaxation of some sanctions. UK citizens have once again responded generously to the Disaster Emergency Committee appeal. But these measures are not enough to avert an irreversible humanitarian disaster. We believe the UK government needs to act in accordance with two fundamental principles: Afghan lives should not be used for political leverage; and economic and state collapse in Afghanistan is not in our own national interest. So we urge the government to convene an urgent international conference, in partnership with the UN and key international partners. We should do so on the basis that the international community distinguish between two types of aid: money that can be withheld to try to leverage political concessions from the Taliban (such as large scale infrastructure projects – roads, dams and so on); and money to enable government institutions to deliver basic human services and to keep the economy from collapsing. Given the weak economy, Afghans providing essential services have largely been paid from the aid budgets of development partners for the last 20 years. Governments – rightly – do not want to give any succour to the Taliban. Instead, money has been channelled into the humanitarian system. This is important, but cannot replace institutional service delivery to 40 million people. Humanitarian agencies are ready and able to pay medical staff, teachers and other civil servants delivering public services. But they need the money to do so – far more than has yet been delivered. And they need a clear political mandate from donors, not least the US. The UK should therefore press for five practical outcomes: The international community to meet the UN’s appeal for humanitarian funding and accelerate payment of money promised. The preservation of state delivery systems, including salary payments for civil servants delivering essential public services. The resumption of technical support to the central bank to prevent economic collapse and pursue the managed and limited release of the Afghan people’s foreign exchange reserves. The reinstatement of the Afghan reconstruction trust fund, a trusted mechanism for structured and accountable disbursement of international donor development funds. Projects must be scrutinised and adjusted to ensure no direct benefit accrues to the Taliban. The release of some of the frozen Afghan foreign reserves so that salaries of essential workers can be paid directly by third parties and key social services be maintained. All of these are compatible with maintaining a policy of non-recognition of the Taliban regime. The UN secretary general has clearly stated: the time to act is now. Let us not fail the Afghan people again. Valerie Amos former UN undersecretary-general for humanitarian affairs and secretary of state, Department for International Development David Richards former chief of the defence staff Peter Ricketts former national security adviser and permanent secretary, Foreign and Commonwealth Office Mark Sedwill former national security adviser, cabinet secretary and ambassador to Kabul Nicholas Kay former ambassador to Kabul Mark Lowcock former UN under-secretary-general for humanitarian affairs and permanent secretary, Department for International Development Tom Fletcher former ambassador and No 10 foreign policy adviserWhite applicants to the government’s elite graduate scheme are three times more likely to win a place than their black counterparts, new analysis shows. A record number of graduates applied to join the UK government’s civil service fast stream between 2019 and 2021, with more than 160,800 external applicants for just 3,290 places, a success rate of just under one in 50. However, the figures show that the chances of success differed greatly for separate ethnic backgrounds. People from black African or Caribbean backgrounds had a success rate of one in 137 when applying to join the fast stream between 2019 and 2021. In comparison, white applicants had a success rate of one in 44, while Asian applicants had a success rate of one in 77 to join the scheme. Overall, ethnic minority representation improved slightly, from 19% in 2020 to 23% in 2021. Anneliese Dodds, the shadow secretary for women and equalities, described the figures as a “disgrace” and said it showed “just how far ministers are falling short of their promise to make the civil service the UK’s most inclusive employer”. She attacked the “Conservative incompetence and denial of the existence of structural racism” for allowing these disparities to exist. The hugely popular scheme is designed to fast-track successful applicants into senior positions in government. Those who have benefited from it include Sharon White, who was the chief executive of Ofcom and is currently the chair of the John Lewis Partnership. However, the scheme has long been criticised for failing to be inclusive enough. In 2018, figures released by the Cabinet Office showed about a fifth of applicants to the fast stream were from private schools – about three times the proportion who attend such schools in the UK. Dodds, who is also the chair of the Labour party, said: “It’s a disgrace that young people from black backgrounds are still three times less likely than their white counterparts to win a place on the government’s elite graduate scheme. “The fact that you have a one in 44 shot at success if you’re white and a one in 137 chance if you’re black shows just how far ministers are falling short of their promise to make the civil service the UK’s most inclusive employer. “Conservative incompetence and denial of the existence of structural racism are creating barriers to success for young people from ethnic minority backgrounds. “Labour has a plan to dismantle those barriers and support talented black, Asian and minority ethnic people to reach their full potential, with a new race equality act to tackle structural racial inequality at source.” A Cabinet Office spokesperson said: “Our latest data shows that the fast stream is making progress in recruiting the best people from every part of British society. “We know that there is more to do, which is why we have outreach work in the most diverse schools, colleges and universities right across the UK. “We have also expanded our paid diversity internships and continuously review and improve our selection processes.”Nusrat Ghani has been first many times. She was the first Muslim female minister to speak from the Commons dispatch box, the first Muslim woman elected as a Tory MP in 2015, the first woman to represent the Conservative stronghold of Wealden, East Sussex and has said she was the first woman in her family to attend university. Born in Kashmir to Pakistani parents, Ghani, 49, grew up in Birmingham before studying at Birmingham City University and Leeds. She worked in an investment bank, charities and the BBC World Service before an unsuccessful attempt at election in 2010 for the seat of Birmingham Ladywood. Ghani was appointed a member of the home affairs select committee in 2015 and backed Brexit in the EU referendum in 2016. She was promoted to assistant whip and transport minister in 2018 under Theresa May, which the former transport secretary Chris Grayling said at the time showed the Conservatives “were a party of opportunity”. Ghani wrote on her website: “A century after women got the vote for the first time, I hope that today young people can see that regardless of their background, faith, race, gender or sexuality, there will be a warm welcome on the green benches, and no matter where you are from you can achieve your dreams and ambitions.” While a minister, Ghani revealed she had been bombarded with emails from a Conservative activist and constituent praising Enoch Powell’s “rivers of blood” speech and questioning whether immigrants should be allowed to stand for parliament. She has also detailed an “incredibly draining” ordeal where she was stalked for two years by a man she said eventually made clear that he had targeted her because she was a female MP, Asian and a Muslim. In February 2020, Ghani was replaced by Kelly Tolhurst in a reshuffle. The Guardian reported that Ghani had been widely tipped for a job overseeing HS2 but was sacked without explanation. A few months later, the former minister said ethnic minorities had “had enough of warm words and zero action” from the government. Following Boris Johnson’s announcement of a commission on racial inequality, Ghani said on Twitter that the prime minister needed to “crack on with real practical solutions”. Ghani is a steering committee member of the Covid Recovery Group, a group of Tory MPs who have opposed lockdown measures.We are all familiar with elastic bands and other soft, rubbery materials, but familiarity should not diminish our surprise at their properties. What other solids can be stretched many times their original length without breaking, then returned perfectly to their original shape? The theoretical physicist Mark Warner, who has died aged 69 of cancer, not only explained the behaviour of existing soft materials but also predicted the existence and properties of entirely new classes of them – not just once but several times. He imagined the consequences of combining the long, chainlike molecules that make up “elastomers”, such as rubber, with the smaller, rodlike molecules that are found in all liquid-crystal displays, for example on smartphones. By intuitive reasoning and theoretical calculation he realised that when flexible chains and rods are linked (rather like a multi-pendant necklace) they form materials with entirely new emergent properties, that defy simple classification into one of the traditional states of matter. Though solid overall, these “liquid crystal elastomers” show extreme softness in specific, liquid-like directions. His subsequent calculations predicted that by incorporating certain dye molecules, they could be made to completely change shape in response to weak stimuli, including visible light. This has opened a new technology for creating optically actuated switches and artificial muscles. Exploiting mathematics that Einstein had used to describe the curvature of spacetime owing to gravity, Mark calculated that pliable sheets of these new materials could be designed with an imprinted molecular patterning that would cause them to form complex shapes, otherwise impossible to manufacture. Spontaneous folding into these shapes could be triggered by small changes in lighting or temperature – “The material is the machine” became his mantra. He also showed how inclusion of molecules with chirality, or “handedness”, enables the design of mechanically tuneable rubber lasers, and of membranes that could separate otherwise identical molecules of opposite handedness. This problem of chiral selectivity goes back to the work of Louis Pasteur and remains crucial in the pharmaceuticals industry. Each of the astute and imaginative theoretical foresights that Mark arrived at in Cambridge were later confirmed experimentally, through collaborations elsewhere in the UK and Germany, especially with Heino Finkelmann of the University of Freiburg; these opened up new scientific and technological avenues. Mark’s book, Liquid Crystal Elastomers, co-authored with his longstanding collaborator and colleague Eugene Terentjev, became the standard research text in the field. This work was recognised by Mark’s election to the Royal Society in 2012, and the award of the Humboldt prize in 2000 and the Europhysics prize in 2003 (both with Finkelmann). Alongside his work on elastomers, Mark made important contributions to many other areas of science, including neutron scattering and the mechanics of foams. Much of his groundbreaking research was shared with early-career scientists; Mark’s supervision of his many graduate students and postdoctoral researchers was an unflagging model of generous and selfless mentoring. He was equally determined about physics education, and a founding director of the Senior Physics Challenge, a national project that provides intensive theory and laboratory classes at Cambridge to gifted school students. That experience led Mark to a much larger vision. Believing that UK school pupils lacked opportunities to study physics at a sufficiently quantitative level, preventing many of them from accessing the best that higher education could offer, Mark sought a personal interview with Michael Gove, then education secretary, to explain the problem. A resulting grant from the Department for Education launched Isaac Physics, a nationwide resource of graded physics problems and methods, supported by online tutorials, automatic marking and residential events. More than 200,000 pupils and their teachers in more than 3,000 schools have participated in the scheme, started by Mark and Lisa Jardine-Wright in 2013, and for which in 2019 they were awarded the Institute of Physics’ Lawrence Bragg medal. Born in Wellington, New Zealand, the son of Gunther and Patricia (nee Raven), a secondary and primary schoolteacher, respectively, Mark studied at Auckland grammar school. From there he went to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where he gained his first degree in 1974. After a PhD at Imperial College London (1976), under the supervision of Sir Sam Edwards, he worked as an IBM research fellow in San Jose, California, and then at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory near Oxford. In 1986 he returned to Cambridge, initially as a lecturer, and in 2001 was appointed professor. At Corpus Christi he was senior tutor (1992-97) and a life fellow. In 1977 he married Adele Matthaus. While they were on a holiday in a remote part of Greece in the early 1980s his characteristic determination to overcome difficulties came into play when he contracted Guillain-Barré syndrome. He had to drive over rough terrain with his hand strapped to the gear lever so he could operate it, despite encroaching paralysis, before Adele could complete the rest of the route. Mark’s eventual recovery was ascribed by his doctors to his fitness, and a strenuous rehabilitative swimming schedule. He is survived by Adele, their children, Max and Jessica, a grandson and a granddaughter. • Mark Warner, physicist, born 26 January 1952; died 24 December 2021On a weekend where complaining golfers were hardly difficult to come by, Thomas Pieters delivered a timely redemption tale. Tyrrell Hatton made his feelings regarding this venue, Yas Links, perfectly clear. On the PGA Tour, Jon Rahm was filmed lambasting a “piece of shit setup” in California. Enter Pieters, who expressed glee at returning to the forefront of his sport after a period in the wilderness. Four days short of his 30th birthday, Pieters reminded us of the form that once took him into the world’s top 50, a tie for fourth at the Masters and into Europe’s 2016 Ryder Cup team with a one-stroke victory at the Abu Dhabi Championship. A fourth round of 72 saw Pieters claim the biggest victory of his career, at 10 under par, from Rafa Cabrera-Bello and Shubhankar Sharma. “I disappeared for a couple of years, I guess,” said Pieters. “I’m so happy to be back. As a golfer, top 50 in the world is your strive point and when I jumped out maybe three years ago, I took it badly. I’m happy to be back again.” Pieters needed a par five at the last to prevail and recorded one with relative ease. “Stuff like this inspires kids,” said the big-hitting Belgian. “Hopefully I can do that back home.” Hatton doubled down on fierce criticism of the 18th hole here from Saturday, when he took nine at the par five. Asked what he thought when walking onto the same tee on day four, the defending champion replied: “That I would love for a bomb to drop on it and blow it up to oblivion to be honest. It’s just such a terrible finishing hole. “And the fact that they moved the tee back today is ridiculous. I hit a really good tee shot and still had 290 yards to the front [of the green]. I could pick driver up again and still not get there. It would be a much better finishing hole if you’re actually rewarded for hitting the fairway which, as it stands, you’re not.” There was more. Hatton won this event at Abu Dhabi Golf Club, meaning his desire for it to return there is perhaps logical. “Also, this place for spectators is just awful,” Hatton added. “Seeing where the rope lines are and where spectators have to walk, it wouldn’t be surprising to hear a lot of people have hurt their ankles and all sorts this week. “For that alone, the other course is way better. It’s a much nicer course for spectators, and viewing points, as well.” Hatton’s admission that he “perhaps” might not be back should Yas Links retain the tournament felt like an understatement. Rory McIlroy burst through the field and briefly threatened to produce an unlikely victory before coming unstuck from the 14th onwards. Until then, McIlroy was six under for the day and just two from the lead. He holed his second shot from 141 yards for an eagle at the 9th. Late stumbles meant McIlroy played his final five in three over and had to settle for a share of 12th. “I will take the positives from the first 13 and learn from the loose shoots I hit coming in,” McIlroy said. “I had to make a birdie at the last on Friday night just to be here for the weekend and almost made the most of that. I played well yesterday. It was good to see where the game’s at. It was good to get an extra couple of days’ golf going to Dubai next week. Obviously it wasn’t the finish I wanted today but, big picture-wise, it was good to get another couple of days to play 36 holes.”Faster internet access has significantly weakened civic participation in Britain, according to a study that found involvement in political parties, trade unions and volunteering fell as web speeds rose. Volunteering in social care fell by more than 10% when people lived closer to local telecoms exchange hubs and so enjoyed faster web access. Involvement in political parties fell by 19% with every 1.8km increase in proximity to a hub. By contrast, the arrival of fast internet had no significant impact on interactions with family and friends. The analysis of behaviour among hundreds of thousands of people led by academics from Cardiff University and Sapienza University of Rome found faster connection speeds may have reduced the likelihood of civic engagement among close to 450,000 people – more than double the estimated membership of the Conservative party. They found that as internet speeds rose between 2005 and 2018, time online “crowded out” other forms of civic engagement. The study’s authors have also speculated that the phenomenon may have helped fuel populism as people’s involvement with initiatives for “the common good”, which they say are effectively “schools of democracy” where people learn the benefit of cooperation, has declined. Other studies have shown that social media engagement has strengthened other kinds of civic engagement, for example by helping to organise protests and fuelling an interest in politics, even if it does not manifest in traditional forms of participation. However, politics conducted online has been found to be more susceptible to “filter bubbles”, which limit participants’ exposure to opposing views and so foster polarisation. “We observed that civic participation and the form of engagement in the activities of voluntary organisations and political participation declined with proximity to the network,” said Fabio Sabatini, a co-author of the study. “Fast internet seems to crowd out this kind of social engagement.” Face-to-face volunteering in the UK has been in decline for substantial periods in recent history. It fell from 2005 to 2011 and again in 2020 as Covid-19 hit, according to separate analysis by the National Council for Voluntary Organisations. The new study, published in the Journal of Public Economics, gathered information from the communications regulator Ofcom about the location of local internet cabling exchanges, which during the period studied were a key determinant of data speeds. It then cross-referenced this with residents’ survey responses from the British Household Panel Survey and the UK Household Longitudinal Study about their engagement with social organisations. The combined effect on engagement with organisations such as political parties, unions and professional associations was a 6% reduction in participation from 2010 to 2017 for each 1.8km closer to the local exchange someone lived. The biggest impact was on political party involvement, while the impact on trade unions was far smaller – a 3.6% reduction. That chimes with estimates of declining membership of the main UK parties over the period studied, with the exception of a spike caused by a surge in Labour membership before Jeremy Corbyn’s election as party leader in 2015. The decline in political parties’ appeal when internet speeds rise compared with unions may be because “political parties only indirectly safeguard their supporters’ particular interests [while] trade unions have a stronger and more explicit commitment to advocate for … their members,” the study suggested. The effect on volunteering with organisations that deliver social care and environmental improvements as well as the Scouts, which have been defined by sociologists as instilling “habits of cooperation, solidarity, and public-spiritedness”, was measured at a 7.8% reduction. “These kinds of organisations have been defined as ‘schools of democracy’ where people learn the benefit of cooperation” Sabatini said, adding that involvement with such organisations also helped people to trust strangers. “The rise of populism has been linked to a decline in interest in public affairs and we thought that, being less politically and socially active, people may be less capable of interpreting political phenomena and understanding the complexity of the management of public affairs,” Sabatini said. “While bonding social capital [family and friends] seems resilient to technological change, bridging social capital [politics, volunteering, unions] proves fragile and vulnerable to the pressure of technology,” the study concluded. “This result is disturbing as it suggests that progress in information and communications technology can undermine an essential factor of economic activity and the functioning of democratic institutions.”Following the end of the Vietnam war in 1975, thousands of people fled from the victorious communist forces by sailing to neighbouring countries. When these “boat people” attempted to land in Singapore, the police pushed them back out to sea, where many died. In 1978 the Vietnamese Zen Buddhist monk Thich Nhat Hanh, who has died aged 95, went to Singapore for a conference on religion and peace. By working with fishermen he helped get provisions to those at sea and smuggle some refugees ashore; he then took them to the French embassy compound so that the next morning they could surrender to the police and enter the official arrival system. When Nhat Hanh was arrested and threatened with deportation, hundreds were put in peril. He reflected: “If I could not be peaceful in the midst of danger, the peace I might realise in easier times would not mean anything.” Despite the pressure, Nhat Hanh and his colleagues did some walking meditation, and got the idea of asking the French ambassador to write a letter for them to take to the prime minister, Lee Kuan Yew. After a cabinet meeting they were granted 10 more days, which they used to wind up the operation. Nhat Hanh pointed to this as an example of “engaged Buddhism”, where mindfulness – “the capacity to be aware of what is going on, and what is there” – forms the basis for offering practical help to address the issues and injustices of the modern world. Through developing a movement to promote it in the west as well as in Asia, he did much to bring the practice of mindfulness into the social mainstream, by emphasising that a contemplative attitude could inform every moment of the day, not just those devoted to explicit meditation. His philosophy of “interbeing”, which holds that we should regard ourselves as interconnected parts of the fabric of life, rather than as separate entities, has been an important influence on many environmentalists. Christiana Figueres, the executive secretary of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, said that she could not have achieved the Paris agreement of 2016 “if I had not been accompanied by the teachings of Thich Nhat Hanh”. He was also an influential advocate for nonviolence. A group of imprisoned Sinn Féin leaders adopted his teachings and, having become elected politicians, in 2012 invited him to address the Stormont Assembly. At the height of the war between communist North Vietnam and US-supported South Vietnam in 1966, Nhat Hanh travelled to the US “to tell Americans of Vietnam’s suffering”. He met academic, religious and political leaders, including the Catholic author Thomas Merton and defence secretary Robert McNamara, and argued persuasively for a ceasefire and a negotiated settlement. Largely due to Nhat Hanh’s influence, Martin Luther King declared his opposition to the war, and later that year nominated Nhat Hanh for the Nobel peace prize, writing: “Thich Nhat Hanh offers a solution acceptable to rational leaders … His ideas for peace, if applied, would build a monument to ecumenism, to world brotherhood, to humanity.” However, King breached protocol (and perhaps offended the Nobel committee) by publishing the nomination letter, and no award was made. In Europe Nhat Hanh met Pope Paul VI to urge cooperation between Buddhists and Catholics in Vietnam, and in 1969 he established the Buddhist peace delegation at the Paris peace talks. After the 1973 peace accords Nhat Hanh was refused permission to return to Vietnam and instead embarked on a new sphere of activity as a Buddhist teacher in the west. With Sister Chan Khong he established a meditation centre south-east of Paris, and in 1982 he founded Plum Village in the Dordogne, in south-west France – now home to more than 200 nuns and monks - as a base. The thousands of meditation practitioners who visited the various Plum Village centres in Europe, the US, Australia and Asia knew him by the name of Thay. In 1987 a disciple founded a small publishing house that printed Being Peace, a book of his writings. With little promotion the book quickly sold 100,000 and was followed by other bestselling titles such as The Sun My Heart, and Old Path, White Clouds – a novelised life of the Buddha. Nhat Hanh has written more than 100 books, many of them available in English, including poetry, meditation teaching and advice for activists. Born Nguyn inh Lang, with a legal name of Nguyen Xuan Bao, in Hue, central Vietnam, he entered a monastery aged 16 and received the name Nhat Hanh at his full ordination in 1949 – Thich is a title used by Vietnamese monks. From the start of his monastic life, Nhat Hanh combined meditation practice with social action and scholarship – he became fluent in eight languages – and by the age of 30 he was editing a journal that urged Buddhism to modernise and oppose both the war and South Vietnam’s dictatorship. In 1961 he went to the US to study and taught comparative religion at Columbia University. Three years later he returned to Vietnam. Buddhism was widely respected as a grassroots alternative to communism, capitalism and the war, but it lacked means to translate this prestige into social change. In short order, Nhat Hanh founded the Van Hanh Buddhist University, a publishing house, the School of Youth for Social Service (SYSS), and the Order of Interbeing – a lay organisation based on the combination of social action and mindful awareness. The South Vietnamese government declared that anyone promoting “neutralism” would be considered pro-Communist, and many of Nhat Hanh’s colleagues were killed, while he narrowly survived an assassination attempt. Despite this, by the end of the war the SYSS included 10,000 monks and lay people who travelled into the countryside to establish schools and clinics and rebuild villages. In later years Nhat Hanh’s life mirrored that of other Buddhist leaders in the west – writing, leading retreats and guiding the development of the Order of Interbeing, which grew into an international Buddhist movement with several hundred monks, and many more lay teachers and practice communities. On his return visits to Vietnam in 2005 and 2007 Nhat Hanh was greeted warmly by ordinary Buddhists, but leaders of the outlawed United Buddhist Church – some of whom had been under house arrest for decades – refused to meet him, arguing that his visit would legitimise repression of Buddhism. Nhat Hanh’s teaching combined traditional Zen meditation practices with others drawn from Theravada Buddhism. His principle of engaged Buddhism expressed his belief that meditative calm must be tested in the midst of conflict: “Other people can occupy your country, they can even put you in prison, but they cannot take away your true home and your freedom.” In 2014 he had a stroke. He moved to Thailand in late 2016 and two years later returned to Vietnam. There he received traditional medicine treatments for the after-effects of his stroke at the Tu Hieu Pagoda, the monastery in Hue where he had been ordained. • Thich Nhat Hanh (Nguyen Xuan Bao), Buddhist teacher and peace activist, born 11 October 1926; died 21 January 2022 • This article was amended on 25 January 2022. While Thich Nhat Hanh’s legal name was Nguyen Xuan Bao, his name at birth was Nguyn inh Lang.Icicles were glued on to vintage streetlamps as Glasgow was transformed into a wintry Gotham City over the weekend, as Batgirl became the latest blockbuster to take advantage of Scotland’s versatile urban locations and glorious scenery. Last summer the city was draped in US flags and bunting to simulate a New York parade for the latest Indiana Jones movie, while the stars of the Amazon Prime series Good Omens 2 have been spotted recently in Edinburgh. For Screw, the flagship new-year drama by STV Studios for Channel 4, the inside of Glasgow’s Kelvin Hall – now host to a £11.9m television studio jointly funded by the Scottish government and Glasgow city council – was transformed into a prison wing. “Scotland is now at a critical mass of screen production, both for television and cinema,” says the Scottish government’s culture minister, Angus Robertson, who declares he is the first in his role to be able to say to a younger generation interested in screen careers “that they will be able to work throughout their lives in film and TV production in Scotland”. Industry figures acknowledge a significant change from the previous decade, when there was deep frustration at a lack of funding and infrastructure, institutional neglect and a talent drain when compared with competitors in Ireland, Northern Ireland and Wales. The funding body Screen Scotland, formed in 2018 and helmed by the much-admired Isabel Davis, is credited with leading the change. As a result, Scotland is now far better placed to participate in the global post-pandemic content boom. But how does this frenetic activity affect homegrown Scottish film, and the development of talent and skills over the coming generation? “My optimistic take is that this influx of bigger international productions will have a positive effect”, says Ben Sharrock, the writer and director of the award-winning Limbo, a comedy-drama about a group of asylum seekers waiting out their claims on a remote Scottish island, and one of the most successful independent Scottish films of recent years. “It could lead to more skills training and more studio space, and will allow the Scottish industry to grow in a sustainable way. But it is important that smaller independent productions don’t end up being bottom-feeders.” It’s a concern shared by the film-maker Hope Dickson Leach, whose stage-and-screen hybrid of Jekyll and Hyde will be livestreamed from Leith theatre in Edinburgh next month. She says the local industry is “at a crunch point”. “There’s masses going on, which is great, but these massive productions which are staying in the country longer do cause a resource issue for crew, cast and even equipment for smaller budget and independent films,” she says. Dickson Leach, a founder of the campaigning organisation Raising Films, which support parents and carers in the sector, says any expansion in Scotland must go hand in hand with moves to address inclusion. “[The trade union] Bectu is working on job sharing, and there are discussions about shorter working hours, but it’s a long haul.” “This is the busiest I’ve know it in 30 years in the industry,” says Dave Arrowsmith, a production designer who was part of the team that secured the Cumbernauld unit that became the studio for the series Outlander in 2013, and recently built the set for Screw. “But the flipside is we still need more studio space.” Scotland has four studios, as well as the Kelvin Hall development, but Arrowsmith says this is simply not enough to cope with demand. “The boom is great, but Scotland is missing out of so much more additional work. Big productions come and do their Scottish bit in Glasgow city centre or landscape locations, then go back to England to complete the studio filming. We need public and private investment in a big 10- or 12-stage studio space.” The veteran producer Chris Young, who achieved huge success with The Inbetweeners before relocating his company to Skye, where he now champions emerging talent and Gaelic-language work, says there remains “a lack of ambition for promoting our own talent and stories in Scotland”. “It’s no easier to get new talent and writers off the ground,” he says. “If you look at Scottish prose and poetry, there’s an incredible amount of new work, so why is the equivalent not happening with film?” For Ben Sharrock, there’s also the hope that visible film-making will spur young Scots to tell their own stories. He says: “For me growing up, I didn’t know anyone that had a job making films. So if people on the streets of Glasgow or Edinburgh are seeing these films being made, maybe it will make them think ‘I could do something like that’. “But grassroots education is important, so kids aren’t growing up thinking film has to be a massive CGI-fest. They need to understand there are other stories and different forms, and there has to be support for the independent cinemas that show those to a younger audience.”The row over Islamophobia gripping the government deepened on Sunday as the former minister Nusrat Ghani claimed the prime minister told her he “could not get involved” after she told him party whips had blamed her sacking on her “Muslimness”. Ghani’s claims have rocked the Tory party at a critical time for Boris Johnson, as he awaits a make-or-break inquiry into lockdown-flouting parties in Downing Street. Ghani told the Sunday Times that her “Muslimness” was raised when she was removed from a ministerial job in 2020, and she was told it was “making colleagues uncomfortable”. No 10 sought to defuse the row on Sunday, saying in a statement that “after being made aware of these extremely serious claims, the prime minister met with Nusrat Ghani to discuss them. He then wrote to her expressing his serious concern and inviting her to begin a formal complaint process. She did not subsequently do so. The Conservative party does not tolerate prejudice or discrimination of any kind.” However, Ghani said that after she had spoken to Johnson about her treatment: “He wrote to me that he could not get involved, and suggested I use the internal Conservative party complaint process. This, as I had already pointed out, was very clearly not appropriate for something that happened on government business.” She added: “In my statement yesterday I was careful not to mention any names or implicate the PM. All I have ever wanted was for his government to take this seriously, investigate properly and ensure no other colleague has to endure this.” Meanwhile the Conservative backbencher MP Michael Fabricant caused fresh controversy by saying it was unlikely Ghani was discriminated against for her faith, because “she’s hardly someone who’s obviously a Muslim”. In the latest of a series of media appearances apparently aimed at shoring up Johnson’s position, Fabricant told LBC: “I think the whole thing actually stinks, the accusation being made by Nus Ghani.” The outspoken backbencher said: “Prejudice of any kind in modern Britain is pretty pathetic … but you know, ministers they come and they go.” “She’s hardly someone who’s obviously a Muslim. I mean I had no idea what religion she is,” he continued. “The Labour MP Keith Vaz, who was of South Asian origin, I do know because we discussed it, he’s a Goan Christian; others are Hindus, others are Muslims or whatever. But with her, it wasn’t apparent. So it does seem rather a lame excuse to me that she claims she was sacked because of that.” Fabricant’s remarks were quickly condemned by opposition politicians. The shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy, said: “What an appalling, disgraceful thing to say. If the Tories wanted to show they were serious about tackling Islamophobia, they could start by removing the whip from Michael Fabricant.” There are growing calls for an inquiry into Ghani’s claims, with the cabinet ministers Nadhim Zahawi and Sajid Javid tweeting their support for her. Zahawi, the education secretary, called Ghani “a friend, a colleague &amp; a brilliant parliamentarian”, adding: “This has to be investigated properly &amp; racism routed out.” The deputy prime minister, Dominic Raab, on Sunday urged Ghani to make a formal complaint to the Conservative party, which she had previously decided not to do – and has now made clear she does not think is appropriate. Calling the allegations “incredibly serious”, Raab declined to say whether he believed his former government colleague, adding that he was “not going to get into impugning anyone’s integrity”. Raab said there would be no investigation by the Conservative party unless she submitted a formal complaint. The chief whip, Mark Spencer, rejected the claim, saying Ghani’s account of events, in an interview with the Sunday Times, was “completely false”. Ghani told the paper that when she lost her job as a transport minister during a reshuffle in 2020, she was told that “Muslimness” had been raised as a problem at a meeting in Downing Street. “It was like being punched in the stomach,” she said. “I felt humiliated and powerless. I was told that at the reshuffle meeting in Downing Street that ‘Muslimness’ was raised as an ‘issue’, that my ‘Muslim women minister’ status was making colleagues uncomfortable and that there were concerns that I wasn’t loyal to the party as I didn’t do enough to defend the party against Islamophobia allegations.” Asked if he believed Ghani, Raab told Sky’s Trevor Phillips on Sunday show: “It is incredibly serious – let me just be clear at the outset. We have absolutely zero tolerance for any discrimination, any Islamophobia, in the Conservative party.” He went on: “On these specific allegations, it’s very unusual, but the chief whip has come out and said the conversation concerned was with him, Mark Spencer. He has categorically denied in what can only be described as the most forthright and robust terms, calling it defamatory.”Marc Skinner would not be drawn on whether Manchester United were now challenging for the title after this defeat of Tottenham put them second in the Women’s Super League, albeit having played two games more than third-placed Chelsea. “Title contenders? Only if we keep winning games,” he said. “We’ve got Bridgwater next [in the FA Cup], nothing else. If we take our eyes off them it can hurt us.” It has taken time for the United players to find their flow under Skinner. Despite his WSL pedigree, having arguably overperformed with a threadbare squad at Birmingham before moving to Orlando Pride, there was frustration among fans early in his tenure. With his style of play and, seemingly, an inability to get the best out of United’s previous highest achievers, he had doubters aplenty. However, if Skinner’s two and a half years in the US showed anything it was that patience would likely pay off. At the close of the manager’s first campaign in the States, Orlando Pride had slumped to their lowest ever points tally and sat rock bottom of the NWSL table. By the time he departed for Manchester the Pride had picked up 15 points from their opening seven games of the season, a club record. Having been unable to string together back-to-back victories since the team’s opening two games of the season, taking in all competitions, United are now six games without defeat. It’s a feat they have not achieved since a run of six wins completed their 2018-19 season in the Championship, in what was the team’s first season after they were relaunched by the club. Skinner’s insistence on sticking to a regular XI despite results is paying dividends now, and the synergy in their play continued to impress at a bitterly cold Leigh Sports Village against Tottenham. In the reverse fixture, Alessia Russo’s first-half goal was cancelled out by a 95th-minute equaliser from Ria Percival. In Manchester there was no such profligacy up front or complacency at the back from United. Despite the hosts’ dominance, Tottenham had gone closest just prior to the first goal, when the forward Rachel Williams sent the ball across the face of goal but Jess Naz could not quite connect. This time, though, United were two goals clear by the halfway mark, with Vilde Bøe Risa prodding in at the back post from a Katie Zelem corner and Hayley Ladd sending a thumping header past the Spurs keeper Tinja-Riikka Korpela. The third made light work of the Tottenham defence, with Spurs also unbeaten in their five games prior to this fixture. The United forward Martha Thomas dinked the ball over Molly Bartrip, Ashleigh Neville missed her attempt to clear, and Leah Galton poked it over the line at the far post. Perhaps more impressive than United’s six wins is the six clean sheets, 13 goals having been conceded in the eight league games prior to this run. With the centre-back stalwart Millie Turner out for an indefinite period after medical investigations revealed an issue with the artery in her neck, there was a risk that the newfound solidity would be disrupted. Instead, Aoife Mannion marshalled the back line and the stand-in Maria Thorisdottir played excellently in her absence. “It’s what we built when we were successful at Birmingham, teams are built on clean sheets,” said Skinner. “The thing with Birmingham was it was about the block and resilience, with this team it’s more. I like our energy in keeping clean sheets in that we’re not having to defend for our lives. For us, it’s about being in that game at zero so we can grow.”If Brighton could just play all their games from the 80th minute, then Manchester City might have more serious competition for the Premier League title. Danny Welbeck’s latest deserved equaliser earned Graham Potter’s team their 12th draw of the season as Leicester City again fell away in the latter stages. With Potter watching on remotely from his Covid-enforced isolation, Brighton could once again be proud of their strong finish as they extended their unbeaten run to six games since Christmas. Going behind to Patson Daka’s continued prolificity, Brighton came back to score for the eighth time in the last 10 minutes of matches, a statistic to which only the Premier League leaders can hold a candle. If this was not quite the nightmare Leicester suffered on Wednesday, when Tottenham Hotspur came from 2-1 behind in the 95th minute to win 3-2, then it was another illustration of how stretched they are. Leicester still had nine players missing but had looked more defensively secure initially for the returns of James Justin, who was excellent on his first start in 347 days after his serious knee injury, and Daniel Amartey, back from the Africa Cup of Nations. To be fair – and forgive us if you have heard this before – Brighton’s finishing potency did not match their approach play for the first 80 minutes. This was their fourth draw in six matches, albeit including a pair of 1-1s with Chelsea, but while they displayed admirable passing dexterity through the thirds they had so little to show for it until they went behind. All hot air and no end product, one regular sage suggested. Most of Leicester’s best moments flowed through James Maddison again. Their No 10, tripped by his opposite number, curled the ensuing free-kick into the side-netting; 10 minutes before half-time, he dispossessed Alexis Mac Allister and when the recalled Harvey Barnes slipped the ball wide, Ademola Lookman should have scored but Robert Sanchez was allowed to save his shot. The volume on the PA system seemed to be pumped up as the players came out for the second half and within 28 seconds of the Posthorn Gallop blasting out, Leicester had their snouts in front. Kiernan Dewsbury-Hall won a header to set Maddison running at the Brighton defence and, after he slipped the ball in to the feet of Lookman, the attacking midfielder kept running to take a return. Maddison’s mishit shot deflected off Dan Burn for Barnes and although Sanchez saved the winger’s scuffed effort, the ball fell neatly for Daka to shoot in from the left edge of the six-yard box. It was the Zambian’s eighth goal involvement in his last eight Premier League games. Mac Allister again skied a shot high over the bar as Brighton rallied. Bjorn Hamberg, the first-team coach taking charge for the day, advanced his side to playing higher up the field by switching to three at the back, introducing Tariq Lamptey, at right wing-back, and Welbeck alongside Neal Maupay up front, with Leandro Trossard in the hole just behind. Brendan Rodgers responded by introducing Marc Albrighton to play right wing-back, with Justin moving inside as a third centre-back. Instead of protecting the lead, however, this served to invite Brighton on and Lamptey made a significant difference with his pace and invention. From his cross 17 minutes from time, Welbeck’s deft header required an excellent save down at his near post from Kasper Schmeichel. So it was no surprise when Welbeck did head home, at the far post from Maupay’s right-wing centre, eight minutes from time and Leicester, lilting, looked there for the taking. Youri Tielemans headed off the line from Burn’s towering header and Trossard ran through onto substitute Solly March’s superb pass only for Schmeichel to again save brilliantly, this time low to his right. “I felt that if the game had kept going on, we would have got a second goal,” Hamberg said. Rodgers accepted that Leicester had sat back after going ahead. “There is a natural reaction sometimes when you go in front, the other team get an edge and we look to protect a bit. But we didn’t pass the ball well enough and that’s something I’m not used to seeing,” the Leicester manager said. “But I must commend players going to the end against a good side. We wanted to close the game out [which] showed great courage mentally.” Both teams remain in mid-table but it remains to be seen what Brighton could do if they started games as they finish, with this the fifth time in their last nine games they have scored beyond the 80th minute.For a while it felt as if Liverpool were about to let another Premier League title slip from their grasp at Selhurst Park. Jurgen Klopp’s exhausted side looked as if they were playing on fumes. Nine of them had played a gruelling League Cup semi-final against Arsenal on Thursday night. Two nights’ sleep, some ice packs, some light training, and then back on the bus. Crystal Palace were 2-1 down but well on top. Chances came and went. But Liverpool held on. With a full 18 days until their next league fixture, they gave it one last push and even managed to burgle a third goal, a richly undeserved penalty converted by Fabinho to give them a little breathing space. Now they can rest up a little, recharge their batteries, welcome back Mo Salah and Sadio Mané from international duty. In the meantime, we still just about have a title race. Liverpool were scrappy but decisive when it mattered. Virgil van Dijk and Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain got the two crucial first-half goals. Jordan Henderson was magnificent in midfield. Curtis Jones never stopped. Trent Alexander-Arnold was beginning to puff even before the end of the first half, but in the dying minutes somehow still managed to produce the pass of the match, a devastating 60-yard diagonal ball from which Diogo Jota won the late penalty. As for Palace, it was a familiar story: a nice performance, hampered by their irritating habit of finding themselves 2-0 down after half an hour. Many of their problems appear to be structural: an absence of clear authority at the back (the superb Joachim Andersen aside) and that well-known weakness at set pieces. Palace are not a big team, and so when that physical disadvantage is compounded by individual errors and positional indiscipline, they possess not so much a defence as a welcome mat. Take Liverpool’s first goal: seven minutes in, Van Dijk was able to run unimpeded to the near post to launch a thunderous header past Vicente Guaita. You could point the finger at Odsonne Édouard, supposedly marking the near post but oblivious to Van Dijk’s movement, or perhaps someone further back in the chain. But it is becoming too frequent a problem to be accidental. The second goal was different. In the build-up Édouard and Michael Olise had temporarily switched wings, and so as Andy Robertson advanced to the edge of the Palace penalty area, no one was really sure who was supposed to be stopping him. Tyrick Mitchell drifted too far into the centre, and so Oxlade-Chamberlain at the back post even had time to take a touch before slamming the ball low past Guaita. Again: multiple errors, one entirely foreseeable result. Then again, Patrick Vieira has always believed that the best defence is having the ball. And unsurprisingly the more they saw of it, the more secure they looked. Their second-half resurgence had its origins in the period towards the end of the first, as Liverpool began to tire and Palace began to puncture a few holes in them. Olise had a shot saved from a tight angle. Jean-Philippe Mateta broke the offside trap, Alisson just managing to scrape away his shot. Within a minute of the restart Conor Gallagher – quiet in the first half – had headed wide from four yards. Finally, on 55 minutes, an opening. Joël Matip headed poorly out of defence, Jeffrey Schlupp carved open a ragged Liverpool with one pass and Édouard was able to tap into an empty net after Mateta’s unselfish lay-off. Nick Hornby once theorised that crowds were at their loudest when their team was losing but playing well. And, as Selhurst Park belatedly found its voice, having spent much of the first half in a low grumble, so it proved here. Vieira decided to go for the throat. Eberechi Eze came on, followed later by Jordan Ayew and Christian Benteke as Palace essentially went to an attacking 4-2-4. Meanwhile, Liverpool were desperately trying to take some oxygen out of the game. Klopp had introduced Takumi Minamino on the hour but in reality there was little else he could do. Henderson doesn’t get tired, of course, and Jota was still gamely running the channels. But too many Liverpool players did not really want the ball, could no longer sprint after it, were starting to play for time. With eight minutes remaining Olise got a run on Robertson and tried to lob the ball over Alisson, who back-pedalled and desperately pawed the ball clear, earning himself a bang on the goalpost as he did so. That was the title race, right there. With four minutes left Alexander-Arnold looked up and pinged the ball 65 yards on to Jota’s toes. The flagging Jota could not quite bring the ball under control. But as Guaita closed in, he had an even better idea. It was a terrible decision by the referee, Kevin Friend, who even with the benefit of his own eyes, the VAR and several replays failed to spot that Jota had veered right in order to engineer a collision with Guaita, who could do little about it. Still, Liverpool were content to take whatever they could get. And for all Palace’s chagrin at the end, this was a game lost at its start, not at its end. Before Liverpool’s second goal, possession was 30-70 in Liverpool’s favour. After, it was 51-49 in Palace’s. If only, Vieira will reflect, they had started playing a little earlier.UK taxpayers could have to pay as much as £1bn in compensation to former Post Office workers wrongly convicted of theft due to the defective Horizon IT system. The system, which was installed by the Post Office and supplied by Fujitsu, falsely suggested there were cash shortfalls, leading to 736 unsafe convictions for theft, fraud and false accounting in what is one of the biggest miscarriages of justice in British legal history. The Post Office has said it cannot afford to foot the huge cleanup bill for the scandal and last month the government, the service’s only shareholder, confirmed the taxpayer would step in. This weekend new details of the potential magnitude of the compensation programme emerged. The Post Office Scandal blog by the journalist Nick Wallis, who has written a book on the fiasco, reported that the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) has now made three grants available to the Post Office that total just over £1bn. The most recent grant, made last month, was for £686m, and came on top of previous awards of £94m and £233m. In his post, first reported by the Sunday Times, Wallis said the figures involved meant the Post office Horizon IT disaster was now a “fully fledged £1bn scandal”. Between 2000 and 2014, the Post Office prosecuted 736 post office operators based on information from a recently installed computer system called Horizon. Some of the workers were jailed following convictions for false accounting and theft, and many were financially ruined. However, it was the software, which contained bugs, errors and defects, that had caused the problems, according to the high court judgment that quashed many of the convictions. So far, the Post Office has offered compensation to 777 of the 2,500 subpostmasters who have applied. Those who had convictions overturned have been offered interim payments of £100,000 while their claims are assessed. A spokesperson for BEIS said the subsidy figures were a “top estimate of what could be needed. It has not been spent and will only be given to the Post Office in arrears if and when required.”And with Jonathan Liew’s match report there for you all to enjoy, I’ll bid you good evening. Thanks for reading, thanks for emailing, see you soon. “For a while, it felt as if Liverpool were about to let another Premier League title slip from their grasp at Selhurst Park. Jürgen Klopp’s exhausted side looked as if they were playing on fumes. Nine of them had played a gruelling League Cup semi-final against Arsenal on Thursday night.” Arsenal 0-0 Burnley. A match report: Samuel has a different view on email: “Watching that match as a Palace fan, I thought it was a stonewall penalty at the time, so had thought we’d gotten away with it ... Frustrated by the result - We did so well to fashion openings but just weren’t clinical. Not our day.” Peter Lansley’s report from Brighton’s 1-1 draw at Leicester: Liverpool’s win means they trail Manchester City by nine points with a game in hand. Suzanne Wrack reports from Manchester United’s 3-0 win against Tottenham in the WSL: Will Unwin’s MBM-ing Chelsea v Spurs, LIVE, right here: Remember last month and the furore around the penalty that wasn’t, for Liverpool at Tottenham, when Paul Tierney insisted Diogo Jota had wanted the contact? Maybe Tierney had a point after all ... Vieira’s thoughts should be interesting, anyway. Presuming they’re shown on the telly I’ll type them up ... On the plus side, Palace played some lovely stuff, and Liverpool played some lovely stuff, but neither side ever looked fully comfortable in defence. The Liverpool full-backs Alexander-Arnold and Robertson are both happiest when Liverpool are on the front foot, with their opponents pinned back, but when the boot is on the other foot, Liverpool can be got at. A brief email from Martin arrives, entitled ‘Gross decision’: “Makes me sick. And I’m a Red.” Well, that was quite eventful and slightly strange. Liverpool got over the line after a dominant opening ... but Palace will be rightly disgusted with the penalty won by Jota in the closing minutes. Patrick Vieira sends a few pointed words in the direction of the match officials as they leave the pitch. 90 min + 5: “I’m a Liverpool fan so I’ll obviously take it but I would be livid if it was the other way round,” emails Sam. “Never a pen for me; Jota no longer had control of the ball and went into Guita pretty directly.” 90min + 4: Gallagher swings in another free-kick from the right wing. Liverpool clear comfortably enough. It’s hard to escape the deflating feeling that a laughably poor decision, to award Liverpool that penalty after a long VAR review, has robbed us of an exciting finish. 90 min + 2: We’ll have a minimum of six minutes added on. Palace win a free-kick in the Liverpool half. Nothing comes of it. 90 min: Mac’s emailed again: “Jota misses the ball, so then shuffles toward the keeper to initiate contact. And besides, the VAR people looked at it for so long, how could it possibly have been a clear and obvious error? What’s the point any more?” I agree. 89 min: “A horrible, horrible decision,” emails Mac, with regards to the penalty. I agree. Even Jamie Carragher on commentary was saying it wasn’t a penalty. Jota clearly stepped into Guaita and initiated the contact. Fabinho steps up and passes the ball coolly into the corner. That is surely the game for Liverpool. Palace will be livid with the decision. The crowd make their feelings known. I think Jota has bought that. But it’s a penalty. Fabinho will take. 85 min: Jota sprints on to a brilliant pass by Alexander-Arnold, deep into the Palace area. He tries to flick the ball beyond Guaita but misses it ... He is then brought to the ground by Guaita, looking for the contact, and now we have a lengthy VAR check for a penalty ... I think this would be a ludicrous decision if Liverpool get a penalty. Jota has blatantly played for that and brought the contact about himself, if you ask me. 83 min: Olise nearly lobs Alisson and makes it 2-2 but the goalie claws the ball out for a corner! The Palace man sprints on to a ball over the top and hits it first time. It is looping into the net, for sure, but Alisson does extremely well to run back and bat the ball out, crashing into the post as he does so. 81 min: Jones makes a bright run on the left wing for Liverpool and is felled by Schlupp. Schlupp is booked. James Milner is coming on for Liverpool. Klopp is looking to shore things up and hang on to this 2-1 lead with Liverpool’s Mr Dependable. 78 min: A hopeful ball over the top from Palace is headed back to Alisson by Robertson, tracking back at full pace. There’s a slight scare for Liverpool, though, as Alisson has come a little too far towards the ball and has to react quickly to stop it bouncing past him and towards the open goal ... anyway, he manages to sort it out. 77 min: Hughes and Mateta go off – Benteke and Ayew come on for Palace. Vieira is throwing the kitchen sink at Liverpool. Or is it everything but the kitchen sink? He’s trying to get a goal, anyway. 75 min: Liverpool construct a lovely passing move in which Alexander-Arnold is the fulcrum. He gets his foot on the ball once, then twice, bending a trademark cross to the far post. But the move fizzles out. 73 min: Olise clips a cultured ball infield for Gallagher who is advancing into the area. He controls it but it flicks his hand as he does so and the ref awards a free-kick to Liverpool. 72 min: Fabinho smacks a shot from distance for Liverpool. Guaita gets down to make a comfortable save. Liverpool have steadied the ship once again, after a spell of rampant running and attacking by Palace and their all-action front three. But here they come again ... 69 min: Liverpool pump a ball into the Palace box from distance. The Eagles deal with it easily. Liverpool look short of ideas in attack, all of a sudden, while Palace carry a threat every time they go forward. Eze races down the left for Palace and plays in Schlupp but Liverpool eventually get a goal kick. 65 min: Minamino replaced Oxlade-Chamberlain for Liverpool a few minutes ago, and now Eze comes on for Éduoard for Palace, both managers looking to some fresh legs for the final quarter of the match. 61 min: Liverpool keep the ball for a spell in the Palace half. The home crowd, deafening a couple of minutes ago, calm down a little. Palace stroke the ball around at the back and nearly get caught out by the Liverpool press, with Guaita forced to loft the ball out for a throw in on the Palace right. Liverpool look comfortable when they have Palace pinned back, but very shaky when they’re on the back foot themselves. 57 min: Selhurst Park is rocking! Now Andersen pounces on a half-cleared ball and cracks a powerful left-footed shot which flies fractionally wide! Klopp will be having kittens. Again a lot of space opens up in the midfield for Palace to attack. Schlupp runs forward and angles a good low ball which cuts through the Liverpool defence and beats the offside trap. Mateta is one-on-one with Alisson but shows great awareness to lay the ball off to his left for Édouard, who tucks the ball into an open goal with a minimum of fuss. Game on: and Vieira’s men unquestionably deserve that goal. 52 min: Palace have done well to fight back into this. Liverpool’s dominance was almost complete for the first half an hour or so. As I type, it’s nearly 3-0: Alexander-Arnold’s cross finds Henderson who takes a smart touch and then shoots on the turn. His effort flashes wide of the post. Seconds later Henderson has another shot from outside the area which is blocked. 48 min: Alisson makes another save as Eduoard tries a backheel from a couple of yards out! Palace could seriously have had four goals in the past 10 minutes, before and after half time. 47 min: Gallagher misses another big chance for Palace! Olise is released down the right in tonnes of space. Liverpool rush back to cover but after a smart turn away from Robertson, Olise fires a ball into the danger zone. Mateta is lurking at the far post, but before the ball gets to him, Gallagher gets a touch on the ball with a flicked header and it flies out for a goal kick on the far side of the goal from where Olise hit the cross. Here we go for the second half. Palace get things started. Can they find a way back? “It’s an opportunity for Klopp to be criticial of them,” Roy Keane says of those late Liverpool errors from the pundits’ chair. He’d never struck me as someone looking for reasons to criticise people!? “Liverpool will have to dispense with Mr Hyde (Matip’s ridiculously sloppy cross-field pass) and focus on Dr Jekyll (Trent, Robertson, Oxlade-Chamberlain) if they they want to make sure of this victory,” emails Colum. “They got away with (Hyde-like) murder in the last 10 minutes of the first half and have Allison to thank for the scoresheet.” Liverpool were simply irresistible in racing into a 2-0 lead. But a couple of mistakes allowed Palace chances late in the half, and Vieira’s men will believe they can force their way back into this. See you in a few minutes for more. Here’s some half-time viewing ... what a hit! WHAT a hit! 45 min: With the half-time whistle close, Gallagher of Crystal Palace hits an attractive-looking ball into the channel for Mateta to chase, but he’s offside. 41 min: Whoops. Now Firmino coughs up possession sloppily in midfield. Olise again is on to it in a flash, and slides a good ball in behind for the onrushing Mateta. Mateta goes around Alisson, with Van Dijk and Matip desperately tracking back to try and cover the open goal. Mateta strikes a shot, Matip deflects the ball out for a corner – although I’m not sure that Mateta’s effort from a tight angle was goal bound in the first place. On the touchline, Vieira gesticulates in frustration at another golden chance passed up by his players. 39 min: Palace are nearly in again! Matip plays a dreadful pass across his own penalty area, trying to move out of defence, and Olise has a clear sight of goal from the right after pouncing on it. However, Alisson comes to Matip’s rescue and makes a good save. That error from Matip was completely out of keeping with what’s been a polished Liverpool display up until now. 36 min: A glimmer of an opening for Palace, Gallagher putting himself about and winning the ball from Liverpool high up the pitch. Mateta then has a chance to cross for Gallagher from the right, and whips the ball across with power. It’s not a bad idea to hit the cross hard, but Gallagher isn’t in position to meet it with a first-time shot. He tries to control it, but the ball squirts off his boot and Alisson claims. The visitors stroke the ball around at the back. On commentary for Sky Sports, Jamie Carragher correctly observes: “The positive for Crystal Palace is it’s only 1-0.” Seconds later, it is 2-0. After that spell of possession for Liverpool in defence, they work the ball forwards and to the left wing. Robertson seems to have all the time in the world to look up and clip a cross to Oxlade-Chamberlain, who is lurking at the far post. Firmino jumps to try and head it but can’t reach it. No matter: Oxlade-Chamberlain brings the ball down unerringly and slots a smart finish in from an angle. It’s difficult to argue that Liverpool don’t deserve this 2-0 lead ... they have been outstanding. 29 min: A classy bit of footwork by Roberto Firmino on the Liverpool right wins another corner. Palace manage to deal with it again and even have a glimmer of a fast counterattack but Robertson wins a 50-50 ball to snuff out the danger of being hit on the break. 27 min: Liverpool win a corner. Roberston bends it in, outswinging, to the near post. Jota is nearly on hand to meet it but Palace manage to clear for another corner. The next one bobbles across the Eagles’ goal but no-one can get a shot in for Liverpool and Vieira’s men manage to clear. 25 min: This is heavy-metal football at its finest. Robertson is again making a nuisance of himself on the Liverpool left. They stream forward in attack and the ball is worked back to Fabinho by Jota, but the Brazilian’s side-footed effort from the edge of the box is always rising and flies high over the goal. 20 min: Big chance for Palace! Ward races down the right, appearing to beat the Liverpool press, and crosses low, and Mateta’s side-footed effort is saved at point-blank range by Alisson. But after all that, the flag had gone up for offside. An encouraging moment for the Eagles regardless. 18 min: Sky replayed the goal a little while back and it looked like Schlupp and Andersen got in each other’s way at the corner, which allowed Van Dijk to head in. I think Andersen was meant to be marking Van Dijk. That will make for some uncomfortable viewing in the analysis room with big Patrick Vieira. 16 min: A brief spell of respite for Palace and a sniff of possession in Liverpool’s half. Olise tries a couple of times to play in teammates but Klopp’s men deal with the danger comfortably enough. Palace are still on the ropes in reality. 12 min: Oxlade-Chamberlain hits a shot from outside the area which flies high over the goal. Palace want to play, but they can’t get the ball, and are being pinned back. Again Liverpool attack: Henderson slides a low pass for Oxlade-Chamberlain but Guaita is alert and rushes off his line to smother the ball. 10 min: Liverpool are rampant. Robertson links with Jones and cracks an ambitious shot from an angle which he drags wide of the goal but which stays in play. Liverpool keep the ball alive, and Robertson gets a chance to cross for Oxlade-Chamberlain at the far post. The midfielder’s effort from close range hits the side netting. Boom. What a header, what a start by Liverpool. Palace lose their way defending the first corner of the match. Van Dijk peels off to the front post and meets Robertson’s excellent delivery with a thumping, un-saveable header that crashes into the top corner. He was unmarked, but still, a top-class finish. Vieira will be angry that Palace gave Van Dijk the freedom of the Borough of Croydon there. 6 min: All hands on deck for Palace. Jota nearly bursts through, one-on-one, but is crowded out. The ball bounces back to Jordan Henderson who hits a low shot which Guaita saves. Liverpool area going for it. 4 min: Liverpool win a free-kick in an advanced area, which is swung into the Palace box, but Mateta clears. Liverpool soon attack again down the right. Trent Alexander-Arnold bends a cross to the far post where Curtis Jones kills it with a fine first touch. He has the time and space to cut the ball back for Robertson, who hits it first-time, left-footed, from just inside the penalty area, but his shot balloons over the bar. 2 min: Palace aren’t parking the bus, anyway. As Vieira said before the match, they have a front three, and will be looking to press Liverpool and keep possession high up the pitch. Andy Roberstson makes a burst down the Liverpool left but Michael Olise deals with the early danger. Liverpool, wearing their cream-coloured away kit, get things started after players from both sides take the knee. The players are out on the pitch – and we’re ready to go. Patrick Vieira has a chat with Sky Sports: “The key today is about concentration, determination, to play the game and try to make less mistakes ... every mistake you make against a team like Liverpool, you get punished straight away ... we have to go on the field and perform with enthusiasm, and with confidence, and we will have support from the fans like always. “JP [Mateta] has been doing really well lately, so I just wanted to give him a chance to start ... the front three are really young, with a lot of energy, and a lot of quality. Hopefully they will perform at the level I know they can do.” Over on Crystal Palace’s Twitter, they’re going alllllll the way back to 2014, and this belting free-kick by Mile Jedinak: Klopp speaks to Sky Sports on his selection: “I’m really pleased that ‘Ox’ is available again ... [his injury] was nothing serious ... [Klopp makes a puzzled face] What was the other change? Oh yes, the goalkeeper ... as good as Caoimhin [Kelleher] is, Ali will always come back in.” Klopp is then asked about the change to Crystal Palace under Vieira after the Hodgson days: “I really admire Roy Hodgson, what a manager ... Patrick has a different idea, he wants to be in charge of the game, he wants to have possession, you can see that in the stats ... they will play round you and play through you if you are not careful enough.” Football doesn’t really change: If you want to win, you have to boss the midfield. With that in mind, all eyes will be on the battle between Conor Gallagher and Jordan Henderson in the middle of the park. Liverpool are very excited to be in Norwood on a cold Sunday in January. Wouldn’t you be? “Liverpool’s January always promised to revolve around African attackers. Just not Daniel Udoh, perhaps. And yet, should they keep a fourth consecutive clean sheet against Crystal Palace on Sunday, Shrewsbury’s Nigerian target man will retain his distinction as the only player to score against them while Mohamed Salah and Sadio Mané were at the Africa Cup of Nations.” Richard Jolly assesses the way Liverpool have dealt with Afcon absences – and the importance of the centre-back Virgil van Dijk: Vicente Guaita is back in nets for Palace, with Jack Butland dropping to the bench. Jean-Philippe Mateta comes in for Eberechi Eze in the only other change to Patrick Vieira’s starting lineup. Jürgen Klopp selects the same team that dispatched Brentford 3-0 in the Reds’ previous Premier League outing. Crystal Palace: Guaita, Ward, Andersen, Guehi, Mitchell, Gallagher, Hughes, Schlupp, Olise, Edouard, Mateta. Substitutes: Butland, Milivojevic, Ayew, Eze, Clyne, Benteke, Kelly, Ferguson, Riedewald. Liverpool: Alisson, Alexander-Arnold, Matip, van Dijk, Robertson, Henderson, Fabinho, Jones, Oxlade-Chamberlain, Firmino, Jota. Substitutes: Konate, Milner, Gomez, Minamino, Tsimikas, Gordon, Kelleher, Neco Williams, Morton. Referee: Kevin Friend (Leicestershire) Last season, Liverpool put seven goals past Crystal Palace in this fixture and led the Premier League, albeit briefly, by six points. But the world was a very different place then, after 14 rounds of the 2020/21 season. Leicester City were second and Everton (!!) were fourth. Manchester City languished down in eighth, hatching a cunning plan for their post-Christmas charge to the title. Second-placed Liverpool approach today’s match trailing the champions by 12 points and they are also without the prolific forwards Mohamed Salah and Sadio Mané – the former knocked in a hat-trick in that 7-0 win. Added to which, the conservatism of the Roy Hodgson era at Selhurst Park is a distant memory now that a young, talented and progressive coach has taken over in the shape of Patrick Vieira. Seven-nil to Liverpool looks distinctly unlikely – but Jürgen Klopp’s men know they must win to retain any hope of getting that title back from Pep Guardiola and Manchester City. Kick-off: 2pmThe UK’s biggest private pension fund will shift £5bn of its investment in equities to an index avoiding the worst polluters, in a move that will immediately reduce the carbon emissions associated with the shareholdings by 30%. The Universities Superannuation Scheme (USS), which manages the pensions of British academics, will introduce a climate “tilt” to the money, shifting it to companies that are making efforts to cut emissions. USS owns assets worth £82bn on behalf of 470,000 members from 330 of the UK’s higher education institutions, of which 40% is held in equities. It is facing pressure from members to decarbonise, as well as a separate dispute over proposals to cut pension benefits that could lead to strike action. The £5bn stake will move to Legal &amp; General Investment Management (LGIM), which will invest it according to a climate transition index developed by Solactive, a German company. The passively held investments have previously been managed by BlackRock, the world’s largest asset manager, to reflect indices by MSCI. The move will also cut management costs. As well as the initial 30% fall in emissions associated with the investment, Solactive will ensure that portfolio carbon emissions fall by 7% every year thereafter. Crucially, this calculation will take into account emissions associated with companies’ products, such as oil or gas sold by fossil fuel producers. “We think this is a significant first step,” said Simon Pilcher, the chief executive of USS Investment Management, which manages the pension scheme’s money. “We are committed to the ultimate decarbonisation of the total assets. “Our conviction though is that for that total decarbonisation to happen, it is the underlying companies and the way in which the world operates that have to change. So we are not going to exclude our way to net zero. We have to help the businesses in which we invest.” Although the move affects just part of the scheme’s shareholdings, a spokesperson said more of the portfolio was expected to be moved to climate-aware indices in future. The Church of England’s pensions managers last week showed how a similar approach could work in practice, announcing they would sell some shares in 28 fossil fuel producers that had not shown clear evidence of plans to reduce emissions. USS has faced persistent criticism from some of its members for holding large stakes in major carbon emitters, including oil companies such as Shell and other companies that are dependent on burning fossil fuels, such as Heathrow airport. The campaign group Divest USS argues that the scheme has not done enough to vote in favour of climate-focused shareholder resolutions. Paul Kinnersley, an emeritus professor at Cardiff University and a coordinator of the group, highlighted the fact that USS members included large numbers of climate scientists and other academics who would probably favour rapid divestment. “Any shift by USS to decarbonise or clean up their investments is obviously a step in the right direction,” he said, “but they’ve been slow about changing and they’ve been slow about sharing detail on the target of net zero by 2050. We’re welcoming it, but there’s a long way for them to go.” The move could be seen as a blow to BlackRock as it pushes climate-friendly policies, although Pilcher said BlackRock would continue to manage some USS assets. Neither will it make much of a dent in BlackRock’s total assets under management, which rose above $10tn (£7.4tn) at the end of 2021 – the first time any investor has reached that size. In relation to the dispute over pension contributions, the University and College Union said on Friday that it would set dates for members to strike in the coming days unless USS and employers back down on proposals to cut guaranteed benefits and increase member contributions. The union argues it would be unaffordable for members.From anti-ageing diamonds to topical collagen, I have witnessed a lot of wild claims and eye-watering price tags over a decade of dipping in and out of beauty writing. I’ve also fielded a lot of questions, from friends, family and coworkers. Well, just one question over and over: “What works?” While there are certainly those who treat skincare as a hobby, most people just want something that delivers results, ideally affordably and without having to acquire a degree in organic chemistry to debug the messaging on the packaging. When it comes to skincare basics like cleanser and moisturiser, pretty much everything on the market will clean your face or make it feel moist for a time, so finding something that works is largely down to personal preference about price; scent (or lack thereof); your subjective experience of texture; and how you’d like to use the product (a makeup remover you use in the shower isn’t going to make sense for someone who bathes at dawn). But for products that deal with specific concerns like acne, redness and rosacea, dryness and signs of ageing like fine lines and sunspots, Australia has a regulatory framework to ensure some skincare products deliver on their promises. While cosmetic products in Australia are tested for safety but not efficacy, if your skincare is classified as a registered medicine, there has to be evidence that it works. Some therapeutic skincare products are only available with a prescription, while others are sold over the counter. There’s a good chance you’re already using at least one – sunscreen, which is regulated by the Therapeutic Goods Administration if it’s got an SPF of 15 or higher. And if you’re not using sunscreen but you’re even vaguely interested in caring for your skin, please change that immediately – it’s the lowest hanging fruit on the tree. Now that we’ve all slipped, slopped and slapped, let’s move on. Whether you’re concerned with pimples, rosacea or the overall appearance over your skin, look out for products that are registered as medicines on the Australian Register of Therapeutic Goods. Typically, these are much cheaper than luxury skincare products. While expensive, booking an appointment with a dermatologist will allow you to come up with an effective, active skincare plan suited to your needs (just don’t let them upsell you on pricey cosmeceuticals that aren’t actually medicine). There is also an increasing number of services that offer skincare consultations online and via telehealth that will deliver a tailored set of prescription-only products to you. But your first port of call should be your GP, who may well be able to offer suggestions, advice and even scripts. This isn’t to say that skincare products that are not registered as medicines don’t work – just that they don’t have to work. Talking to a doctor is slightly more effort than showing up to the cosmetics counter and asking “what’s good”, but it is more likely to deliver results, which will ultimately save you time (on research) and money (on fancy creams that don’t work out).The New South Wales government could be forced to spend another $4.1bn over the next decade to address “significant uncertainties” surrounding a controversial $40bn rail corporation it set up to inflate the state’s budget bottom line. The auditor general, Margaret Crawford, has given the long-awaited signoff on the state’s finances after a three-month delay caused by concerns surrounding the establishment of the Transport Asset Holding Entity, or Tahe, which holds $40bn in NSW rail assets. Crawford in 2021 delayed the release of the state’s audited finances as a result of “significant accounting issues” with Tahe – a move that forced the state to inject $1.1bn into the transport system to meet the auditor’s concerns. While she has now signed off on the state’s finances, the auditor has flagged that significant uncertainties remain surrounding the financial assumptions underpinning Tahe. In comments attached to the state’s finances, Crawford noted that predictions outlined by NSW Treasury remained “highly dependent” on revenue which “may not eventuate”, and revealed taxpayers would need to contribute another $4.1bn over the next decade to satisfy accounting standards associated with Tahe. The NSW government established Tahe in 2015 as a way of transferring the state’s $40bn rail assets out of the hands of the transport department and into a state-owned corporation. The decision had significant benefits for the government’s bottom line. Because Tahe could lease the state’s rail assets back to service operators such as Sydney Trains, the government could classify funding to the corporation as “equity injections” which did not have a negative impact on the budget. But under accounting rules, Tahe was required to show both that the entity remained entirely independent of the government and that it would turn a profit. In November, the auditor said “significant accounting issues” remained with the body, and delayed signing off on the state’s finances. “We are not in a position to sign the audit,” she said at the time. “The matters are very complex and there are a lot of discussions going on around these matters.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The auditor’s concerns meant that in December the NSW government was forced to provide $1.1bn in additional funding to the state’s transport department to pay for a huge increase in fees paid to Tahe for access to the state’s rail assets. The increase was confirmed in a heads of agreement deal signed on 18 December 2021 between Tahe and its “customers”, the state’s rail networks. “The heads of agreement reflects Tahe’s intention to negotiate higher access and licence fees to deliver on shareholder’s expectation of a return of 2.5% and includes proposed indicative future access and licence fees,” the auditor noted in her report. In the report, the auditor general revealed the $1.1bn in extra funding only extended to the 2024-25 financial year and that another $4.1bn would be required over the life of the 10-year agreement. That additional funding had been “broadly communicated” to the government’s expenditure review committee “but is yet to be provided for in government budget figures”, she wrote. “As described in the 2020-21 half year review, for the period to 2024-25 an additional $1.1bn has been allocated to Transport for NSW to be provided to rail operators consistent with the updated shareholder expectations for Tahe,” she said. “While the half year review does not embed approved funding beyond 2024-25, the heads of agreement attaches an indicative financial profile which indicates access and licence fees increase by an additional $4.1 billion over the following six years.” She also wrote that a “significant portion” of the revenue required to meet accounting standards was outside the 10-year contact “and there is a risk that Tahe will not be able to re-contract for access and licence fees at a level that is consistent with current projections”. “There is also a risk that funding for Tahe’s key customers will not be sufficient to fund payment of access and licence fees at a level that is consistent with current projections,” Crawford wrote. On Sunday, the NSW treasurer, Matt Kean, trumpeted the release of the “unqualified audit opinion” as evidence the government had provided “a true and accurate reflection of the financial position of the state”. “What this shows is that, despite claims to the contrary, the NSW finances are now validated and verified as accurate by the NSW auditor general based on her unqualified opinion,” Kean said. But Labor’s shadow treasurer, Daniel Mookhey, said the auditor general’s comments showed taxpayers would be forced to “plunge even further into debt to stop Tahe from unravelling the state’s finances”. Labor claims the cost to the budget is likely to be nearer to $7bn over the life of the agreement with the state’s rail operators based on projected access fees included in the finances. “Tahe was always a budget con. But now it’s become a full-blown budget disaster,” Mookhey said. “Every dollar spent on Tahe is a dollar denied to the tens of thousands of small businesses fighting to survive the Omicron lockdown. Those businesses deserve the extra $4.1bn Mr Perrottet is paying Tahe – especially since Tahe is nothing more than an accounting sham.”Google has warned of a “devastating” impact on the internet if a court ruling that the search giant is liable for defamatory material contained in hyperlinked pages is not overturned. Google warned in a submission to the high court it will be forced to “censor” its search results if a $40,000 defamation damages award to George Defteros, a solicitor who represented Melbourne gangland figures, is allowed to stand. Defteros successfully sued Google, arguing its publication of search results that included a 2004 article in the Age about his arrest on conspiracy to murder charges – which were later dropped – defamed him. In 2020, the Victorian supreme court justice Melinda Richards ruled the article had implied that Defteros crossed a line from professional lawyer to confidant and friend to criminal elements. Victoria’s court of appeal rejected a bid from Google to overturn the result. Defteros’ lawyers had contacted Google in 2016 asking for the article to be removed but it refused on the basis the Age was a reputable source. Google’s lawyers told the high court the notice contained “false” claims that Defteros had sued the Age in defamation and the Age had agreed to remove it from its website. Google warned if the court of appeal judgment stands “Google will be liable as the publisher of any matter published on the web to which its search results provide a hyperlink” after a person complains the matter defamed them – “regardless of the quality” of that notice. Even if many of those accessing the article had a “legitimate interest” in it, which should enable the defence of qualified privilege, the search engine would be required to block search results for everyone or else be held liable for those accessing it out of “idle curiosity”, Google said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The tech company argued that it was not a publisher of the material because “a hyperlink is not, in and of itself, the communication of that to which it links”. Websites should only be liable if the hyperlink “actually repeats the defamatory imputation to which it links”, Google said. “The inevitable consequence of leaving the court of appeal’s decision undisturbed is that Google will be required to act as censor by excluding any webpage about which complaint is made from its search results, even when, as here, the webpage may be a matter of legitimate interest to the substantial portion of people who search for it and is published by a reputable news source.” Google argued it should be entitled to the “innocent disseminator” defence unless a complainant could explain what the defamatory meanings of the article were and why they could not be defended. It also asked the high court to reconsider the defence of qualified privilege, arguing it “believed on reasonable grounds” that its users had a legitimate interest in accessing the article. In 2018, the court gave the green light to defamation claims against search engines in a case brought by Milorad Trkulja against Google for a series of images, autocomplete predictions and results that he alleged were defamatory. In September last year, the high court ruled in the Dylan Voller case that social media users, including media companies, were liable as publishers for defamatory third-party comments on their social media posts. In December, the Coalition released draft legislation to counteract the Voller decision by deeming that an Australian person or company with a social media page was not the publisher of third-party comments made by other users. If passed, the bill would deem the social media company the publisher but would provide them with a defence if they had a complaints procedure to help identify anonymous commenters.The indirect effects of the pandemic on children and adolescents are as substantial – if not more so – than the impact of being infected with Covid-19, paediatricians say. A research review from the Murdoch Children’s Research Institute led by paediatrician Prof Sharon Goldfeld said interventions needed to be developed now to address growing disparities in child health and wellbeing due to the pandemic. Goldfeld said children were facing a “generation-defining disruption” with public health restrictions and interventions such as online learning, social distancing, increased screen time, reduced access to healthcare, less community sport and less outside play all having repercussions. “The public health measures have resulted in positive benefits for some, while others have been adversely and inequitably impacted,” Goldfeld said. “Children and adolescents experiencing adversity before the pandemic have been disproportionately affected, potentially leading to a widening of disparities in child health, wellbeing, and developmental outcomes.” The review, published in the Medical Journal of Australia (MJA) on Monday, includes findings from a Royal Children’s hospital poll that found one-third (36%) of Australian parents felt that the pandemic had negatively affected the mental health of their child, and that 31% of parents had delayed or avoided medical care for a sick or injured child due to concerns about catching the virus. A separate study found some children and adolescents infected with the virus experienced stigma and mental health distress such as difficulty sleeping, having nightmares and withdrawing from friends. The review also refers to Kids Helpline data, and paediatric emergency department data, that shows a rapid rise in mental health and self-harm presentations. Associate Prof Nicholas Wood, a paediatrician with the Children’s Hospital Westmead, said he had heard reports of children not wanting to leave their house because they were so anxious and worried about Covid. “I think there’s going to have to be some effort put into resilience-building programs for children, whether that’s through schools or communities,” he said. “There has also always been an issue with access to mental health support in the community. It’s very hard to get your children into a psychologist or psychiatrist, and we must be thinking about these and other services children will need to be accessing during and post-pandemic.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A survey of 5,000 teachers cited in the MJA review found only 35% of them reported their students were learning effectively during lockdowns. The achievement gap between advantaged and disadvantaged students grows at triple the rate during remote learning, the review estimated. Goldfeld said some families lacked the resources and time needed to support their children during remote education. “It will be difficult to predict how long it will take those with lost learning to catch-up, but strategies to identify those left behind and targeted long-term interventions for those especially in low socioeconomic school settings will be critical,” she said. Goldfeld said even areas such as child nutrition and child safety had been impacted due to reduced family income and job losses during lockdowns, and parental mental health issues and stresses. “Job loss and reduced income is a known risk factor for harsh parenting and maltreatment,” she said. The review concluded that those children requiring extra care and intervention as a result of the pandemic need to be urgently identified so that intervention programs can be targeted towards them. These programs need to be reviewed for efficacy, the authors of the review wrote. Addressing financial instability through parent financial supplements, more investment in children’s health and wellbeing at school, and screening programs for mental health and wellbeing on return to school were among the other measures suggested by the authors.It would be a gross understatement to say the AFLW has changed the Australian sporting landscape. While slow to field an elite women’s competition, since its inception, the league has punched above its weight in flying the flag for diversity and inclusion, particularly in the LGBTIQA+ space. Since AFLW Pride began as a standalone match between Western Bulldogs and Carlton, the Pride banner has risen in prominence across football, culminating in the AFLW Pride Round. But when a campaign is so visible and focused on public image, there is always a risk it is providing cover for a lack of more substantial structural change. Carlton champion Darcy Vescio and the Suns’ Tori Groves-Little came out as non-binary in the lead up to this year’s round, one of many powerful stories gifted by players and families, coaches and fans, all of whom identify women’s football as a safe place for the LGBTIQA+ community. The flood of individual and collective pronouncements about childhood dreams, family pride, and a sense of belonging would melt the hardest of hearts. These statements and gestures are not just about the players. The AFLW has always had a strong sense of community and connection with the outer. Collingwood super fan Andy posted a Twitter thread articulating the importance of including the transgender flag on the Pies’ Pride jumper. “Today, footy and Collingwood feel like they’re for me,” he wrote. “I can own this. I can wear it, and show up, and scream ‘ball’, and be my truest unfiltered self, and belong.” The importance of this campaign and what it represents cannot be overstated. However, given the inextricable relationship between gender, sexuality and the AFLW, the conversation around inclusion and diversity must also acknowledge the agonising crawl towards gender equity and other glaring gaps in the equity conversation across Australian football. Given the inherently political nature of women playing what was traditionally a “man’s sport” – with anyone not identifying as male forced to fight for a chance to play – it is not surprising women’s football has fomented a culture of activism and progressiveness. It is equally unsurprising that AFLW players and supporters are finding their voice and actively calling out inconsistencies and inequity between the men’s and women’s games. This has been cast in sharp relief by the AFL’s response to Covid. In an Instagram post lamenting the postponement of a second match due to Covid, Western Bulldogs player Nell Morris-Dalton said: “It’s devastating and a reminder of the inequalities that still persist in our league compared to the AFLM.” Noting the AFL’s shift to hubs in 2021 that allowed the season to play out in its entirety, she acknowledged the impracticality of hubs for the AFLW, given the players’ part-time contracts. Ironically, these women suffer a double whammy of disadvantage in Covid times. Their unliveable wage forces them to pursue outside work and careers, which increases their exposure to Covid in the community, which, in turn, increases the likelihood of bringing Covid back to their club, jeopardising their team and their opponents – many share houses with opposition players – and potentially threatening the entire competition. Adelaide Crows champion Erin Phillips has described indefensible limitations imposed on the women’s teams to make way for the men’s, including restricted access to training facilities and soft-capped medical support. Despite the significance of including the trans flag on Pride jumpers, the AFL’s policy on trans women playing at elite levels remains contentious and inconsistent, as noted by another longtime AFLW super fan, Alfie. The original AFLW Pride Carlton v Bulldogs Pride match, postponed due to Covid, has not yet been rescheduled, nor has the round three Bulldogs v Suns replacement match. On Friday, when questioned about the West Coast Eagles’ lack of a Pride jumper, coach Michael Prior said: “We’ve done the pride stuff to death.” The club later apologised “to everyone who was offended”, a textbook non-apology. As one of the richest AFL clubs, their argument that they couldn’t manage a Pride jumper and an Indigenous jumper in the same season is difficult to swallow. Their focus, they said, was on football. Perhaps this was their biggest error. Women’s football has never just been about football. Women’s footy has been playing and advocating for generations. In the end, the Eagles lost to the Crows 1.3 (9) to 6.6 (42). There is no question Pride Round carries enormous weight in cultivating positive and inclusive attitudes among players, fans and the sporting community. However, it is important to acknowledge these campaigns deliver far more in terms of goodwill and positive public image for the AFL and its clubs than the movement gains on the ground. The risk is that such visible and public celebration of diversity and inclusion can substitute for the hard work and structural change that isn’t happening at the level required – in the AFL and the broader community. For real change to take place, the AFL’s efforts to advocate for inclusion and diversity must reach further than creating an impressive shopfront, and must confront some uncomfortable truths. Whether in reference to sexuality, gender, cultural difference, First Nations or disability, diversity and inclusion must be entrenched structurally and culturally in order to generate the sort of change that will bring us closer to true equity and fairness.Stackable cubes; hardtop lunchboxes; multi-compartment boxes; bento boxes; multi-level cooler bags; cooler bags the size of a backpack; individual containers – as I sifted through the countless, brightly coloured options for my children’s lunchboxes this year, I began to feel like a disgruntled actor from an informercial, shrugging in defeat and blowing my hair from my eyes. But in my informercial, there was no hero product coming to my rescue. Just more variations of lunchboxes. Kate Browne, personal finance expert from Finder – who you may recognise as the Guilty Mum from ABC’s series The Checkout – agrees that the process of buying a new lunchbox can be confounding. “Finding the right lunchbox for your child depends on a few factors.” So, what are those factors? 1. Make sure your kid can use it “If they are new school starters, look for something that is easy to open with compartments for recess and lunchtime for little people to access,” Browne suggests. Leanne Elliston, who is an accredited practising dietitian, a program manager from Nutrition Australia ACT and a Healthy Lunchbox Week coordinator, echoes this. “A common reason for lunchbox food coming home uneaten is because children could not access their food in the first place,” she says. Elliston suggests doing “a few test runs at home before starting school so your child is confident with opening and closing their lunchbox. That also goes for little reusable containers and zip bags within the lunchbox too”. 2. Buy for what they eat Take into consideration the type of foods your child is happy to eat at school, and choose a lunchbox that accommodates these. “Around a third of children’s daily food intake comes from the lunchbox so it is essential we include a range of nourishing foods that will support their learning and overall health,” Elliston says. “Providing a balance of foods from each food group” is the aim, but your child’s preferences also matter. “For children who like their food separated and enjoy picking at bits and pieces, a bento style lunchbox might be best,” Elliston says. “For children who love their sandwiches, wraps or rolls then go for one that has plenty of room to prevent the bread from squashing, and also provides enough space for some fruit and vegetable snacks.” She says to go easy on the highly processed packaged snacks. “These foods are usually high in added sugar which can affect children’s ability to concentrate for long periods of time.” They also tend to be excessive in kilojoules and low in nutrients. On the environmental front, they’re not great either. “Most of the rubbish in school bins comes from food packaging brought from home,” Elliston says. Also on waste minimising, Elliston says that auditing your child’s lunchbox won’t just help with selecting a new one; it also helps cut down on food waste. When school starts, she suggests looking at what is left over at the end of the day so you can “avoid overfilling the lunchbox with food your child won’t eat”. 3. Keep it clean and cool Professional organiser Katrina Springer, of the Organised Housewife website, says a key consideration for food safety is ensuring that the materials of the lunchbox or bag you use are made from non-toxic materials. For this, she says to look for BPA-free options. Many lunchboxes available now can be fiddly not just to open, but to clean. Springer suggests placing substance over style and avoiding anything too elaborate. Before you buy a lunchbox, make sure it is dishwasher or washing machine safe. If you have to hand wash, a lunchbox with only one lid will also help prevent bacteria growth. In addition to cleanliness, another aspect to food safety is the heat. “The school term starts in the hottest time of the year so look for a lunchbox that has an ice pack or ice compartment to keep food cool,” Browne says. Heat is also a consideration when it comes to healthy eating. If fresh fruit and vegetables have wilted by lunchtime, they are less likely to be appealing. 4. Affordable is just fine Browne recommends researching lunchboxes online to find bulk packs and compare prices. “We recommend stores like Amazon, eBay and Catch for these kinds of products,” she says. While it is easy to become caught up in the insta-worthy lunchbox trap and spend lots of money making your child’s lunchbox the most creative and attractive, Elliston says there are better ways to spend your time. A good lunchbox should be “simple, safe and smart”.On New Year’s Eve, on the other side of the world, Ash Fadian’s brother-in-law died of Covid-19. Devastated by the news, Fadian’s thoughts quickly turned to getting from her home in Sydney to the funeral in London. Fadian is on a bridging visa, one of the only visa types still subject to harsh Covid travel bans preventing her from re-entering Australia without an exemption. Fadian, who is fully vaccinated, applied for an exemption on compassionate grounds six times. She showed authorities her brother-in-law’s death certificate and the funeral notice. Despite Omicron already being widespread in New South Wales, and the fact that border restrictions have been eased for all other visa holders, her six applications were rejected. “I’m beyond devastated. I’m just gutted to be treated like this,” she said of being unable to leave to attend the funeral. “I’ve been here four years, and all I’m asking is to attend a funeral. “If this isn’t a compassionate case, then I just don’t know what these people are looking at.” Stories like Fadian’s were common in earlier stages of the pandemic. But the vast majority of temporary visa holders are now able to travel to and from Australia without an exemption, so long as they are fully vaccinated. On Tuesday, the Morrison government went further to encourage visitors to Australia, issuing a plea to working holidaymakers to come and help fill the skills shortage, waiving their application fees as an incentive. “My message to them is come on down,” he said. “We want you to come to Australia and enjoy a holiday here in Australia – move all the way around the country and, at the same time, join our workforce.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The irony of the prime minister’s plea was not lost on Fadian. She came to Australia as a working holidaymaker herself. She is now on a bridging visa while she waits for a replacement working holidaymaker visa. People holding bridging visa B (BVB) are usually allowed to live in Australia and travel abroad while they await government decisions on more permanent visas. But BVB holders like Fadian have found themselves stuck due to a combination of blowouts in visa processing times and the border restrictions, which make it near impossible for them to enter the country or to re-enter after leaving. The government’s treatment of her has left Fadian considering whether she should abandon Australia and her life here. “The fact that I can’t fly home for a funeral, yeah of course it [makes me think about leaving], it makes me think what are their values and their morals?” she said. “I want to get up and go and never come back, but there’s something that’s keeping me here, and that’s because I live here.” She’s not alone. A petition started by bridging visa holders has now gained 15,000 signatures. Their calls are backed by the independent MP Zali Steggall and the Greens senator Nick McKim. McKim wrote to the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, saying the restrictions for bridging visa holders were causing “immeasurable pain to thousands of people”. “With global visa processing times blowing out significantly across a number of visa classes due to Covid-19, people that are offshore on both expired and valid BVBs [bridging visas] are still not able to return to Australia while their substantive visas are being processed,” he said. Guardian Australia approached Hawke and the home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, for a response. The query was referred to the department of home affairs, which said the remaining travel restrictions were needed to “balance the need to safely reopen with the continuing need to protect the Australian community from Covid-19”. “These border policies have contributed to Australia having one of the lowest death rates from Covid-19, strongest economies and highest vaccination rates in the world,” a spokesperson said. “The key principles guiding government decisions on visas while responding to Covid-19, are that our visa system must support public health measures and should not displace job opportunities for Australians.”One voice, your voice, and our collective voices can make a difference. We are on the precipice of a revolution whose call to action needs to be heard loud and clear. – Grace Tame Women have been angry since Eve. And the responses to that anger are just as old. We saw it play out as the prime ninister and his government struggled to get a handle on the issues Brittany Higgins’ accusations raised, held up by the swell of voices rushing in behind her. The platitudes and the “that’s terrible, but what can we do” shrugs. The attempts to move on. The pushback and the patronising “when will these emotional women stop being so emotional” sighs. There isn’t a woman alive who wouldn’t recognise the signs. In men, anger, no matter how unreasonable, is always reasonable. At least at first glance. In women, that same anger is irrational – spurred by emotion, not rationality. Men argue, women rant. Men speak with authority, women screech like banshees. Men were driven to it, women must have done something. While expressing my frustration and rage with the political response, one man asked me in jest, “Are you sure you’re not just hormonal?” It was a joke, made in an attempt at irony, but we both knew it was tinged with what he believed to be true. Women everywhere seemed to be angry, and the usual tricks used to calm them weren’t working. You could see the frustration in the male political leaders as they delivered well-rehearsed lines and headed down well-trodden paths of placation, only to be met with stony faces and pointed questions about actual solutions. By the time historical rape allegations against Christian Porter were made public (allegations the former attorney general has vigorously denied), the government’s lack of response had led the resolve of women around the country to harden into steely determination. Women asked for their leaders to listen. They were told, repeatedly, to listen to how much they were not being listened to. It’s not unusual for those in power to be confused by a woman’s anger. Some of the most famous of western civilisation’s myths have been built around the fall of an angry woman. Medusa, raped and betrayed, was understandably angry – and was turned into a Gorgon for her troubles. She was slayed as she slept, her powers then used against her will. Circe handled rejection so poorly she would turn suitors into swine and poison waterways. Cassandra, so beautiful she tempted a god, was then doomed to never be believed when she rejected him. Medea handled Jason’s infidelity and rejection by murdering his new wife and her own children. The Greek spirit of mad rage was encapsulated by Lyssa, a woman. Clytemnestra became synonymous with being every man’s worst nightmare after she murdered her husband for sacrificing their daughter. Eve has never been forgiven for mankind’s first sin, tasting the forbidden fruit. Story after story, myth after myth, women receive comeuppance for their anger and are doomed to live as monsters, cast away from friends and family, or hunted by righteous men. Women have been angry since before they could name the emotion, but they are quickly taught to hide it. Study after study after study into anger show how women suffer professionally from displaying the emotion – while men are rewarded. We see this played out in our personal lives, too. An angry woman is a shrew, unattractive, unlovable and in need of taming. Her voice is too shrill to be heard, her face too flushed, her eyes too full of fire to focus on. Angry women commit the greatest of feminine sins – they make themselves unfuckable. “It’s probably why she’s so angry – no one will fuck her.” “If you would just calm down, then we can talk.” “Just settle, petal.” “Calm your tits.” “You’re taking it too far.” “Keep your hair on!” As with so much of womanhood, anger is framed through the male gaze. Men’s anger is perceived as just, while women’s anger is irrational – and so, when aimed at men, is usually unjust. An angry man is credible. An angry woman is difficult. Add in other institutionalised discrimination, such as being a woman of colour, and there are more stereotypes to contend with, to silence anyone who dares to speak up – not just as a woman but as a woman who is not white. She’ll often find her white “sisters” joining the chorus to drown her out. Girls absorb all those messages at the same time as their ABCs. Boys too. It’s why women’s anger has become such a trope: something men have to suffer, humour or bounce along with – but only to a point. In her 2018 book Rage Becomes Her: The Power of Women’s Anger, Soraya Chemaly writes how it is as children that many women “learn to regard anger as unfeminine, unattractive, and selfish … As girls we are not taught to acknowledge or manage our anger so much as to fear, ignore, hide and transform it … ” Women know others will be making those assessments and work to counter them, even as they struggle to make their anger known. So it’s no wonder our leaders are not used to seeing it. It’s no wonder, in the instance of Brittany Higgins, that they believed platitudes and politics as usual would solve it. For the first time in a long, long while, within a long, long list of tragedies and injustices Australians should be angry about, the anger didn’t seem to be dissipating. In fact, it was growing. Women were marching. They were mobilising. They were telling their stories – loudly – and they were refusing to calm down or express their anger in a more palatable way. As one woman I met in a supermarket told me, “It’s liberating to be this angry and not have to hide it.” These were not the first angry women to speak up to their leaders. But here were a lot of straight, white women – a core constituency of the Coalition – refusing to calm down or let the matter drop. Anger can be destructive, but it can also be transformative. Used well, it can bring about a necessary clarity, stripping back all the frosting to what lies rotten underneath. In trying to appease without offering solutions, the government found that anger only grew. And for those feeling that anger, it was cleansing. This is an edited extract from On Reckoning by Amy Remeikis (Hachette, $16.99), out 26 JanuaryAustralia’s offshore processing regime on Nauru will cost taxpayers nearly $220m over the next six months as it holds 107 people on the Pacific island. Brisbane firm Canstruct International has been awarded a new extension – its eighth non-competitive contract extension – for $218.5m to provide six months of “garrison and welfare services” on Nauru. The company’s total revenue from island contracts over the past five years now totals more than $1.8bn. It currently costs Australian taxpayers more than $4m a year to hold one person within the Nauru offshore regime – a little over $11,000 per person per day. The government’s latest figures, revealed in Senate estimates, stated 107 people – 81 refugees and 26 asylum seekers – were still held on Nauru. The 81 refugees have had their claim for protection formally recognised. Australia is legally obliged to protect them and they cannot be returned to their home country because they face a “well-founded fear of being persecuted”. While no new asylum seeker arrivals have been sent to Nauru since 2014, the regime continues to cost Australia between $35m and $40m a month on average, the same amount it did when the detention centre held more than 1,000 people. Canstruct’s tenure on Nauru has attracted significant regulatory and parliamentary attention. The October 2017 “letter of intent” awarded to Canstruct International was worth $8m. Less than a month after this was signed, the company won a $385m contract awarded by limited tender, meaning there was not an open and competitive process to secure the initial contract. The auditor general criticised the process, saying “it is not clear why the department could not have secured a replacement supplier using a more competitive procurement method”. Since then, government figures show eight further amendments, all uncontested, have escalated the total cost to $1.82bn. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Questioning before the Senate has revealed other significant irregularities. The Guardian revealed in November that Canstruct International had just $8 in assets and had not commenced trading when it was awarded the contract. A government-ordered “financial strength assessment” – conducted by KPMG to test the suitability of the company – was actually done on a different company. The Canstruct group of companies, or entities associated with it, have made 11 donations to the Liberal National party in Queensland. Canstruct International said it was contractually restricted from responding to a series of questions from the Guardian about the latest amendment. A spokesperson for the department of home affairs said the Australian government remained committed to regional processing as a key pillar of Operation Sovereign Borders. “In support of the government of Nauru’s management of regional processing arrangements, Canstruct continues to provide garrison and welfare services to the regional processing caseload,” they said. “Australia is working with Nauru to establish an enduring regional processing capability in Nauru.” The spokesperson said between 2008 and 2013, more than 50,000 people arrived in Australia by boat seeking asylum and an estimated 1,200 people drowned. “We will never allow this to happen again. Operation Sovereign Borders has built a multi-layered system of: deterrence and disruption; detection, interception and returns, and; regional processing and third country resettlement.” The shadow home affairs minister, senator Kristina Keneally, said more than four years had passed since the government had handed a lucrative contract to an alleged “shelf company” without a competitive tender and without “conducting basic due diligence on the company”. “Since then, the Morrison government has had countless opportunities to renegotiate this important contract to get a better deal for taxpayers, or to put the contract through a competitive tender process,” Keneally said. “Instead, it keeps extending the contract – paying this private company more and more money to do less and less work.” The former New South Wales auditor general Tony Harris told the Guardian that Canstruct International’s contracts, and the process by which they had been awarded, required further examination. “We can certainly say that the audit office ought to have commented on the KPMG report assessing the wrong company – the fact that it didn’t report on that suggests that it didn’t see it – that’s a major flaw in the report. But the ‘per detainee’ cost is so outrageous now, the audit office should be doing a report on it.” Harris said while the audit office was constrained by time and resources, the expense of Australia’s offshore contracts – and their history of cost blowouts – justified further examination. “I know the audit office has many worthy subject matters vying for its attention, but we have seen with this company and with Paladin [the shelf company awarded the equivalent contract in PNG] that the department has allowed, or been forced into, dealing with companies that have taken full advantage of their monopoly positions at the taxpayers’ expense.” The Canstruct group helped build the Nauru regional processing centre and Canstruct International took over running the centre from Broadspectrum in 2017. The Nauru processing centre became an “open” centre in 2015, allowing some movement outside the camp, and all refugees and asylum seekers were physically moved into the Nauru community in 2019. But the 107 refugees and asylum seekers held by Australia on Nauru cannot leave the island. The processing centre has been plagued by controversy, including reports of alleged violence against asylum seekers and refugees, systemic sexual abuse of children, inadequate medical and psychiatric care, and a spate of acts of self-harm and suicides. The Nauru files – a cache of leaked internal working documents written by staff and published in 2016 before Canstruct took over operations – detailed reports of alleged sexual violence against children as young as six, assaults, and systemic neglect. Separate statements from senior United Nations officials said the Nauru camp was “cruel and inhuman” and a violation of the convention against torture. Médecins Sans Frontières said the mental health suffering on Nauru was “among the most severe MSF has ever seen”.Patricia Karvelas is not fazed by a daily 3.30am start and exudes the confidence and enthusiasm of someone who can anchor an agenda-setting national news program like ABC’s RN Breakfast. But “PK”, as she is known to listeners and colleagues alike, is well aware that audiences generally don’t like change. Radio National listeners are sure to miss the calm and assured voice of Fran Kelly, who hosted the flagship radio show for 17 years before stepping down last year to take up a less gruelling role at Aunty. “What I want to demonstrate to our listeners is that the show’s spirit will continue,” Karvelas told Guardian Australia ahead of her first shift hosting RN Breakfast on Monday. “That’s my first project: to sort of steady the ship. When you lose a host there is a period of grief and adjustment that I’m very prepared for. Because I’ve done it before, I went through it when Waleed Aly moved on [from RN Drive] – the listeners were very attached to him.” Once the show is bedded down her focus will be on “making sure that it doesn’t sound like a show that now will be coming out of Melbourne”. Breakfast will be produced from Karvelas’s hometown of Melbourne – moving from Sydney under Kelly – but it will have a determinedly national focus. “This country is big and vast and the experiences we have in it are just so diverse and different,” the former host of RN Drive and Afternoon Briefing on ABC News says. “If you’re in the Northern Territory, dealing with the new laws which are putting 10-year-olds back in detention, your experience in this country is vastly different to mine in Melbourne.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Karvelas has always taken a keen interest in Indigenous affairs – dating back to her time as a political reporter at the Australian – but she does not accept the label of activist ascribed to her by Sky After Dark presenter Chris Kenny. When Karvelas was revealed as Kelly’s replacement, Kenny said Fran Kelly, a “left of centre activist”, was being replaced by “another green left activist”. Karvelas bristles with irritation when she hears this. “In the years I worked with him at the Australian newspaper I don’t recall him telling me I was a green left activist,” she says. “I was in a senior role at the newspaper, not in some junior role, but in consistently senior roles appointed by their rightwing management. So I’m assuming that at that stage, they thought that I was a pretty fair and robust reporter. I’m pretty certain that they knew that and he knew that. “Unlike maybe him and some others I’m not a card-carrying member of the Liberal party and I have not worked for Liberal prime ministers or senior Liberal figures. I also haven’t worked for senior Labor figures and I never will. “And that’s something I definitely can guarantee you: I will never work in politics because I don’t believe in it because I am a journalist.” These attacks on her professionalism are nothing new. Karvelas believes one of the reasons ABC management saw her as a successor to Kelly was that she was “battle-hardened” and “knows not to read the comments”. She cares less about what people say about her on Twitter now than when she was an up-and-coming reporter more easily provoked by trolls. “There are people on the left who really don’t see me as captured by them,” she says. “They believe that I need to, you know, basically pursue their agendas or their politics in order to be legit. I won’t do that. And I don’t think it’s my job and the people on the right are unhappy because I don’t declare myself a conservative and I won’t because I’m not a conservative. “What I am interested in is the truth, and sometimes if you pursue the truth and facts they can take you to places unexpected.” Kelly is a hard act to follow but Karvelas is known as one of the most driven people in media and is determined to be successful. She likes to tell students at school talks that hard work is the key to success. “I was never the smartest kid in the room or the prettiest kid in the room, but I was always the hardest working,” she says. Kelly is on a long break over the summer and will return to the ABC in a yet-to-be-announced role.Bernie Sanders on Sunday sought to turn fire aimed by Democrats at two of their own, Kyrsten Sinema and Joe Manchin, on to Republican senators he said were “pushing an anti-democratic agenda”. “Republicans are laughing all the way to election day,” the Vermont senator told CNN’s State of the Union. “They have not had to cast one bloody vote, which shows us where they’re at.” But Sander also confirmed that he will campaign against Manchin and Sinema should they face viable primary challengers. Manchin and Sinema have blocked Democratic priorities including the Build Back Better spending plan and, this week, voting rights reform. Their refusal to contemplate reform to the filibuster, the rule which requires 60-vote majorities for most legislation, meant two voting rights bills in answer to Republican attacks on voting in states were always doomed to fail. On Saturday, Sinema was formally censured by her Arizona state party. Sanders said he supported that move. He also confirmed his threat to campaign against Sinema and Manchin in 2024. “If there was strong candidates prepared to stand up for working families who understand that the Democratic party has got to be the party of working people, taking on big money interests, if both candidates were there in Arizona and West Virginia, yes, I would be happy to support them.” But, Sanders insisted, “it’s not only those two. It is 50 Republicans who have been adamant about not only pushing an anti-democratic agenda but also opposing our efforts to try to lower the cost of prescription drugs, trying to expand Medicare … to improve the disaster situation in home healthcare, in childcare, to address the existential threat of climate change. “You’ve got 50 Republicans who don’t want to do anything except criticise the president and then you have, sadly enough, two Democrats who choose to work with Republicans rather than the president, and it will sabotage the president’s effort to address the needs of working families in this country.” Speaking to NBC’s Meet the Press, Sanders insisted the Biden administration made “a great start”, in part with a Covid relief bill passed with just 50 votes and the casting vote of Kamala Harris, but was now bogged down thanks in large part to Manchin and Sinema. “The president and the Democratic Congress,” Sanders said, “… looked at the economic crisis that was caused by Covid. We passed the American Rescue Plan … and we also passed along the way the strongest infrastructure bill that has been passed since Dwight D Eisenhower … We were off to a great start. “And then I will tell you exactly what happened. Fifty members of the Republican party decided that they were going to be obstructionist … and then you had two United States senators joining them, Mr Manchin and Senator Sinema. “For five months now there have been negotiations behind closed doors trying to get these two Democratic senators on board. That strategy, in my view, has failed. It has failed dismally. We saw it last week in terms of the Voting Rights Act. We now need a new direction.” Asked if he was frustrated, Sanders told CNN he was. But, he insisted, “we need to start voting. We need to bring important pieces of legislation that impact the lives of working families right onto the floor of the Senate. And Republicans want to vote against lowering the cost of climate change, home healthcare, whatever it may be. And if the Democrats want to join them, let the American people see what’s happening. “Then we can pick up the pieces and pass legislation.” Some Democrats advocate splitting Build Back Better into separate bills, in order to pass what they can. Sanders conceded that most such legislation will not pass, given Republican obstruction and the machinations of Manchin and Sinema. Bringing bills to the floor, he conceded, would really be about electoral politics ahead of midterms this year in which Republicans expect to take back the House and possibly the Senate, and the presidential contest in two years’ time. “Once we know where people are at,” he said, “then we can say, ‘All right, look, we have 50 votes here, we have just one vote here, 49 votes here. “But what has bothered me very much is Republicans are laughing all the way to election day. They have not had to cast one bloody vote, or two, which shows us where they’re at. And we’ve got to change.”A familiar figure on the concert platform and a prolific broadcaster for the BBC, the tenor John Mitchinson has died at the age of 89. Many of his broadcast performances were of relatively obscure works, leading him to quip: “I think I’ve got the biggest repertoire of useless roles of anybody in the world!” The 38 BBC Proms appearances he made between 1959 and 1964 reflected this versatility. The first two came in Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony and Missa Solemnis, both under Malcolm Sargent (1959, 1960) and he returned to perform the Ninth Symphony on six further occasions. In the earlier years came works by Handel (Samson, Israel in Egypt) and Purcell. He took part in the Proms premieres of Mahler’s Eighth Symphony under Charles Groves (1964) and of Berlioz’s Béatrice et Bénédict under Colin Davis (1969). Other notable appearances were in Mahler’s Das Lied von der Erde (three times), Janáček’s Glagolitic Mass, and in the title roles of Liszt’s oratorio Christus and Stravinsky’s Oedipus Rex. His operatic debut came in 1959 with the Handel Opera Society, as Jupiter in that composer’s Semele, and he went on to sing Oedipus, Mozart’s Idomeneus, Smetana’s Dalibor and Svatopluk Cech (Janáček’s The Excursions of Mr Brouček). Initially he was much better known as a concert artist, and when he was invited to sing Tristan in the Welsh National Opera Tristan und Isolde under Reginald Goodall (1979), it was only his seventh major opera. Between 1978 and 1982 he sang several other key roles with WNO, including Florestan (Fidelio), Aegisthus (in Strauss’s Elektra), Peter Grimes, Manolios (Martinů’s The Greek Passion) and Filka Morozov (Janáček’s From the House of the Dead). In the last of these, according to the critic of Opera magazine, he fashioned an “impersonation of barely suppressed violence that frightened the audience as much as it did his fellow prisoners”. Probably the chief reason he did not do more operatic work lay in the perception that he lacked the requisite stage persona, his acting ability remaining largely undeveloped. He was born in Blackrod, Manchester. His father was a train builder for British Rail in nearby Horwich, his mother a confectioner. At the Royal Manchester College of Music (now the Royal Northern College of Music) he studied under Frederic Cox and Heddle Nash; later studies were with Boriska Gereb. In 1953, while still a student, he joined the BBC Northern Singers, becoming one of its founder members. He worked briefly for Barclays Bank, but could not leave soon enough to enter the world of music. The bank manager bore no grudge and indeed followed Mitchinson’s career with interest. When he invited him to give a recital for an internal Barclays function, Mitchinson opened the event with Roger Quilter’s Fair House of Joy, with its first line “Fain would I change that note”. One of Mitchinson’s first professional engagements was in a Chelsea Opera Group concert performance of Don Giovanni, and he also featured in Eric Robinson’s television series Music for You. He soon established himself on the concert circuit and eventually performed all over the world under such conductors as Giulini, Horenstein, Klemperer, Ozawa, Mehta and Masur. In Britain, radio listeners heard him in often relatively unfamiliar repertoire: Busoni’s Doktor Faust, Prokofiev’s Fiery Angel, Peter Cornelius’s Der Barbier von Bagdad, Strauss’s Friedenstag and two early operas by Wagner: Die Feen and Rienzi. The last of these, a landmark project masterminded and conducted by Edward Downes in 1976, presented the most complete form of the opera heard in modern times. The Tristan und Isolde for WNO three years later was another significant undertaking for Mitchinson and one of his greatest achievements. Mitchinson had worked with Goodall once before, in 1969, when he had taken the part of Siegmund in a BBC broadcast of Die Walküre. He had never sung Tristan previously and indeed had not performed much opera at all. Alongside the young Linda Esther Gray, cast on Goodall’s insistence as Isolde, he learned the part under the conductor’s tutelage, phrase by phrase, familiarising himself with every detail of the music in conjunction with the text. The working relationship was a good one and he proved to be a persuasive Tristan, refining his interpretation over the course of 18 months, during which he sang 16 performances. As can be witnessed in the Decca recording, made in late 1980 and early 1981, by which time his command of both text and music had matured considerably, he was able to combine a heroic tone and seamless legato with acute sensitivity to the text. Another major role was his Peter Grimes for WNO (1978), to which he brought his signature phrasing, consistently musical in its deployment, as well as a delivery both virile and varied in tone colour. John Copley’s production cleverly disguised Mitchinson’s notoriously untheatrical stage persona by giving him plentiful props to hold and bits of scenery to clutch. Other notable operatic appearances included his impressive singing of the title role in the ENO Oedipus Rex (1972) and his Idomeneus in the ENO Idomeneo (1976), both under Charles Mackerras. He also scored a success in the comic role of Ménélas, King of Sparta, in Scottish Opera’s La Belle Hélène (1995), playing the cuckold with a delightful air of befuddled innocence. Further concert works included Waldemar in Schoenberg’s Gurrelieder, the Verdi Requiem and British music including Vaughan Williams’ On Wenlock Edge and Elgar’s Dream of Gerontius. He sang his last Gerontius with the Philomusica in Tewkesbury Abbey in 2006. Mahler’s Das Lied von der Erde he recorded three times, and the Symphony No 8 twice. Other recordings included the Glagolitic Mass, twice, The Dream of Gerontius, Berlioz’s Lélio, Stravinsky’s Les Noces and Renard, and William Alwyn’s Miss Julie. After teaching at the RNCM (1987-92), he was head of vocal studies at what is now the Royal Welsh College of Music and Drama until his retirement in 1997. Known for his generosity and sense of humour, he was much loved by his colleagues and students. Despite his celebrity, he remained modest about his achievements. “We’re all entertainers, really”, he maintained: “no better and no worse than the performing dog at the circus.” His wife, the mezzo-soprano Maureen Guy, whom he married in 1958, died in 2015. They are survived by their two sons, David and Mark. • John Leslie Mitchinson, born 31 March 1932; died 17 December 2021Millions of patients are currently on tenterhooks, often in agony, hoping the NHS will find time to treat them. In my local hospital trust alone, there are 100,000 people stuck in this limbo, with 8,000 of them waiting for more than a year to date. The backlog for operations has reached an all-time high, with Covid making an already difficult situation impossible. Those patients expecting surgery may be shocked by how the current system could encourage those who treat them to see pound signs rather than patients. During the pandemic, the government has poured funding into private healthcare firms, nominally to relieve pressure on overstretched NHS hospitals. The kind of spending that was once deployed for cataracts and hip operations is now being used routinely to deliver cancer and cardiology care. Nobody objects to every effort being made to cut waiting lists: but that has not happened, and costs have also rocketed. During the Covid crisis, private companies have pocketed millions in furlough payments while billing the NHS for services that we now know weren’t fully used. This is not just a consequence of trying to respond to a virus; it may also be symptomatic of an inbuilt potential conflict of interest that has seeped into commissioning. Throughout the history of the health service, many NHS consultants have worn two hats, using private practice to top up their public salaries. As the NHS increasingly relies on capacity bought in from the private sector, many consultants have direct shares – and so a financial interest – in joint venture companies. Research by the Centre for Health and the Public Interest shows £36m of taxpayers’ money has been spent by London NHS trusts on cancer services alone with just one of these companies, HCA Healthcare. At the same time, 120 NHS doctors who work for these same trusts are engaged in joint ventures with HCA. Their accounts show that over the last six years, £249m in dividends have been generated as a result, of which £26m went to mainly NHS doctors. HCA is not the only company forming such joint ventures, with hundreds more consultants involved. Patients need to have confidence that if they are referred to a private provider, it is in their interests, not their consultant’s. So, too, that any delay does not reflect the cost of treatment. A constituent who was booked in for urgent NHS cancer surgery at a hospital run by a major healthcare firm just before Christmas had the surgery cancelled at the last minute. They were told that this was because the facilities were needed for private – and so likely more lucrative – patients. This incident, and the pressures behind it, should concern anyone who understands that the NHS will only thrive if it is medical urgency, and not money, that drives decisions. Ministers may argue that more than 300,000 people left waiting more than a year for surgery is a side-effect of the pandemic, but lists have been creeping up for years. Rather than invest in NHS capacity, recent years have seen a conscious decision to divert funding to profit-making private healthcare companies. Without more scrutiny, this could see healthcare outcomes shaped not by need but whether you have the money to jump the queue, with taxpayers and patients alike paying the price. Stella Creasy is the Labour MP for WalthamstowMichael Gove has threatened a UK trading ban on manufacturers of combustible cladding and insulation unless they pay to fix dangerous housing. Opening a new front in the government’s attempt to force the construction industry to fix billions of pounds’ worth of fire safety defects, the secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities has given the companies a March deadline to agree a settlement. In a letter to the industry, Gove highlighted more than £700m in profits made over the last four years by the three firms most closely associated with the Grenfell disaster – likely to mean Arconic, Celotex and Kingspan, which made the combustible cladding panels and insulation foam on Grenfell Tower, where a fire in June 2017 killed 72 people. He described as “extremely alarming” evidence revealed by the Grenfell Tower public inquiry about how firms manufactured, tested and marketed their combustible materials. Gove told the Construction Products Association in a letter: “The total contribution from the cladding and insulation sector must represent a significant portion of the total remediation costs, caused by the dangerous products sold by some of your members. “I am offering a window of opportunity, between now and March, for the sector to work with my department through open and transparent negotiations to agree a settlement that will restore confidence and secure an appropriate contribution from the sector.” If they failed to pay up, he said, he would consider “using our regulatory framework to limit any culpable company from operating and selling products in this country in the future”. He added: “I will pursue those individuals and firms liable for building defects who are unwilling to do the right thing now. There is no future for those companies and directors who are not fully committed to upholding the safety of residents and fixing past wrongs.” The inquiry has heard that a senior executive at Arconic, which made Grenfell’s combustible polyethylene-filled (PE) cladding panels, warned colleagues in 2016: “We really need to stop proposing PE in architecture! We are in the ‘know’.” When Kingspan, which made some of the combustible insulation, tested its foam insulation in 2007, the rig became “a raging inferno”. Celotex, which made most of the insulation, knew in 2013 that “in the event of a fire [its insulation] would burn”, the inquiry heard. The government has said removing dangerous cladding could cost more than £9bn. This month Gove promised in parliament that the government would give leaseholders statutory protection that extends to all works required to make buildings safe. Gove’s move came after he met housebuilders last week to demand they also pay up. He was met with a counter-demand that the government also target materials companies. Leaseholders affected by the cladding crisis welcomed the latest steps. UK Cladding Action Group, which represents thousands of people whose homes have been rendered worthless and are facing bills as high as £200,000 a household, said: “These firms have deep pockets and will fight tooth and nail to remain unaccountable for their failings. We support the minister as he works to protect innocent leaseholders from the failings of others.” Arconic declined to comment. It has previously said the principal cause of the Grenfell tragedy was “failure by those responsible for the refurbishment of the tower”. Kingspan and Celotex have been contacted for comment. Kingspan has previously said it “welcomes the plans for industry dialogue and the helpful clarity that should bring for all stakeholders”. Celotex has previously admitted to “unacceptable conduct on the part of a number of former employees”.US authorities are confident most states will soon reach and pass a peak in coronavirus Omicron variant cases, even as hospitals struggle to cope with the current surge, Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser said on Sunday. “I think [we’re] as confident as you can be,” Anthony Fauci told ABC’s This Week. “You never want to be overconfident when you’re dealing with this virus, because it has certainly surprised us in the past. “But, if you look at the patterns that we have seen in South Africa, in the UK and in Israel, and in the [US] north-east and New England and upper midwest states, they have peaked and started to come down rather sharply. “There are still some southern states and western states that continue to go up but if the pattern follows the trend that we’re seeing in other places … I believe that you will start to see a turnaround throughout the entire country.” Fauci also predicted “a bit more pain and suffering with hospitalisations in those areas of the country that have not been fully vaccinated or have not gotten boosters”. But, he said, “we do know – and these are the recent data that have come out – that even with Omicron, boosting makes a major, major difference in protecting you from hospitalisation and severe outcomes. “So things are looking good. We don’t want to get overconfident. But they look like they’re going in the right direction right now.” More than 865,000 people have died in the US during the coronavirus pandemic. Fauci said Omicron “looks like” it is causing less severe disease than other variants, though “it’s by no means exempt from making people sick and putting them into the hospital, particularly those who are not vaccinated”. That relative lack of severity, he said, helped efforts to get Covid under control. “Control means you’re not eliminating it, you’re not eradicating it, but it gets down to such a low level that it’s essentially integrated into the general respiratory infections that we have learned to live with. “I mean, we would like them not to be present, but they’re there. But they don’t disrupt society. They don’t create a fear of severe outcomes that are broad. You will always get some severe outcomes with respiratory infections. Even in a good pre-Covid era, you have always had that. We’d like it to get down to that level where it doesn’t disrupt us, in the sense of getting back to a degree of normality. “That’s the best-case scenario. We have got to be prepared for the worst-case scenario. I’m not saying it’s going to happen, but we have to be prepared, which is, I think, that we get yet again another variant that has characteristics that would be problematic, like a high degree of transmissibility or a high degree of virulence.” According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 75.5% of eligible Americans have received at least one vaccination dose and 63.3% are considered fully vaccinated. However, only 39.7% (or 53.2% of those eligible) have had booster shots. Further boosters could be recommended, Fauci said, once it is known how long a third shot of an mRNA vaccine or a second of the single-shot Johnson&amp;Johnson vaccine will last. “Certainly you are going to see the antibody levels go down,” he said. “That’s natural, but … it is quite conceivable, and I hope it’s true, that the third-shot boost will give a much greater durability of protection. We’re following that very carefully. “And when I say protection, I mean protection against severe disease. You are going to see breakthrough infections as we’ve seen now, even in boosted people, but for the very most part, they’re mild or even asymptomatic.” Fauci also said supplies of Covid tests still had to be improved. The Omicron surge has coincided with problems which the Biden administration is attempting to solve, including by offering free at-home tests. Fauci was asked if it was safe to send children to school without a mask, in states where mandates are being removed, often due to political pressures. “We want to get the children back to school,” he said. “And the way you do that, you … surround the children with people who are vaccinated. For the children who are eligible to be vaccinated, get them vaccinated, and provide masks … as well as ventilation to make sure that you can get a respiratory infection at its lowest level of infectivity. “All of those things go together and masking is a part of that.”Re bee bricks (Brighton bee bricks initiative may do more harm than good, say scientists, 18 January), here in the Vale of Belvoir there is a tradition of building garden walls from mud, topped with slates to deflect the rain. They are highly attractive to numerous solitary bees, who excavate their tiny nests in the soft clay. Such mud walls would be an even better wildlife resource than bee bricks, to be specified in future developments. There would be no need to burn gas to fire conventional bricks. Robert Hartley Newark, Nottinghamshire • Dr Jonathan Punt hopes for a revival of Brecht’s The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui (Letters, 21 January). The Donmar Warehouse in London had a timely production in 2017 – soon after Brexit and Trump – starring Lenny Henry. Maybe it could revive that. Derrick Cameron Stoke-on-Trent • A mother telephoned the director of a French art school where I taught, complaining that her son, who’d barely scraped through into the second year, had been examined by colleagues after a too-fine lunch (Letters, 21 January). “Madame, had they been sober he would not have passed at all.” Brian Smith Berlin, Germany • My Frida Kahlo bikers’ mask (Letters, 21 January) and heavy black eye makeup nicely covered up enough to gain entry to Chintz’s bar in Falmouth to party with the youngsters at a ska gig on Friday. Marvellous! Gill Garratt (age 70) Falmouth, Cornwall • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The powerful exposé by George Monbiot (Dumped fishing gear is killing marine life. Yet no governments seems to care, 19 January) highlights the exploitation of a natural resource. There are solutions, and wouldn’t it be good if the UK used its leadership of the Global Ocean Alliance of 71 member countries to drive all governments and international criminal courts to recognise the dumping of fishing gear for economic gain as an environmental crime (ecocide); sanction exploiting nations and industries; and implement charges for the use of oceans beyond exclusive economic zones, as recommended in the 2021 Dasgupta review. The funding of pollution prevention, fishing net recovery programmes and ecosystem protection would introduce additional costs to the price of ocean products – but those are the real costs of exploitation. While seals and dolphins, whales and turtles are strangled by plastic fishing gear, we can be sure that neither the nets nor the deaths are going to go away without international action. Carol Temple-Pediani Blandford, Dorset • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Your editorial on water pollution (18 January) is right to emphasise the need for a conversation about the water industry’s regulatory framework. Water companies recognise the urgent necessity of ending harm from overflows and improving the health of our rivers. Our recent 21st Century Rivers report calls on the government, regulators, water companies, agriculture and other sectors to work together to deliver a comprehensive national plan to bring about the transformation in our rivers that we all want to see. The radical improvement in England’s coastal bathing waters in recent decades, with 99% passing water quality tests and more than 70% classed as “excellent”, shows what can be achieved by working together. Water companies have invested more than £160bn into an industry that was previously starved of cash and want to invest more. That’s why we’re working with the government and Ofwat to facilitate greater collaboration and investment to ensure we don’t waste this critical decade. Christine McGourty Chief executive, Water UK • The news that antimicrobial resistance is a leading cause of death worldwide is another warning sign about current, and future, health crises (Antimicrobial resistance now a leading cause of death worldwide, study finds, 20 January). Antimicrobial resistance is a silent killer of millions across the globe, but the double tragedy is that many people could be saved by the basics of clean water, sanitation and good hygiene, which are critical to prevent and control the spread of drug-resistant infections. Governments must take urgent action against this often-overlooked emergency and invest in the basics in the poorest countries – especially in healthcare centres – to stop the spread of preventable infections in the first place. Covid-19 and Ebola have been stark warnings. The failure to learn and to act on them will make pandemics the new norm, and will effectively sign the death warrant of millions of men, women and children for generations to come. Claire Seaward Global campaigns director, WaterAid • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Yes, protest can feel futile, but what other vehicles do we have to articulate our frustrations at those who lead us (I’ve been protesting all my life. It can feel futile, yet doing nothing is much worse, 21 January)? It takes effort to protest so it must be important to us. The targets of protest tend to be issues that are big, with long-term implications, and where the public know that short-term political decision-making will be wrong. Protests also keep issues in the media – which is vital. Peter Riddle (Letters, 20 January) noted that the “partygate” pantomime steals the headlines and distracts from what is happening elsewhere in government. Earlier this month, the environment audit committee issued a damning report on the quality of our rivers and the performance of the Environment Agency, but it was lost in the brouhaha of partygate. Protection of our rivers is a significant, long-term issue, so at the weekend, I was at Port Meadow in Oxford, protesting against the lack of investment by Thames Water in wastewater treatment and the pathetic response by the Environment Agency to a quadrupling of raw sewage discharges in the upper Thames. Bill Kingdom Oxford • In mentioning the few protests that have prevented illiberal laws being passed in this country, Polly Toynbee forgets an important one, in which the Guardian itself played a role. On 3 January 2011, 3,000 people of the Forest of Dean marched in blizzard conditions to protest about the Tory government’s bill to sell off into private hands all of our publicly owned forests. The march, at which Jonathon Porritt, Lady Royall of Blaisdon and the bishop of Gloucester spoke passionately against the bill, and which featured the burning of a large effigy of the Houses of Parliament, was reported on in the Guardian. This was then taken up by all the other media, causing thousands of constituents – many of them Tory voters – to berate their MPs. Although the local Tory MP Mark Harper did his best to promote and defend the bill, popular opinion forced the then prime minister, David Cameron, into a U-turn and it was dropped. The group that organised that march, Hands off our Forest, still exists as a watchful eye on subsequent subtler attempts to carve up this valuable real estate for the government’s cronies and donors. Tragically, their right to protest in future could be severely curtailed by the proposed police and crime bill that the lords are doing their best to amend. John French Chepstow, Monmouthshire • Polly Toynbee is right that the so-called libertarians of the right are only interested in one freedom – to spend their money as they like – and they can’t be trusted to defend our communal and collective rights to freedom of expression and protest. Rights atrophy if they aren’t exercised and the right to protest protects us from politicians who see no further than parliamentary politics as the art of the possible. Street politics is the art of making things possible, from keeping our brave boys out of Vietnam to ridding us of the poll tax. They are among the freedoms that cement our social cohesion and community spirit, especially at crisis times like these. It is thus deeply dispiriting to hear absolutely nothing from the opposition on the appalling bill targeting the right to protest. Mary Pimm and Nik Wood London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Fears are growing that action by the US central bank to combat high inflation will trigger a fresh debt crisis, as it emerged poor-country repayments to creditors are already running at their highest level in two decades. The Jubilee Debt Campaign said debt payments by developing countries had more than doubled since 2010 and were likely to increase further if, as expected, the Federal Reserve pushed up interest rates. Urging deeper debt relief, the JDC said payments to creditors already accounted for 14.3% of poor-country government revenue in 2021, up from 6.8% in 2010 and the highest level since 2001. Many poor countries have borrowed in US dollars, exposing them to the dual risk of higher borrowing costs and a weakening of their currencies against the greenback. The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund have called for more comprehensive relief. Of the external debt payments by low- and lower middle-income governments, 47% are to private lenders, 27% to multilateral institutions such as the Bank and the IMF, 12% to China and 14% to governments other than China. Heidi Chow, the executive director of Jubilee Debt Campaign, said: “The debt crisis has already stripped countries of the resources needed to tackle the climate emergency and the continued disruption from Covid, while rising interest rates threaten to sink countries in even more debt.” The campaign group’s latest analysis found 54 countries were in debt crisis, defined as a situation where payments undermined the ability of a government to protect the basic economic and social rights of its citizens. Kenya and Malawi were among the countries that had been added to the list of countries in crisis, it added. “G20 leaders cannot keep burying their heads in the sand and wish the debt crisis away,” Chow said. “We urgently need a comprehensive debt cancellation scheme which compels private lenders to take part in debt relief.” The G20 created a new debt relief scheme at the end of 2020, called the Common Framework, which required countries to negotiate terms with bilateral sovereign creditors and the IMF and then secure the same deal with private creditors. So far, none of the countries that have applied for the Common Framework have had any debt cancelled.Afghanistan can only be saved from state collapse and widespread starvation if the definition of legitimate humanitarian aid to the country is broadened, some of Britain’s most senior former security and diplomatic chiefs have said. The group, including two former national security advisers, a former chief of defence staff and a former ambassador to Afghanistan, write in a letter published in the Guardian that the aid that can be sent to the Taliban-controlled country without fear of sanctions is too restricted. Afghanistan’s humanitarian situation has deteriorated drastically since last August when the Taliban stormed back to power 20 years after being toppled. International aid came to a sudden halt after their takeover, worsening the plight of millions of people who were already suffering from hunger after several severe droughts. Taliban leaders flew to Oslo on Saturday to participate in talks with Afghan civil society representatives and western powers on human rights and sanctions. The British former officials also call for an international conference to raise funds for the country and say Afghanistan is heading towards famine, not previously seen in 40 years of conflict. The group say a distinction needs to be drawn between money that can still be withheld to try to leverage political concessions from the Taliban, such as large-scale infrastructure projects, and money to enable government institutions to deliver basic human services and to keep the economy from collapsing. Aid exclusively channelled through the humanitarian system “cannot replace institutional service delivery to 40 million people”, the letter says. It adds: “Humanitarian agencies are ready and able to pay medical staff, teachers and other civil servants delivering public services. But they need the money to do so – far more than has yet been delivered. And they need a clear political mandate from donors, not least the US. Projects must be scrutinised and adjusted to ensure no direct benefit accrues to the Taliban.” The letters’ authors insist they are not seeking to give succour to the Taliban, but they warn economic collapse would cause widespread death and suffering and that this would not be in the interests of western security. A UN security council resolution passed on 23 December tried to give aid agencies greater leeway to deliver aid without fear of sanctions, but the resolution has not yet lifted the cloud of uncertainty preventing agencies and banks from sending aid to Afghanistan. The Norwegian government said the three days of talks it was hosting in Oslo did not amount to de facto recognition of the Taliban or a pullback from demands that the Taliban give Afghan women the right to work and be educated. “These meetings do not represent a legitimisation or recognition of the Taliban,” said the Norwegian foreign minister, Anniken Huitfeldt. “But we must talk to the de facto authorities in the country. We cannot allow the political situation to lead to an even worse humanitarian disaster. “In order to be able to help the civilian population in Afghanistan, it is essential that both the international community and Afghans from various parts of society engage in dialogue with the Taliban. We will be clear about our expectations of the Taliban, particularly as regards girls’ education and human rights, such as women’s right to participate in society.” The Taliban will meet officials from western powers and also exiled female Afghan leaders, journalists, and individuals working to safeguard human rights and address humanitarian, economic, social and political issues. “Every step taken toward the Taliban is a step taken against the people of Afghanistan,” Huitfeldt said, noting that the last time EU officials met the Taliban in Kabul, the houses of women who participated in protests were raided and activists were arrested. Nargis Nehan, an Afghan former minister for mines, petrol and industries who now lives in Norway, said she had declined an invitation to take part. She told Agence France-Presse she feared the talks would “normalise the Taliban and … strengthen them, while there is no way that they’ll change”. She asked: “What guarantee is there this time that they will keep their promises?”Recovery from ill-health and injury is underrated. In the UK, and many other parts of the world, getting back to work as quickly as possible after sickness is what the neoliberal culture tells everyone to do (and workers indeed may have little choice in the matter in the world of the gig economy and zero-hours contracts). There is little societal value placed on convalescence – itself a tellingly old-fashioned word. Despite the efforts of the medical profession, there are occasions when patients, once their immediate problems have been patched up, feel themselves set loose to recover as best they can on their own. Most of us know how difficult this process can be – even the recovery from trivial complaints can be a trial, let alone that from serious disorders. Sometimes, indeed, a full recovery may not be possible, and the goal may be to regain a measure of dignity and autonomy while living with pain or disease. The large number of people suffering from long Covid is now forcing societies to try to understand, and have compassion for, recoveries that are especially long and fraught, with no clear outcomes. Recovery is not only a physiological matter but, like disease and illness, is shaped by culture and ideas and expectations of the body, as Gavin Francis points out in his new book, Recovery: The Lost Art of Convalescence. It is also a matter for the mind. “We fall ill in ways that are profoundly influenced by our past experiences and expectations, and the same can be said of our paths to recovery,” adds Dr Francis, who works as a GP in Edinburgh. As a society, we are not, he argues, giving recuperation proper consideration: it is something that requires space and active attention to be fully effective. “I often remind patients that it’s worth giving adequate time, energy and respect to the process of healing,” he writes. As for individuals, so with the nation. England’s Covid-19 restrictions will be over at the end of March, and there is a faint glimmer of hope that the end of the acute phase of the pandemic could be in sight. But the UK’s recovery will take much, much longer. Even as the dangers of the Omicron variant are on the wane, the country is teetering on the brink of a cost-of-living crisis and is in the midst of others. And that is just the start. There can be no notion of the country simply snapping back to full health. There are psychological wounds – borne heavily by the very young and the very old – that run deep and will take time to heal, and indeed, may have far-reaching and unpredictable consequences. There will be economic, cultural – and, yes, political – recoveries to attend to. The nation may one day be nursed back to health. This sort of long-term recovery will require not just hope and a prayer, but care and a communitarian spirit. “Give time, space and respect to convalescence if you can,” writes Dr Francis. “It’s an act that we need to engage in, giving of ourselves; a work of effort and endurance, and to a certain extent, of grace.”If a British minister knowingly misleads parliament, they are expected to resign as a constitutional convention. Should a minister refuse, then they could legally carry on in office, but it would be unconstitutional. Boris Johnson seems not to care. Last week, he brazenly refused to accept that the political principle should apply to him. What are the consequences of lying to lawmakers? The answer could be nothing much. That highlights a far bigger problem. Britain is governed by a political – rather than a legal – constitution that relies heavily on conventions, and leaders with a sense of decency, to work. The dishonest and deceitful Mr Johnson is uniquely unsuited for the top job. A fish, it is said, rots from the head down. With claims of blackmail, bullying and racism, it seems so too does a political party. The British constitution is said to be unwritten. This is only partly true. Written acts of parliament do regulate executive power. The European Communities Act 1972 took the UK into the EU’s predecessor (the European Economic Community) and allowed judges to disapply legislation in conflict with European law. However, parliament remained ultimately sovereign in the sense that it did, under Mr Johnson, repeal the act in leaving the EU. The despot who deems themselves to be above the law was supposed to be done away with by a constitutional monarchy. But Mr Johnson shows the need to be protected from our elected representatives as much as our former royal rulers. In Britain this danger is heightened by the power of a Commons majority, what Lord Hailsham described in 1976 as an “elective dictatorship”. His answer was more democracy, not less. The peer’s proposals for a federal Britain and an elected second chamber have much to commend them today. The Human Rights Act, currently menaced by Mr Johnson’s proposals to hollow it out, fulfils Lord Hailsham’s call for a bill of rights. Ultimately, the former Tory lord chancellor believed only a written constitution could balance parliamentary power. Britain could muddle into a new constitution, undergirded by the rule of law. There would be no requirement for a separate constitutional court that could strike down primary legislation. But judges could act if the rule of law was threatened – as they did when Mr Johnson illegally attempted to prorogue parliament. Similarly, the courts would step in if a prime minister tried to legislate for a longer parliament than five years to hold on to power or rig elections by restricting the franchise. The rule of law could be entrenched such that only a supermajority in parliament could repeal it. Such a piecemeal approach might be how a new constitution emerges. The “partygate” scandal highlights that Mr Johnson won’t concede that the executive is subject to the law and equal to its citizens before it. The prime minister has little respect for the civil service, local government or parliament. He may, shamelessly, make a faux contrite apology this week in the wake of a report by the Cabinet Office’s Sue Gray into illegal Downing Street parties. As arbiter of the ministerial code, the prime minister decides his own fate. The betting is he won’t sack himself. There are few ways – bar a vote of no confidence – to get rid of a bad prime minister. There is no law against cabinet knavery. Maybe there should be. Mr Johnson once thought impeachment, last used in 1806, was a doomsday weapon against a prime minister. He tried to impeach Tony Blair over the Iraq war. Perhaps MPs should be able to hold a consequential Commons vote on the conduct of the prime minister, as one of Lord Hailsham’s Labour successors, Lord Falconer, suggests in a new book, for offending the constitutional principle of the rule of law. If such a test had existed, Mr Johnson would have failed it long ago – and the country would have been much better off.My friend Ros Newman, who has died aged 82, was a sculptor who created human, animal and bird forms – mainly in steel – that were initially for domestic display and later for large public works. Wearing goggles and leather gloves, and with sparks flying everywhere, she created works that were, in her own words, “conceived to deceive the eye into seeing much more than there is”. Among her most prominent pieces was her stainless steel Flight of Birds at the Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, rising from and reflecting the waters of a carp pond and providing an oasis of calm for patients, staff and visitors. Ros was born in Highgate, north London, to Ensor Holiday, a scientist, and Betty (nee Rothenstein), an artist. Her maternal grandfather, Sir William Rothenstein, and her uncles, Sir John Rothenstein and Michael Rothenstein, were all artists or art historians. After leaving school at 16, Ros attended Chelsea School of Art in London, working in various disciplines. But it was later, studying at Hammersmith College of Art, that she discovered oxyacetylene welding and developed a technique for creating steel sculptures. “Steel found me and I embraced her with all my passion,” she said. Ros’s first solo exhibition, in London in 1971, at the Alwin gallery, with whom she would have a long association, was so successful that shortly afterwards she bought a barn at Stibbard, Norfolk, converting it into a home and studio. In Stibbard, the local Women’s Institute commissioned a village sign to celebrate its golden jubilee in 1976, and Ros created a piece called The Ploughman, a homage to the area’s rural heritage, which featured a real plough steered by a ploughman made of scrap horseshoes, pitchforks and other agricultural tools and machinery. Later she moved to Norwich, where she taught evening classes and created props for Anglia Television’s Tales of the Unexpected. Ros’s smaller sculptures used mild steel but she turned to stainless steel for larger public works. Flight of Birds was followed by a similar piece for Pensthorpe Natural Park near Fakenham, sometime home of the BBC’s Springwatch programmes, and her Seagulls adorn St George’s Park in Great Yarmouth. She exhibited throughout the UK and also in Taiwan, where she lived for four years in the early 1990s. In 2019 she closed her Norwich studio, passing the torch and other equipment to fellow sculptor Rachael Long. Her lifetime’s work was celebrated with an exhibition, Woman of Steel, at the Fairhurst Gallery in Norwich. Ros was married three times: to Pepe Cavilla and Barry Dawson, from both of whom she was divorced, and to Chris Wade, who died in 2017. She is survived by her daughter, Delphi, from a relationship in the early 1960s with the musician Del Newman (whose surname she adopted), and a granddaughter, Cece.Nearly half of those who became ill with Covid in the first wave of infections may have long-term and even permanent changes to their sense of smell, according to preliminary research from Sweden. A sudden loss of smell, or an impaired or distorted perception of odours, emerged as an unusual symptom of Covid early on in the pandemic. While many people swiftly recovered, others found that their sense of smell never quite returned to normal. To find out how common the impairments might be, scientists at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm ran comprehensive tests on 100 individuals who caught Covid in the first wave of infections that swept through Sweden in spring 2020. Their early findings show that 18 months after recovering from Covid, very few people – only 4% – had lost their sense of smell entirely, but a third had a reduced ability to detect odours, and nearly half complained of parosmia, where the sense of smell is distorted. Most of those with a reduced sense of smell were unaware of it before they joined the study. The scientists then ran the same tests on a control group of people who tested negative for Covid antibodies, indicating that they had managed to avoid the virus. About a fifth were found to have similar deficiencies in their sense of smell, implying that smell disorders were common in the general population before Covid struck. Writing in a preprint that has not yet been peer reviewed, the scientists conclude that 65% of those who recovered from Covid displayed either a loss of smell, a reduced sense of smell, or distortions to the sense 18 months after the infection, compared with 20% of those who had not caught the virus. “Given the amount of time since [the] initial insult to the olfactory system, it is likely that these olfactory problems are permanent,” they wrote. The volunteers recruited for the study were healthcare workers who were regularly tested for Covid from the start of the epidemic in Sweden. Because the study focused on people who caught Covid in the first wave, none of the volunteers had been vaccinated at the time. For the same reason, their infections were caused by older versions of the virus, not the Omicron variant that is now spreading rapidly around the world. Analysis by the UK Health Security Agency suggests that a loss of smell or taste is less than half as common with Omicron than the Delta variant, but Dr Johan Lundström, who led the research at the Karolinska Institute, said there was no reliable data demonstrating that Omicron was less dangerous to the olfactory system. A minor loss of smell, or noticing that certain odours smell weird, may not be life changing for many, but Lundström said a severe loss of smell could lead to depression and to people changing their diets, often for the worse, causing them to put on weight. “When you cannot smell, all you can sense is the five basic taste qualities, tactile sensations and spices,” he said. “Unconsciously, people start to add more sugar and fat, or have an increased urge for fried food for the texture, all to get some enjoyment out of eating.” Lundström said the greatest surprise of the study was that nearly half of people who had recovered from Covid reported a distorted sense of smell so long after the infection. “Many of these individuals can get help by doing olfactory training,” he added. “They might not regain 100% of past performance, but most of them will, with training, get back to a point where their reduced sense of smell will not affect their lives.”A livid Patrick Vieira was unsparing in his criticism of the referee, Kevin Friend, and VAR after his Crystal Palace side were beaten 3-1 by Liverpool. Vieira said Friend had been “naive” in awarding a penalty to Diogo Jota late in the game, a decision that he said “took our hope away”. At the time Palace were 2-1 down and pushing hard for an equaliser that would have changed the complexion of the title race. As it is Liverpool are now only nine points behind Manchester City with a game in hand. Vieira was also displeased at Liverpool’s second goal, awarded after Friend adjudged that Roberto Firmino was in an offside position but not interfering with play. But it was the late penalty decision that proved most controversial, with multiple replays appearing to show that Jota had changed the direction of his run in order to engineer contact with the goalkeeper, Vicente Guaita. After consulting the monitor, Friend decided to give the penalty. “I don’t even want to talk about it,” Vieira said after the game, before going on to talk about it at some considerable length. “That was a really poor decision from the referee,” he said. “I looked at it from every angle and I still don’t understand how that can be a penalty. In meetings with the referees they explained to coaches that contact is part of the game, and if there is not obvious contact there is not going to be a penalty. “Here, there was no way Jota – who I believe was really smart, and the referee quite naive – could get the ball back and try to score. That decision took our hope away of getting back into the game and getting a point.” Liverpool’s manager, Jürgen Klopp, claimed not to have watched the incident back. “But I don’t think I have to because we thought it was [a penalty] and the referee did. The Crystal Palace people did not, which I understand. I can’t say anything about it. “It was a big three points for us. The first 35 minutes was some of the best stuff we’d played this season. You could see how good we can be. Someone should have a proper explanation of what happened after. I don’t understand it 100%. In the second half we were not compact. We became sloppy in the last line. All their chances were set up by us, pretty much. We wanted a little break on the pitch, but that was not possible.”It was the kind of individual brilliance which the great Dan Carter might have managed in his all-conquering prime. But Sale Sharks’ loosehead prop Bevan Rodd? When Rodd, who will link up with the England squad in Brighton for a five-day training camp on Monday as they begin preparations for the Six Nations, collected a pass from Ben Curry inside his own half in the 28th minute, a standard carry into contact beckoned. Instead, the 21-year-old displayed remarkable pace to charge over the halfway line, past a clutch of leaden-footed Ospreys defenders, before finding Arron Reed with a brilliant long pass. Reed raced down the left flank to score but Rodd’s role in the winger’s try was unmistakable. “Bevan’s got it all hasn’t he? It’s that kind of play which sets him apart from the other looseheads – it was outstanding,” said Sale’s director of rugby Alex Sanderson of a player who made his England bow in the autumn. The two other Sale players in Jones’ 36-man Six Nations squad – the scrum-half Raffi Quirke and the openside flanker Tom Curry – also made notable contributions, the latter off the bench after replacing the captain Jono Ross in the 50th minute. Significantly, Sanderson suggested that the Red Rose forward, a player considered indispensable to Jones, could feature in Sale’s Premiership home clash against leaders Leicester on Sunday –just six days before England’s Six Nations opener at Murrayfield. Sanderson said: “Tom enjoyed himself today but he’s got a bit more of a shift to put in next week. There is a chance he might be staying back to get some more game-time. That’s between him and Eddie, but I don’t want to give anything away to Leicester. He hasn’t played a lot in the last couple of weeks. If it does happen, that will be the reason.” After a first half of the season where progress has been slow in the Premiership for Sale, Sanderson can now look forward to a place in the last-16 of the Heineken Champions Cup . After this seven-try success, Sanderson said: “This is a stepping stone towards the final in Marseille. Do I think we can get there? Yes I do, on that performance. On form, we have shown we can beat any side in the land.” Sale always had too much quality for an Ospreys side who fell to their fourth straight pool-stage defeat. Yet they lacked precision during the opening 40 minutes and had three tries chalked off as chances were spurned. Nevertheless, the winger Tom Roebuck claimed his first in the 13th minute when he collected AJ MacGinty’s sumptuous crossfield kick to score in the right corner. Reed then applied the coup de grâce to Rodd’s excellent work before the hooker Ewan Ashman dived over shortly after the interval. Sale began to cut loose and Dan du Preez finished off a scintillating move before Curtis Langdon and Jack Metcalf also touched down while Roebuck added his second. Ospreys were outclassed from start to finish but Toby Booth took heart from the try-scoring performance of the debutant Harri Deaves in the back row. The Welsh region lost fellow flanker Sam Cross to a serious knee injury at the end of the first half. Booth, whose side were missing a number of key players, said: “Sam is in a brace and on crutches and had to have gas and air on the pitch, so it looks like a knee ligament injury. Harri Deaves had an impact on the game and that point of difference was encouraging for him and us. But we didn’t do enough well enough for long enough and ultimately the physics took its toll.”Two-thirds of officials working on the UK government’s flagship levelling up policy are based in London, figures show. Two years since Boris Johnson was elected on a promise to improve what he has described as the “outrage” of glaring regional inequalities, 1,929 out of 3,011 civil servants on the levelling up taskforce are based in the capital. The largest group of civil servants based outside London are 129 in Wolverhampton, where there is a second HQ for the government’s levelling up department. After that, the largest groups of mandarins working on the policy are in cities such as Birmingham (118), Bristol (88), Leeds (75), Manchester (62) and Newcastle (62). The figures were revealed in response to a written question from the shadow secretary for levelling up, Lisa Nandy. She described the situation as “frankly insulting”. In a speech on civil service reform in June 2020, the secretary for levelling up, Michael Gove, argued that the government could “literally reduce the distance between government and people by relocating government decision-making centres to different parts of our United Kingdom”. He continued: “Why shouldn’t some of the policymakers intimately involved in reshaping our approach to energy and the decarbonisation of our economy be in Teesside, Humberside and Aberdeen? Shouldn’t those thinking about this sector be part of the communities whose jobs depend on getting these decisions right?” Nandy said: “We’ve had quite enough of ministers and civil servants sitting in Whitehall picking winners and losers in our nations and regions. For the department supposed to set this right to adopt the same arrogant approach is frankly insulting.” Although expected in early February, the long-awaited white paper on levelling up has been delayed several times and there is still no fixed date for publication. The latest launch was shelved until after Sue Gray concludes her report on alleged Downing Street parties. Gove has clashed with the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, over whether any new funding should be released. The white paper is understood to include several “missions” on broad topics such as life expectancy and obesity, and ensuring every child has access to a good school. It is also expected to make new proposals for devolution, including extending the mayoral model. The housing minister Eddie Hughes said: “In March 2020, 23% of the department’s workforce was outside of London; we now have 32% of our workforce outside of London.”Five teenagers have been arrested on suspicion of murder after a 16-year-old boy was fatally stabbed in Trafford. Greater Manchester police (GMP) named the victim as Kennie Carter and said officers were piecing together the circumstances leading to the “callous attack”. Officers said four boys aged between 15 and 17 were arrested overnight after officers attended reports of a teenager with stab wounds on Thirlmere Avenue in Stretford at about 7pm on Saturday. A fifth turned himself in at a police station and was also arrested on suspicion of murder. Paramedics treated the boy at the scene before he was taken to hospital where he died of his injuries. GMP said three arrest warrants were executed on Saturday night in Stretford, Old Trafford and Hulme. Several officers were patrolling Thirlmere Avenue on Sunday morning, and a large forensics tent had been set up within a cordon. Supt Caroline Hemingway said on Sunday: “My thoughts – as a police officer and as a mother of a teenage son – go out to Kennie’s loved ones, who will receive as much support as we can give through our specially trained officers. “Again, we see the utterly devastating consequences of knife crime – it destroys lives, families, and communities. It’s so heartbreaking to see such a young life lost, and such young people suspected of being capable of a horrendous act of violence. “A family is today grieving the loss of a much-loved young soul. If you know someone carrying a knife, look out for them: think of how their actions could cost someone a life, ruin a poor family’s life, wreck their own life, and wreck the lives of their loved ones.”The unusual Foreign Office revelation on Saturday night that British intelligence had unmasked a plot to install a Russian puppet government in Ukraine was issued alongside a lengthy release from Downing Street in effect claiming Boris Johnson was now at the helm of an anti-Russian alliance. The release said a deeply engaged Johnson was being briefed daily on the crisis, had ramped up the Whitehall response and was willing to engage directly with Vladimir Putin. It also touted his close personal friendship with the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, and the number of calls he had made to world leaders in recent days. The release, promising ministers would be fanning out across Europe and a gear change across Whitehall, sought to give the impression of an animated leader gripping a crisis, some distance from the impression of a broken man unable to shed the travails of Downing Street parties in lockdown. It was confirmed that the defence secretary, Ben Wallace, at Johnson’s instruction, would be travelling to Moscow, and Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, may go to Kyiv and Moscow, following in the footsteps of the new German foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock. Yet the Downing Street release was unusual not just for giving the impression of frenetic activity. For alongside its call for maximum Nato unity and its insistence that the UK was operating in lockstep with the US, Johnson delivered some pointed barbs against the French and the Germans. The No 10 statement was in diplomatic terms most remarkable for making no attempt to disguise his frustration with his European Nato allies. In a clear reference to remarks made by the French president, Emmanuel Macron, the statement said: “The prime minister has been clear to counterparts in recent days that now is not the time in the face of spiralling aggression on the border to start a conversation about Europe’s strategic autonomy or radical changes to the European security architecture.” Macron has recently once again raised the idea of a stronger European defence pillar. No 10 said it would be “frankly naive to assume that Russia could be mollified by changes to the European security architecture – the Kremlin’s behaviour has made that consistently clear”. Sources close to Johnson were described as saying he feared that “some world leaders may not appreciate the deteriorating picture on the Ukrainian border, or fully comprehend the risks posed by a bullying Russia.” No 10 did not name these naive countries but it did take aim at the German coalition government, pointing out that Johnson in a Mansion House speech in November had broken with the previous approach of polite but muted opposition to the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia to Germany, saying it was “a major strategic problem for European security”. Johnson will also have raised eyebrows in European capitals with his announcement that he was setting up calls with G7 leaders to form a sanctions coalition that would hit “Putin-supporting oligarchs”. His announcement came on the day Transparency International released figures showing that the amount of Russian money in London property is higher than previously thought – £1.5bn, as opposed to the previous estimate of £1bn. Efforts are still under way, led by the Liberal Democrat Layla Moran, to set up a public property register in London, but so far the government has dragged its feet on it. Transparency International UK said it had “identified almost 150 land titles ultimately owned by Russian individuals alleged to be involved in corruption or with links to Putin’s regime”. It said: “Of the £1.5bn identified, more than £1bn of this is held by companies based in secrecy havens, the majority of these companies are based in UK crown dependencies and overseas territories like the British Virgin Islands and the Isle of Man. The ownership of these firms has only been revealed due to court cases, document leaks and investigations by journalists.” Few can predict the course of the Ukraine crisis, and no one doubts the huge military and ideological support provided by the UK, but at minimum Johnson has a lot of catching up to do before he is taken seriously as the central player in this conflict in the way that Downing Street projects.Dominic Raab has refused to confirm that the Sue Gray report on alleged Downing Street parties will be published in full, saying the amount of detail released publicly will be a matter for Boris Johnson. The prime minister is braced for a critical week, with many Tory backbenchers reserving judgment on his future until they see Gray’s findings and how Johnson responds. One former frontbencher said: “If he has been found out to have misled or covered up or anything like that, he’ll face a vote of no confidence.” Another senior MP said: “I think most colleagues have largely made their minds up – both ways around. There may be some who want to see the content first to judge if they think they want to defend any of it, but there’s enough out there to have reached a conclusion. But it is right to see the whole picture before taking action.” Several MPs have already called publicly for Johnson to resign, but it would take 54 letters from MPs to Sir Graham Brady, the chair of the 1922 Committee, to trigger a vote of no confidence. In what appeared to be a scaling back of the government’s commitment to openness on the report, Raab, who is the justice secretary and deputy prime minister, promised there would be “full transparency” but declined to give any specifics. Gray, the senior civil servant tasked with investigating claims of lockdown-breaking parties at Downing Street and elsewhere in government, is expected to publish the report in the coming week. She is still to interview Dominic Cummings, Johnson’s former aide who disputes the prime minister’s account that he was not warned an event on 20 May 2020 was against lockdown rules. It is thought she could speak to Cummings on Monday. There have also been reports she has interviewed police officers stationed at Downing Street, with a source telling the Telegraph that their statements were “extremely damning”. Asked whether the public would be able to see Gray’s report in full, Raab told BBC One’s Sunday Morning programme: “Quite the way, the process for it, will be for the prime minister to decide. But … there will be full transparency. He has said he will come back to the Commons and make a statement, so there will be full scrutiny.” Pressed on whether this meant it would be fully published, Raab said: “I’m not quite sure the shape and the form it will come, but the prime minister has been clear there will be full transparency around this, so that people can see. We would welcome that transparency and we need to learn the lessons.” It has been reported that Gray’s investigation has been expanded to consider claims that Johnson and his wife, Carrie, held parties in their flat above 11 Downing Street. According to the Sunday Times, Gray is looking into whether visits to the flat during lockdown by government aides who are close friends with Carrie Johnson were necessary for work. Raab declined to say whether Gray was looking into this, but did agree that Johnson would be expected to resign if he had misled parliament. “The whole point of Sue Gray conducting this investigation is that she can look without fear or favour at whatever she wants to look at, and we avoid trial by media or the soap opera of things coming out without being substantiated,” Raab said when asked about the new claims. “What I would say in relation to any of this is, if it’s significant, it’s important, Sue Gray should look at it.” Pressed on whether Johnson would have to go if he lied to the Commons, he said: “The code of conduct for ministers is very clear, that if you mislead parliament it’s a resigning matter.” Several other cabinet ministers, including the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, have made the same point in recent days. Speaking earlier, the former Labour prime minister Gordon Brown said it seemed unlikely that Johnson’s career would “end in anything other than scandal”. “My fear is that scandal is going to follow Boris Johnson as long as he is prime minister,” Brown told Sky’s Trevor Phillips on Sunday. “We don’t just have the scandal – and all the details will probably come out later this week about partying – we have the conflicts of interest, we have the dubious appointments, we have foreign money and question marks over that: who is paying the bills for what? And I don’t think we are going to see this administration end in anything other than scandal.”Ukraine is reacting “seriously” to UK Foreign Office allegations that Moscow has plans to invade the country and install a puppet government, a senior government adviser has said, adding that Kyiv is resisting Russian efforts to destabilise its government and economy. The extraordinary Foreign Office claims that Moscow may topple the government and install Yevhen Murayev, a former MP who controls a pro-Russia television station, were met with shock and some scepticism in Ukrainian political and media circles on Sunday. The Foreign Office made the allegations as the UK pledged to take a more aggressive posture over Russia’s buildup of more than 100,000 troops and weaponry on the border with Ukraine. Murayev himself denied that he was involved in any plot, telling the Observer he had been banned from entering Russia and was in a conflict with a close ally of Vladimir Putin. “It isn’t very logical,” he said. On Sunday he said he was prepared to defend his “honest name” against the British allegations and he posted a picture on Facebook of himself altered to look like James Bond. But an adviser to the Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s chief of staff said the alleged plot matched Russian efforts to promote discord in Ukraine. Mykhailo Podolyak told Reuters that although there was doubt among Ukrainians as to whether Murayev was “too ridiculous a figure” to be the Kremlin’s pick to lead Ukraine, Russia had propped up previously minor figures in leadership positions in annexed Crimea and separatist-held Donbass, and that therefore “one should take this information as seriously as possible”. In separate comments to Agence-France Presse, Podolyak said: “Our state will continue its policy of dismantling any oligarchic or political structures that could be working to destabilise Ukraine” or aid Russia. The Kremlin had for some time followed a formula of selecting individuals in business or politics and then using those people to “promote Russia’s interests”, Podolyak said, and “this British information clearly follows along in this logical chain”. The Foreign Office has not provided any evidence to support the allegations, which came as Boris Johnson’s domestic political troubles deepened. British sources emphasised on Sunday afternoon that the coup plot warning on Saturday followed a UK intelligence assessment, a different formulation from earlier briefings that had suggested it was based on “US-led intelligence”. The UK allegation came days after the US alleged that Russian intelligence was recruiting current and former Ukrainian government officials to take over the government in Kyiv and cooperate with a Russian occupying force The accusations have increased tensions as discussions rage about how best to deter Vladimir Putin from launching a new invasion of Ukraine. Russian tanks and artillery, military vehicles and fighter aircraft continued to arrive within striking distance of Ukraine’s borders this weekend, and Russian troops have been sighted less than 20 miles from the border. Moscow has announced sweeping naval exercises that will put its ships in close proximity with Nato forces while potentially positioning landing craft for an amphibious assault on Ukraine’s southern coast. British deputy prime minister Dominic Raab told Sky News on Sunday: “There’ll be very serious consequences if Russia takes this move to try and invade but also install a puppet regime.” Before a foreign ministers meeting in Brussels on Monday, a senior European official said the EU would be ready to launch sanctions “within days” if Russian troops launch an invasion. The meeting is partially meant to address divisions in the EU over how to deter Russia, with Germany hesitant to provide lethal arms to Ukraine or target the Russian banking sector. Other states have called for pre-emptive sanctions against Russia in order to show the Kremlin that western countries are resolved to strike back in case of an invasion of Ukraine. But the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, rejected that idea during a television appearance on Sunday, saying it would not work to deter a potential Russian attack. “When it comes to sanctions, the purpose of those sanctions is to deter Russian aggression. And so if they are triggered now, you lose the deterrent effect,” Blinken told CNN’s State of the Union in an interview. Blinken also said he had “no doubts” Germany was maintaining a united front with Nato on the crisis, after its navy chief, Kay-Achim Schönbach, said Putin deserved respect and suggested it was “nonsense” to think Russia was ready to pour troops into Ukraine. Schönbach resigned on Saturday, but his remarks rattled Nato. The Kremlin has denied it is sabre-rattling as it announces snap drills and continues to deploy troops toward Ukraine, waving off the UK’s accusations of a plot to topple the government as “disinformation”. “The disinformation disseminated by the UK foreign ministry is more evidence that it is namely Nato countries led by the Anglo-Saxons who are engaged in the escalation of tensions around Ukraine,” the Russian foreign ministry said on Sunday. Nonetheless, the growing scope of the Russian military exercises amid an urgent European security crisis has worried western observers. The Irish government has decried plans for Russian warships and bombers to conduct missile tests 150 miles off the south-west coast of County Cork next month. And Russia’s northern fleet is preparing to hold military drills this week in an area that overlaps with Norway’s exclusive economic zone, the Barents Observer news website reported. A spokesperson for the Norwegian joint headquarters told the outlet that Norway would monitor the drills but that Russia had the right to hold exercises in international waters.Boris Johnson is facing calls to launch an independent inquiry into Islamophobia in the Tory party after the former minister Nusrat Ghani claimed she was told her “Muslimness” was “making colleagues uncomfortable”. The prime minister was dragged into the controversy this weekend as he awaits the findings of a make-or-break investigation into alleged lockdown-busting parties in Downing Street. No 10 conceded on Sunday that Ghani had raised her concerns personally with Johnson at a meeting in 2020, and said he had responded by encouraging her to make a formal complaint with the Conservative party. A No 10 spokesperson said: “The Conservative party does not tolerate prejudice or discrimination of any kind.” Ghani said she had made clear at the time that she did not think the party complaints process was the right way to tackle her allegations. “He [Johnson] wrote to me that he could not get involved, and suggested I use the internal Conservative party complaint process. This, as I had already pointed out, was very clearly not appropriate for something that happened on government business,” she said. “All I have ever wanted was for his government to take this seriously, investigate properly and ensure no other colleague has to endure this.” Ghani says that when she was sacked as a junior transport minister in a reshuffle in 2020, Tory whips told her that her “Muslim woman minister status was making colleagues feel uncomfortable”. She told the Sunday Times: “It was like being punched in the stomach. I felt humiliated and powerless.” She received public support from the cabinet ministers Nadhim Zahawi and Sajid Javid. Zahawi, the education secretary, called Ghani “a friend, a colleague and a brilliant parliamentarian”, adding: “This has to be investigated properly and racism [rooted] out.” The deputy prime minister, Dominic Raab, on Sunday urged Ghani to make a formal complaint to the Conservative party, which she had decided not to do and has now made clear she does not think is appropriate. Calling the allegations “incredibly serious”, Raab declined to say whether he believed his former government colleague, saying he was “not going to get into impugning anyone’s integrity”. Raab said there would be no investigation by the party unless she submitted a formal complaint. The Conservative chief whip, Mark Spencer, has identified himself as the person accused of making the remarks. “These accusations are completely false and I consider them to be defamatory. I have never used those words attributed to me,” he tweeted. An independent inquiry into the Conservative party’s handling of complaints of discrimination said in May last year that there was “clear evidence of a party complaints system in need of overhaul”. Chaired by Prof Swaran Singh, the review pointed to a “lack of transparency in the complaints process, with no clear decision-making process as to how complaints should progress, and no specified timeframes for resolution.” As the row deepened on Sunday, the Muslim Council of Britain (MCB) said it was now time for the Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) to carry out a full inquiry into the party to determine if any breaches of the law had taken place. Zara Mohammed, the secretary general of the MCB, said: “Nusrat Ghani’s testimony of Islamophobia in the Conservative party is shocking but not surprising. That she is experiencing this as a Muslim woman at the top of the party only reinforces the deep-rooted nature of the problem. Institutional Islamophobia in the Conservative party has gone on with impunity for far too long.” Shockat Patel, a board member of Muslim Engagement and Development (Mend), described Ghani’s allegation as “totally unacceptable” and said her story had “touched a raw nerve” in the Muslim community, particularly among women. He called for the Conservatives to accept the definition of Islamophobia drawn up by the all-party parliamentary group on British Muslims, which Labour formally adopted in 2019. “Firstly, we need the Tory party to get their act together and adopt this definition of Islamophobia. Secondly, we need an independent review to specifically address the issue of Islamophobia. The third point is they need education within the Tory party on what constitutes Islamophobia. And this should be delivered by grassroots organisations, which in the past, they have not engaged with,” Patel said. Johnson’s team is anxiously awaiting a report by the senior civil servant Sue Gray on parties held in Downing Street while Covid restrictions were in place. Johnson has admitted attending one event on 20 May 2020 to which his principal private secretary had urged colleagues to “bring your own booze”. The prime minister has insisted he believed it was a work event. Many Tory backbenchers who have not yet called for a vote of no confidence in the prime minister are awaiting the report before deciding whether they believe Johnson’s position is tenable. The Conservative backbencher Michael Fabricant caused fresh controversy on Sunday by saying it was unlikely Ghani was discriminated against for her faith because “she’s hardly someone who’s obviously a Muslim”. In the latest of a series of media appearances apparently aimed at shoring up Johnson’s position, Fabricant told LBC: “I think the whole thing actually stinks, the accusation being made by Nus Ghani. “She’s hardly someone who’s obviously a Muslim. I mean, I had no idea what religion she is. The Labour MP Keith Vaz, who was of south Asian origin, I do know because we discussed it, he’s a Goan Christian; others are Hindus, others are Muslims or whatever. But with her it wasn’t apparent. So it does seem rather a lame excuse to me that she claims she was sacked because of that.” The Labour chair, Anneliese Dodds, accused the Tories of “doubling down” instead of trying to tackle the problems Ghani had raised. “It is shameful that instead of treating allegations of Islamophobia with the seriousness they deserve, the Conservatives have spent the day doubling down and refusing to take action,” she said. “Boris Johnson and the Conservatives’ response has been plain offensive. There needs to be an immediate, independent investigation into these serious allegations.” Dr Halima Begum, chief executive of race equality thinktank the Runnymede Trust, said: “This is an incredibly serious situation. At a bare minimum, the allegation that a minister of the crown was fired for her so-called ‘Muslimness’ would represent a flagrant challenge to our equalities and labour laws. “The facts and questions about the legality of what has happened here must be urgently investigated by the very highest authority. This cannot simply be left for another civil service enquiry. If the allegations are proven to be true, Nusrat would have been subjected to grossly discriminatory behaviour. “[Nusrat’s] distress will be felt by every one of the 3 million Muslims in the country, as well as every member of our religious minority communities. All of the political parties need to do more to demonstrate zero tolerance for discrimination, and to prove that religious minorities in this country are respected regardless of their faith.” The behaviour of Tory whips had already been under intense scrutiny in recent days. The Conservative MP William Wragg has claimed several colleagues were threatened with having investment in their constituencies withdrawn if they voted in defiance of the government. Wragg is expected to discuss those allegations with the Metropolitan police this week.The chairman of the congressional committee investigating the US Capitol attack and Donald Trump’s attempt to overturn the 2020 election revealed on Sunday that the panel has spoken to the former attorney general William Barr, a further indication that the inquiry has moved closer to the ex-president’s inner circle. Bennie Thompson told CBS’s Face the Nation that Barr, who was accused of making the justice department Trump’s tool but who resigned before Trump left office, had spoken more than once with the panel. “To be honest with you, we’ve had conversations with the former attorney general already,” Thompson said. His host, Margaret Brennan, asked if the panel would seek answers from Barr over the discovery of a draft executive order for the US military to seize voting machines in contested states. “We have talked to Department of Defense individuals,” Thompson said. “We are concerned that our military was part of this big lie on promoting that the election was false. If you are using the military to potentially seize voting machines, even though it’s a discussion, the public needs to know.” News of the interviews with Barr, who angered Trump by insisting there was no evidence to support his lies of a stolen election, dealt another blow to the former president, whose political and legal woes escalated significantly this week. Unlike other Trumpworld insiders who have refused to cooperate with the January 6 committee, such as the former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows, strategist Steve Bannon and national security adviser Michael Flynn, Barr appears to have spoken willingly. It reflects moves by the House panel to focus more closely on Trump’s actions following the election, including his inciting of the deadly January 6 attack on the US Capitol. This week, the committee asked for the cooperation of Trump’s daughter Ivanka. “Our strategy is to get to all the facts and circumstances that brought about January 6,” Thompson said. “And obviously Ivanka Trump was a major adviser to the president all along, a number of items [are] attributed to what she’s been saying and so we asked her to come in voluntarily and give us the benefit of what she knows.” The inquiry has also subpoenaed phone records of Trump’s son Eric and Kimberly Guilfoyle, partner of Donald Jr. Trump is not pleased, complaining in an interview with the rightwing Washington Examiner that the committee was made up of “vicious people” who “go after children”. Donald Trump Jr is 44, Ivanka Trump is 40 and Eric Trump is 38.It was a moment that made all of Chelsea’s problems fade away. Suddenly, nobody was worrying about a draining fixture list and a worrying run of results. Stamford Bridge had come alive and even Hakim Ziyech was smiling after opening the scoring for Chelsea, who had looked short of attacking inspiration before their mercurial winger gave them the lead with one of the goals of the season. This was Ziyech at his absolute best: cutting in from the right, the ball on his left foot and a shot bent wickedly into the far corner. Hugo Lloris could only watch helplessly as the ball flew past him and Chelsea, who have looked so tetchy and tired of late, could feel their season coming back to life. Spurs, on the other hand, had much to ponder after losing in the league for the first time under Antonio Conte. Their hopes of dragging Chelsea into a top-four battle looked fanciful on this evidence. Ultimately there is no substitute for class and while Spurs fought hard, they had none of Chelsea’s individual quality; nobody capable of opening up a tight game quite as inventively as Ziyech, whose splendid goal at the start of the second half was followed by Thiago Silva settling the contest with a fine header from Mason Mount’s free-kick. For Conte, it was a reminder of the size of his task. For all that Spurs fared better than when Chelsea reached the Carabao Cup final at their expense, they were outplayed in the second half and their hopes of qualifying for the Champions League are likely to depend on reinforcements arriving before the window shuts. All eyes, then, are on Daniel Levy. This is a huge test for Tottenham’s chairman. Spurs, who remain seventh, must accept that Conte can only do so much. The Italian does not have enough talent at his disposal and although the north Londoners were competitive in the first half, with Harry Kane furious to have a goal ruled out at 0-0, their squad remains too mediocre. That was borne out by Conte’s approach. He looked to compress the space and turn the game into a grind. It worked for a while and it might have been a different story had Paul Tierney not penalised Kane for a shove on Silva before the Spurs striker turned and shot past Kepa Arrizabalaga shortly before half-time. Yet Spurs, who omitted Dele Alli, Tanguy Ndombele and Giovani Lo Celso, should not focus on one tight decision. Conte will know that a central midfield of Harry Winks and Pierre-Emile Højbjerg was not good enough to deal with Jorginho, Mateo Kovacic and Mason Mount. Ryan Sessegnon and Matt Doherty were forgettable on the flanks. Kane simply had too much to do and although he kept trying until the end, forcing Arrizabalaga to repel a powerful header, he deserves better teammates. How Kane would love to play with someone like Ziyech. The Moroccan can be frustrating and he did not even celebrate after scoring when Chelsea drew at Brighton last week, yet there is no doubting his natural ability. Ziyech’s goal summed up the difference between the sides. Thomas Tuchel had so many options – Timo Werner and Kai Havertz were unused substitutes and N’Golo Kante came on to see Chelsea over the line – and his side have fresh impetus after their first league win since Boxing Day. Tuchel tweaked his approach, lining Chelsea up in an expansive 4-1-4-1 system, yet conviction eluded the European champions at first. There was less than a minute on the clock when Romelu Lukaku missed his first chance and there were times when Spurs threatened on the break, particularly when Steven Bergwijn found room. This was an opportunity for Bergwijn to build on his heroics against Leicester. One of his bursts led to Silva picking up a booking and there were openings for Spurs. Winks went close after peeling past Jorginho, who was otherwise untroubled as the deepest Chelsea midfielder, and Sessegnon was wasteful with a rare opening. The key moment for Spurs, compact in their 4-4-2, came when Sessegnon crossed for Kane, who was not subtle enough when he pushed Silva in the back. Silva was too wily not to make the most of it and the Brazilian’s fall convinced Tierney to award a foul. For all that Kane complained, though, Chelsea also had reason to feel aggrieved before the interval. The hosts could have been playing against 10 men after Doherty stamped on Malang Sarr – Darren England, the VAR, deemed it accidental – and they could also argue that they dominated the first half. Lukaku missed another decent chance as the opening period wore on, kicking at thin air from Mount’s cutback, and Chelsea emerged with more intensity after the break. Two minutes into the second half, the lively Callum Hudson-Odoi surged past Japhet Tanganga on the left and sprayed the ball to the right. The pass found Ziyech and when Sessegnon backed off, the winger curled in a gorgeous shot from 25 yards. Conte made changes, but Chelsea were rampant now. Ziyech tested Lloris with a vicious drive, Lukaku threatened and it was not long before Chelsea pulled clear. The second goal was more straightforward. Eric Dier tripped Hudson-Odoi, Mount swung in a free-kick and soft marking allowed Silva to glance past Lloris. Normal service had been restored. Chelsea had reminded Spurs of their supremacy and Tuchel, who celebrates one year in the job on Wednesday, will hope that this is the start of a surge.Dominic Raab has urged unvaccinated NHS staff in England to come forward for their Covid jabs amid calls for the deadline on mandatory shots to be extended. Frontline healthcare workers in England must have two doses of Covid vaccine by 1 April, meaning they need to receive their first dose by 3 February to meet the deadline and avoid potentially losing their job. While 90% of NHS staff have taken up the vaccine, mandatory vaccination is controversial and the looming deadline has led to warnings that more than 70,000 NHS staff in England could be lost at a time when the health service is under severe pressure. Speaking on the BBC’s Sunday Morning programme, Raab argued there was no need to postpone the deadline because the NHS was more resilient than it was in 2020, with more staff on which to draw. “We continue to call for those to come forward to be boosted or vaccinated before the deadline,” he said. “Ultimately we have to make sure that we don’t have people putting patients at risk if they are not vaccinated. The deadline is there to protect the most vulnerable in our hospitals, but we have got the resilience because we have got nearly 5,000 more doctors, nearly 11,000 more nurses than we did in 2020.” NHS staff who object to the policy demonstrated in central London on Saturday and further protests took place in Glasgow, Birmingham, Manchester and Leeds. Scotland and Wales have not made the vaccines compulsory for health or care workers. Northern Ireland plans a public consultation on the issue. An impact assessment by the Department of Health and Social Care found that 73,000 NHS staff in England could be lost as a result of the policy. The Welsh first minister, Mark Drakeford, told BBC Radio 4 that he would not rule out recruiting NHS staff who lost their jobs in England, but added: “We certainly won’t be going out there looking for them.” Several health organisations called on ministers to postpone the deadline, but the view is not unanimous. The Royal College of GPs said the policy should be delayed to prevent staff shortages. Martin Marshall, the chair of the Royal College of GPs, said compulsory vaccination for health professionals in England was “not the right way forward”. Pat Cullen, the chief executive of the Royal College of Nursing, said the policy would backfire if it was not delayed, while Danny Mortimer, the deputy chief executive of the NHS Confederation, which represents organisations within the health service, said its members wanted more time to encourage and persuade hesitant staff to get vaccinated. But Mortimer added: “We do have to acknowledge that as the deadline approaches, some frontline staff will have to leave their present roles if they continue to decline to be vaccinated.” Saffron Cordery, the deputy chief executive of NHS Providers, said the organisation did not believe a delay was the answer. “Our survey of trust leaders found that while there was a range of views towards a policy of mandatory vaccinations, a majority backed this policy as a means of protecting colleagues, patients and visitors from cross-infection by unvaccinated staff,” she said.Thank you very much for joining me. Here is Jacob Steinberg’s lovely report from Stamford Bridge. Ziyech: “We played well. Sometimes they had some counter-attacks but it wasn’t really dangerous at all. “I think it [the goal] was 10/10.” Mount: “You could see straight from the beginning the will to win. It is always difficult when a team play with so many defenders. “Overall the last couple of weeks we haven’t had the results we wanted, so teams start to creep up on you. It was a massive result for us.” Conte obviously wants new players but where does he need to invest? I think the central midfield underwhelmed today and a new right-back seems necessary. “Hi Will,” says Nora. “Take up sewing and for sure you won’t miss football.” I’m in! Reports from earlier today ... Palace 1-3 Liverpool Arsenal 0-0 Burnley Leicester 1-1 Brighton It is almost two weeks until we have any Premier League football now. What will we all do? Talk up sewing? Speak to our loved ones? Play board games? Either way, I am very scared. Chelsea were the better team from start to finish and certainly deserved the points. Spurs were unlucky to have a goal chalked off but didn’t merit anything from the fixture. Conte will be looking for a busy final week of the window, while Tuchel will be a lot happier with his lot. 90+2 mins: Ziyech is replaced by Saul. A great man of the match performance from the Moroccan who deserves his standing ovation. 90 mins: Five minutes added on (but Ziyech is currently on the deck being treated for cramp, so it might be longer). 89 mins: Bryan Gil is on for Winks. Good luck turning this one around, mate. 88 mins: Alonso comes on for Hudson-Odoi to add some defensive reinforcement. 86 mins: Spurs almost get themselves back into the match as Kane connects powerfully with a corner but Arrizabalaga moves quickly to his left to palm the header clear. The Basque goalkeeper goes down in agony immediately probably, as he is not used to making saves. He seems fine. I’ve been watching this match for a very long time now and I can’t remember Matt Doherty doing anything of any real use. What a man. 84 mins: The latest stats show Chelsea have had 15 shots to four from Spurs. Possession is down as 68% to the hosts, another sign of the dominance. 82 mins: Kovacic bundles Kane over from behind as Spurs try to break. Skipp does his best to get down the right but his cross into the box is a poor one and Rudiger clears. I think Spurs can give up on this one now. 80 mins: Hudson-Odoi is on the deck after Doherty inadvertently catches him in the jaw with his elbow. 78 mins: You will be shocked to hear that Chelsea have another corner but it is headed clear by Kane. 76 mins: Chelsea are completely in control here. It would take a change of gear from Spurs for them to get something out of this. 74 mins: The Spurs fans seem to be throwing items at Rudiger. This is not want you want to see. Pathetic stuff from the away support. Jorginho departs with Kante coming on. Not a bad replacement. 72 mins: Winks is fouled by Kovacic then the two scrap a little before the free-kick is taken. 70 mins: Spurs have a corner! Winks has the responsibility of sending it into the box but it is a dreadful effort that is volleyed clear at the near post. 69 mins: Lukaku spins Sanchez and gets into space in the box from where he whacks a shot across goal but Lloris is equal to it. 67 mins: Lots of pushing in the box before the latest Chelsea corner, forcing the referee to intervene. When the ball does come in, Skipp and Azpilicueta go down in the area. It looks the two are partaking in a rugby maul. I have no idea who is at fault there but the referee gives Skipp the benefit of the doubt. The ball goes over the top soon after resulting in Lloris legging it out of the box to head clear but he sends the ball against Doherty, sending back towards the Spurs net. In the end Spurs win a goal-kick to restore calm. 65 mins: Ziyech almost slides the ball through to Lukaku in the box but Sanchez stretches, risking his groin in the process, to intercept. 63 mins: Ziyech lines up the free-kick on the right before swinging it into the box for Kane to flick over his own bar. The subsequent corner is sent into the area by Ziyech but he fails to beat the first man. 61 mins: Davies catches Ziyech on the top of his foot to give away a foul in a dangerous position. 59 mins: Bergwijn and Azpilicueta pass the time with a bit of pushing. Paul Tierney runs over to intervene and tells the two to play nice. Kane does well down the left flank and lifts a cross which Sarr heads out to Skipp who lays it into the path of Bergwijn but he makes a poor connection and it is an easy save for Arrizabalaga. 57 mins: Spurs spend a long time after the goal complaining to the referee about something or other. If it is for the original foul, then they have nothing to moan about. Moura and Skipp on for Sessegnon and Tanganga. Dier clips Hudson-Odoi, probably so Tanganga did not have to foul him again. The defender gets away without being booked. Mount swings in the set-piece from the left which Thiago Silva flicks across Lloris into the corner. 53 mins: Mount and Hudson-Odoi combine as the former picks up a pass from the latter which he strikes first time from the edge of the box but his shot flies inches over. 51 mins: Hudson-Odoi is causing all kinds of problems for Tanganga, who is on a booking and could be set for an early finish to his match (one way or another). Gary Neville has just described the pitch as “scabby”. 49 mins: It is almost 2-0 thanks to Ziyech again. Sanchez blocks a Mount shot but the balls ends up with Ziyech who rifles a shot from 18 yards out which Lloris saves by sprawling to his right. WHAT A GOAL! Chelsea keep the ball from kick-off. It eventually reaches Ziyech on the edge of the box after some lovely team play, he gets it onto his left foot and sets himself to curl the ball into the top corner. Here we go again! Two men have come to tie it together. Not all heroes wear capes. I must say, it does look very Sunday league now. OH NO! ONE OF THE NETS HAS A HOLE IN IT! WE WILL BE DELAYED! Honk honk. Dan Christmas emails: “I think it’s just, just about enough to call that a push and disallow the goal. It’s definitely more than what happened with Pukki on Friday. It’s all in the fingers ...” Conte’s plan is working well as Spurs look to secure a 0-0 draw, that’s for sure. Chelsea have been the dominant side but have not threatened Hugo Lloris’ goal, while Spurs have been pretty passive but should be in the lead. That’s football for you. I think the disallowed Kane goal should have stood but my opinion means absolutely nothing. 45 mins: Three minutes added on. 44 mins: Lukaku drives into the box, does a few stepovers before letting rip but Dier blocks the shot. Ziyech sends in another corner for Spurs to clear. The Moroccan gets another chance to send in a cross - and it is much better on this occasion with Sanchez’s head the only reason Chelsea don’t open the scoring. 42 mins: Jorginho goes into the book for trying to bring down Bergwijn. 40 mins: NO GOAL! Sessegnon pulls the ball back for Kane in the box who controls it and calmly slots in from eight yards. The referee blows up however, as he spots a push on Thiago Silva who is on the deck after throwing himself to the ground. It should be a goal but the referee’s decision stands. A very weak bit of officiating. 38 mins: Tanganga is awarded a yellow card after nudging over Hudson-Odoi after the winger pushes the ball past him and tries to run round the defender. Spurs get the best chance of the match as the ball is dinked over the top for Sessegnon to latch onto; he gets the wrong side of the defence makes it into the box where he tries to let fly but drags the ball desperately wide. 36 mins: Another corner for Chelsea! Mount sends it into the box from the right but it does not get past the front post. Not Chelsea’s day when it comes to set-pieces. 34 mins: It is very much all Chelsea here once again ... 32 mins: Mount gets down the right and sends a dangerous low cross into the box for Lukaku to attack but the Belgian misses his kick eight yards out. A huge let-off for Spurs. I am not sure Kane has kicked the ball yet. A very quiet afternoon for him thus far as he slowly chases the Chelsea centre-backs. 30 mins: Another foul from Thiago Silva on Bergwijn as he gives him a push in the back, allowing the Dutchman to do a theatrical dive and demand a second card for the Brazilian. The ref sees through this blatant attempt to get Thiago Silva sent off. 28 mins: Jorginho tries to slide a pass through to Lukaku in the box but the fact Spurs are playing with a bucketload of defenders means there is no space to do so. 26 mins: Spurs look like they will be relying on the counter attack here. Bergwijn the key man for them. 24 mins: Thiago Silva goes into the book for taking out Bergwijn. 22 mins: Azpilicueta goes on the overlap and produces a dangerous cross from the byline but Tanganga reads it and heads behind for another corner. Ziyech sends the cross into the box but Spurs get rid. The ball ends up with Ziyech again on the left and he curls in another cross but it is once again cleared. Tanganga whacks into the advertising hoardings after being nudged by Mount. It is unnecessary from the Chelsea midfielder but the Spurs defender gets up after a minute. 20 mins: The big VAR in the sky completes its check and they decide it is not worthy of further action. Meanwhile, Sarr is still on the floor getting an ankle rub. 18 mins: Mount swings another corner from the right into the box for the big men to attack but it does not beat the near post and Spurs break through Bergwijn but he is eventually tackled by Kovacic inside the Chelsea half. Sarr is writhing around in pain after Doherty catches him on the left ankle. It looks a very painful one for the Chelsea man. It goes to the VAR bods as they check for a red card. It is certainly clumsy but I am not sure it is a red. 16 mins: Spurs are at least in the game now but Chelsea certainly look more dangerous in possession. 14 mins: Winks breaks through the Chelsea midfield and makes a beeline for the area, he shifts the ball onto his left foot and drives for goal but the shot lacks power, allowing Arrizabalaga to drop onto it. 12 mins: Dier dribbles from the halfway up to the edge of the box but is dispossessed by Thiago Silva. At least it is a sign of intent from Spurs. Down the other end, Ziyech cuts in from the right and curls a shot at goal from 18 yards. It looks a very simple save for Lloris but he decides to fist it clear rather than catch the ball. 10 mins: A second corner finds the head of Thiago Silva but he ends up under the ball and heads his effort well over. Spurs might need to adapt sooner rather than later as they are very much second best here. 8 mins: Chelsea get a corner on the right but the outswinger is easily headed clear and ends up down the other end with Arrizabalaga. 6 mins: Chelsea are dominating the early stages here. Spurs are trying to get used to their new formation and have barely got into the match. 4 mins: Another decent chance for Chelsea as the ball is lifted to the back post for Hudson-Odoi to attack but Tanganga does well to hold him off, meaning he can only direct his header wide. Chelsea are 4-3-3, in case you are wondering. Sarr is starting at left-back. 2 mins: Lukaku has a great chance in the opening 60 seconds as Mount gets down the right and sends in a bouncing cross, which Lukaku swivels on but he cannot control the shot and it goes over. Doherty really is starting on the right of midfield. What a statement from Conte. That statement being: let me sign some players immediately. Peep! Peep! Peep! Here we go! Looks like Spurs are going 4-4-2 with Doherty on the right of midfield. Classic. As the Spurs team wanders out onto the pitch, Conte stops Dier for a quick word. I wonder what pearls of wisdom he offered. “On balance,” emails Paul Fowler, “that team sheet is a smart move from Conte. Based on precedent I’d say the result here is about 90% certain to be a Chelsea win. So the base case scenario is losing a game they will lose anyway, but if they get hammered you’d expect it to force levy’s hand for new recruits. And let’s face it, since taking over 20 years ago Levy is the real owner of Tottenham’s awful trophy record (their worst 20 year period in their history, no less). I’m not sure how he still gets away with blaming his managers when he’s the constant.” Stat attack! Looking at the benches, Chelsea certainly have the edge (on paper) if things are tight. Havertz, Pulisic, Werner are all available to Tuchel if needs be, whereas Spurs have Lucas Moura and not much else of note. Conte explains his team selection is based on who is fit and available. I think he is trying to say he wants to sign some players in the next week or so. I am trying to work out how Spurs will line up today. Will Doherty be unleashed at left-wing back? It would be a bold move from Conte. Chelsea’s formation is not clear from the teamsheet either. Sarr pushed to left-back? Jonathan Liew on Conte etc. VAR has just made one of the worst penalty decisions in history at Selhurst Park. What a farce. Tuchel is an impatient man. The interesting bits of team news revolve around the visitors as Sessegnon starts for Spurs and Dele Alli is completely left out of the squad, amid rumours he could be on his away out of the club. Chelsea: Arrizabalaga, Azpilicueta, Thiago Silva, Rudiger, Sarr, Jorginho, Kovacic, Ziyech, Mount, Hudson-Odoi, Lukaku Subs: Bettinelli, Chalobah, Alonso, Kante, Barkley, Saul, Havertz, Pulisic, Werner Tottenham: Lloris, Tanganga, Sanchez, Dier, Davies, Doherty, Hojbjerg, Winks, Sessegnon, Bergwijn, Kane Subs: Gollini, Rodon, Reguilon, Royal, White, Skipp, Bryan, Lucas, Scarlett Antonio Conte is back at Stamford Bridge, so there is plenty in terms of narrative to clasp onto in west London. His Spurs side should be buoyant after their dramatic late victory over Leicester in the week. Despite that positive result, they have recently lost twice to Chelsea in the Carabao Cup semi-final so will know their opponents have the better of them. Some of the performances under Conte have implied they are capable of challenging for a spot in the top four once more but consistency has been an issue both individually and collectively. If they could back up their victory at the King Power with another today, it really could be a great boon for the remainder of their season, especially considering the number of games they have in hand. Chelsea have not won in the league since Boxing Day, ultimately ending their challenge for the Premier League title this season. Thomas Tuchel says his players are tired, which could have something to do with their downturn in form but they need to pick themselves up today after being given a couple of days rest following the draw at Brighton. Let’s hope for a classic! Kick-off: 4.30pm GMTMalcolm Troup, who has died aged 91, was a distinguished pianist, musicologist and educator. He was also my predecessor as chairman of the Beethoven Piano Society of Europe. Born in Toronto, Malcolm was the son of William Troup, a cattle farmer turned stockbroker, and Wendela (nee Seymour Conway), a graduate of the Royal Academy of Music. She was Malcolm’s first piano teacher, and he displayed remarkable early talent. He won a scholarship to the Toronto Conservatory, where he and Glenn Gould, a close friend, both studied with Alberto Guerrero. Aged 17, he made his debut with the CBC Toronto Orchestra in Anton Rubinstein’s massive Concerto in D minor, early evidence of his fearless, restlessly exploratory temperament. Subsequently he studied in London with Sidney Harrison (1950-52) and in Saarbrücken, Germany, with Walter Gieseking (1954-56), receiving the Harriet Cohen Commonwealth medal in 1955. During this period, he toured ceaselessly in Canada, Europe (with frequent performances in the Soviet Union) and South America. A born performer, colourful and flamboyant, he often received standing ovations and gave many encores. On one of his trips to South America he met his future wife, Carmen Lamarca Subercasaux, a member of the Chilean nobility who joined him in London in 1961: they wed the following year at the Vatican in Rome, then settled in Islington, north London. With his inquiring mind it was natural for Malcolm to expand into musicology and academic administration. In 1967 he was already an honorary professor at the University of Chile, then received his DPhil from York University (1968) with the topic Messiaen and the Modern Mind, leading to his most celebrated recording, Messiaen’s epic cycle Vingt Regards sur l’Enfant-Jésus (1986). Typically, Malcolm insisted on recording these fearsome pieces from memory, feeling that the performances would lack the freedom and spontaneity he sought if he had the score in front of him. His prodigious memory was still active into his 70s, ever adding new works, including ones by composers sent to Nazi extermination camps from the concentration camp at the Czech town of Terezín. A rich list of academic and honorary appointments ensued: from 1970 he was music director at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, leaving in 1975 to set up the new music department at City University, London, with one of Britain’s first electronic music studios, and launching the first fellowship in Jewish music research. He was master of the Worshipful Company of Musicians (1999-2000), vice-president of the European Piano Teachers’ Association, a governor of the Music Therapy Charity Trust, chairman of the Ernest Bloch Society, and co-founder in 1993 with Carola Grindea of the Beethoven Piano Society of Europe, which he chaired till 2014. To all of these roles he brought his characteristic energy, vision, commitment and brilliance, expressed in trenchant speech and writing. Carmen died in 2011. He is survived by their daughter, Wendela, and five grandchildren, Saskia, Cosima, Damian, Natasha and Alexia.Louise Rands Silva, who has died of cancer aged 57, worked as my assistant for nearly 30 years, on cases, books and a myriad of other activities relating to matters of international law and justice. She also had a strong commitment to community engagement, working in parallel in education, for Sure Start, as a forest school leader, at a school working with children with behavioural difficulties, and as a teaching assistant at a primary school. Born in Byfleet, Surrey, Louise was the daughter of Barbara Wright, a primary school teacher, and John Rands, a public health inspector. When the family moved to north Devon she went to school at South Molton community college and Kelly college, then spent a year working on a kibbutz in Israel. In 1986 she went to St Edmund Hall, Oxford University, to study English literature. She moved to Brazil, to teach English as a foreign language, returning to London to work as a paralegal at a Brazilian law firm. In 1992 I employed Louise at the Foundation for International Environmental Law and Development at Soas University of London. There we worked together on projects about climate change, sustainable development, and international courts and tribunals. A highlight for her was being part of the team in The Hague on the 1996 case on the legality of the use of nuclear weapons which ruled that environmental protection was now part of international law. While there, Louise took a part-time master’s degree at Soas, in South American development studies. In 1993 she married Maú de Jesus Silva, a guide and musician whom she had met in Brazil, and later they moved to Bideford, north Devon, to raise their children. There, Louise began her work in education, focusing on young families and in her work as a forest school leader, taking children into the outdoors to help them understand the wonders of the natural world. In later years she worked with refugee families in north Devon, teaching English. Over this entire period, Louise and I never stopped working together. She transcribed every interview I conducted, for books and cases, and typed and corrected the manuscripts of 15 books, from a treatise on international environmental law to the more recent East West Street (2016) and The Ratline (2020). She shared thoughts about characters and themes, enriching every book. She was a first sounding board, a trusted colleague and friend who offered significant input on the issues she cared about. A few weeks before her death she was still working, on my forthcoming book about Chagos, The Last Colony, and was immortalised by Martin Rowson in one of his illustrations for the book. Louise was a truly decent person, smart and warm, humorous and generous, understated and utterly reliable. Maú died in 2007. She is survived by their sons, Gabriel and Rafael, by her siblings, Caroline and Edward, and by her mother, Barbara.The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, has said he has no doubts Germany is maintaining a united front with Nato on the Ukraine crisis, on the eve of a meeting of EU foreign ministers in Brussels where they are expected to issue a further warning to Moscow over its buildup of 100,000 troops and heavy weapons along the Ukrainian border. There were alarm bells in Kyiv over the weekend after Germany’s navy chief, Kay-Achim Schönbach, said Vladimir Putin deserved respect and also suggested it was “nonsense” to think Russia was ready to pour troops into Ukraine. Schönbach resigned on Saturday but his remarks rattled Nato, and Blinken did a round of talkshow appearances in an attempt to dampen concerns. “I can tell you that the Germans very much share our concerns and are resolute and being determined to respond – and to respond swiftly, effectively and in a united way,” Blinken told NBC. I have no doubts about that.” Blinken will brief the EU ministers by video link on Monday on his talks last week with the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, in Geneva. EU sources are pessimistic about the Kremlin climbing down from maximalist demands that would in effect give Russia a sphere of influence in eastern Europe. The ministers meeting on Monday, however, will not discuss specific sanctions. Instead they are expected to echo earlier EU warnings of “massive consequences” without going into specifics. “If such a very serious development [Russian troops crossing the border] happens, the reaction will be very quick, the reaction will be extremely clear. And again it will be a question of days … not a question of weeks,” a senior EU official said. The official predicted there would be an “even more remarkable” unity among the bloc’s 27 countries than in 2014 when sweeping economic sanctions against Russia were adopted. “Yes, there are different sensitivities, but all member states have an acute sense of what is the European Union interest, which is at the end of the day a version of their national interest,” the official said. Behind the repeated assertions of unity, it is no secret that western allies are divided. Joe Biden’s comments that Nato allies would be “having to fight about what to do and not do” in the event of a “minor incursion” of Ukraine – comments that the White House subsequently rowed back on – were seen in Brussels as undiplomatic rather than untrue. In the EU, where sanctions have to be agreed by unanimity, differences are emerging. Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, has expressed doubts about cutting off Russian banks from the Swift global payments system, one option under discussion. Poland and the Baltic states, however, think it is a mistake to take anything off the table. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, accused Germany over the weekend of not showing enough support for his country. Writing on Twitter, he expressed disappointment about Germany’s apparent hesitations on Swift, its refusal to supply offensive weapons, as well as the comments from Schönbach. Writing before Schönbach’s resignation was reported, Kuleba said: “German partners must stop such words and actions to undermine unity and encourage Vladimir Putin to a new attack on Ukraine.” Kuleba’s criticism of Germany’s coalition government is shared by many in the European parliament, where a large majority last month called for sanctions against Russia to encompass exclusion from Swift, which is used in more than 200 countries and territories. “We should not be limiting the scope of various actions and thereby making it easier for Putin to have options for the violent alternative,” said Michael Gahler, a German MEP from the centre-right Christian Democratic Union party, which is not in power. Gahler, the parliament’s standing rapporteur on Ukraine, said it was “unfortunate” that Germany was not delivering offensive weapons to Ukraine. Germany’s coalition government refuses to export weapons to conflict zones, in line with longstanding policy rooted in the country’s history. In the event of war, Gahler also said the Nord Stream 2 pipeline connecting Russia to Germany should not come into operation. The MEP is urging EU officials to look into boosting gas supplies from southern pipelines and liquefied natural gas from the US. But it is not just Germany that has raised questions about EU unity. Alarm bells were set off when it was announced last week that Hungary’s autocratic prime minister, Viktor Orbán, would meet Putin on 1 February to discuss a planned Russian-built nuclear power station in Hungary, the Sputnik vaccine and Hungary’s gas supply contracts. While potential sanctions against Russia are a closely guarded secret, it is clear there is a sliding scale of options, with the harshest measures being considered for a full-scale attack. Diplomats say a large-scale invasion is likely to make an EU decision simpler, as it would bring the bloc together in a large-scale response, just as the downing of flight MH17 in July 2014 bolstered unity on sweeping economic sanctions. The EU would face a more complex choice if Russian pursues other forms of aggression. Countries will also weigh how sanctions would affect their economic interests. “Individual member states are more generous with the sanctions that hurt them less than others,” a senior diplomat said. “That is the name of the game a little bit.”A group of MPs has produced a report criticising the gambling industry regulator for trying to reduce addiction and urging ministers to take it into special measures. The findings by the all-party parliamentary group (APPG) on betting and gaming have been described as “ludicrous” by a campaigner for regulatory reform and met with a frosty reception from the regulator. The APPG describes itself as a political “go-between” for the sector and is one of hundreds of parliamentary groups that have come under scrutiny for alleged ties to lobbying. Several of its members have faced criticism for taking thousands of pounds worth of freebies from betting firms. On Sunday evening, the APPG’s vice chair, Labour MP Conor McGinn, revealed he had resigned from the group over the report and did not want to be associated with it. It launched an investigation into the Gambling Commission last year. When asked to share its findings, the group refused. But the Guardian has obtained a draft excerpt of its report. The MPs’ draft labels the commission “in urgent need of change” and says it is too harsh and risks “the destruction of one of the world’s best gambling industry’s [sic],” leading to growth in the black market. It accuses the commission of “acting ultra vires [beyond its remit] in its strategy of seeking to significantly reduce the number of problem gamblers”. The MPs accuse the regulator, which has adopted a tougher stance amid rising public concern about gambling addiction, of displaying a “bullying attitude that has caused mental harm” within the industry and calls on the government to take it into “special measures” while determining whether it can “continue as it is”. The intervention comes weeks before the government is due to publish the results of a once-in-a-generation review of gambling laws, with the commission thought to be playing a major part in finalising proposals. Several of the MPs on the APPG have fielded criticism for accepting freebies from the gambling industry while advocating for it in parliament or in the media, although it is not against parliamentary rules for them to do so. The group’s chair, the Conservative MP Scott Benton, accepted £7,494.60 worth of tickets last summer for Euro 2020 and Ascot courtesy of the Ladbrokes owner Entain, the online gaming firm Gamesys and the Betting and Gaming Council (BGC), an industry lobby group. The Labour MP John Spellar’s days out at Lord’s and Euro 2020, funded by the Paddy Power owner Flutter and the BGC, were worth £2,835.80. The Conservative MP Aaron Bell, who used to work for Bet365, went to three Euro 2020 games with Entain, Flutter and Gamesys, accepting tickets worth £6,955.60. Last year he told the Guardian he had “declared all hospitality promptly and transparently”. McGinn told the Guardian on Sunday evening that he had no involvement in writing the report, did not agree with it or endorse it, and had resigned from the group over it last week. A spokesperson for the Gambling Commission said: “Some sections of the industry are never going to be content with a regulator which continually pushes for safer gambling.” They said the commission would “need time to review [the report’s] contents” and that it had not heard from the APPG before receiving it. “As the industry regulator, we expect to hear from them in an official capacity to respond to views about the Gambling Commission and put straight inaccurate assumptions, as well as share our regulatory approach,” they said. Previous reports by the public accounts committee and the National Audit Office have concluded that the regulator is not tough enough. Matt Zarb-Cousin, the director of the campaign group Clean Up Gambling, said: “It is astonishing that in the middle of a gambling review, industry-friendly MPs want to publish this ludicrous report complaining about regulation. “The growth of online gambling, and the harm associated with it, has increased exponentially under the Gambling Commission’s watch. If anything the operators should be thanking the regulator. What we need is an overhaul of regulation that empowers the Gambling Commission to ensure far more prescriptive rules, more comprehensive oversight of licensees and penalties for non-compliance.” The Guardian has approached the APPG and the MPs who received gambling industry hospitality for comment. • This article was amended on 24 January 2022 to refer to the APPG as a “group” rather than a “committee”. APPGs are subject to parliamentary rules but are informal groups set up by MPs around a particular topic or interest.Italian parliamentarians will begin casting their votes for a new president on Monday after the scandal-plagued Silvio Berlusconi abandoned his dream of becoming the next head of state. More than 1,000 lawmakers and regional delegates will participate in the complex secret ballot, described as being akin to the appointment of a new pope, that could go through several rounds before a successor to Sergio Mattarella, who is due to step down on 3 February, is elected. The winner of the seven-year mandate requires a two-thirds majority within the first three rounds of voting; from the fourth, an absolute majority is sufficient. Only on three occasions in the history of the election has a new president emerged in the first round. Berlusconi, who served Italy four times as prime minister, failed to garner enough support for his bid and in a heartfelt letter wrote that in the spirit of “national responsibility” he asked his backers to “give up” identifying him as a contender. On Sunday he checked into hospital for “routine” checks, his spokesman said, though two sources told Reuters he had been in hospital since Thursday and there were reports in the Italian media that his family had been worried about his health. Even though there are no official candidates in Italy’s presidential election, the 85-year-old broke from tradition and campaigned by calling up unaffiliated parliamentarians to tap them for votes, while augmenting his public persona by publishing full-page adverts in national newspapers highlighting personality traits and accomplishments that he said made him the best person for the job. His renouncement removed an obstacle to negotiations on a mutually agreeable candidate between the political party leaders. However, as of Sunday no clear candidate had been named. Berlusconi, who leads Forza Italia, vetoed the endorsement of the current prime minister, Mario Draghi, arguing that the former European Central Bank chief must remain premier until the end of the legislature in 2023. Draghi, who has been credited with restoring stability in Italian politics, is seen as the frontrunner, even if broad support is not guaranteed over fears his move to the presidential palace could trigger early elections. The most crucial issue at stake is the Italian government’s adherence to the reforms that need to be enacted in order to secure instalments from the EU’s post-pandemic recovery fund, of which Italy is the biggest beneficiary. “With Draghi there’s not so much enthusiasm on behalf of all parties,” said a source from the centre-left Democratic party (PD). “The Five Star Movement fear it will lead to early elections, and some within the PD fear there could be a government in which they will lose their ministerial jobs.” Italy’s president is a largely ceremonial role, albeit with the power to resolve political crises, pick prime ministers, call early elections and approve or scrap laws. Mattarella was forced to step in several times to resolve crises, including calling on Draghi to form a unity government in February last year after the administration led by Giuseppe Conte collapsed. Draghi, 74, has neither confirmed nor denied his interest in becoming president. If elected, Vittorio Colao, the minister for technological innovation and a former Vodafone CEO, is reportedly being readied to replace Draghi as prime minister. “The problem is that it’s a bit complex to move Draghi out of the prime ministership and put him in the presidential palace,” said Franco Pavoncello, a political science professor and the president of John Cabot University in Rome. “Here we have a star prime minister who is regarded as one of the big leaders of the western world. On the other hand, there is the sense that he might be more reassuring as president than as prime minister as long as he finds a good replacement, and that’s why the name of Colao is floating around.” Other possible contenders for the presidency include Pier Ferdinando Casini, a centrist senator who reportedly has good cross-party relations, Marta Cartabia, the justice minister, and Giuliano Amato, a former prime minister. Meanwhile, a faction of the Five Star Movement is pushing for Mattarella to stay on for another year. “Amato is a possibility because Berlusconi likes him, as do the whole of the centre-left,” said the PD source. “The difficulty is getting the rest of the rightwing to accept his name. Amato could be a compromise for Forza Italia, but maybe not the League.” Matteo Salvini, who leads the League, and his far-right ally Giorgia Meloni, the leader of Brothers of Italy, said they would not accept any more “vetoes from the left” following Berlusconi’s withdrawal from the race. However, neither the left nor the right hold enough power in parliament to call the shots, so the deadlock will need to be broken. Parliamentarians will vote once a day until a winner emerges.Police suspect that a dead man who was brought to a post office in Ireland by two men trying to claim his pension had died just hours before the incident. Gardaí have ruled out foul play, with a postmortem revealing he had died not long before the alarm was raised at Hosey’s shop and post office in the town of Carlow, in County Carlow. Two men had reportedly attempted to collect 66-year-old Peader Doyle’s pension on Friday morning but were told by staff that the pensioner had to be present at the counter himself. According to reports in Ireland, the two men returned a short while later appearing to prop up a man wearing a woolly jumper over his face and a hat on his head. Onlookers claimed his feet were “dragging” along the ground on the journey from his house a short walk from the shop. A shop worker became concerned, asking if Doyle was unwell. The two men then departed, leaving the dead man behind. No money was handed over to the men, and staff in the shop raised the alarm with emergency services. Garda sources told the Irish Times that one line of inquiry is the possibility that his death occurred in the post office. In that case no criminal charges would arise as no offence would have been committed. They are now examining CCTV footage of the 500-metre stretch between Doyle’s house and the post office to establish his condition before he arrived. A local priest was called to the scene by gardaí to give the man his last rites. “It really is shocking. People in the town are clearly shocked, but he did get prayers and he was anointed,” Father John Dunphy told Irish media. “The shop was closed, and I didn’t know the man, but the staff were upset, naturally. He was anointed; he got the last rites, of course, and we all gathered around him and prayed. It was very dignified. “The gardaí were very kind and the staff were brave. It was a peaceful moment, very, very dignified.”Unilever is expected to face pressure to shake up its business model after it emerged the activist investor Nelson Peltz has built a stake in the troubled FTSE 100 company. The consumer goods company, best known for Dove soap, Hellmann’s mayonnaise and Marmite, has been thrown into turmoil after a £50bn tilt at GlaxoSmithKline’s consumer healthcare division caused fury among its shareholders. On Sunday the Financial Times reported that Trian Partners, Peltz’s New York-based hedge fund, had taken a position in the UK group, adding to the problems of its embattled chief executive, Alan Jope. Martin Deboo, an analyst at investment bank Jefferies, said the “fox would now appear to be inside the henhouse” and predicted a positive share price reaction on Monday morning. “Trian has a long and successful track record of unlocking value,” said Deboo. “This has frequently centred on splits and spin-outs.” He added: “We have long been of the view that the right path to unlock value at Unilever is via a faster rate of disposals from its slow-growing foods businesses, or a separation between foods and household and personal care, via a sale or spin [out].” The size of Trian’s stake is not known but in the past the hedge fund has taken positions of 1%-3.5% in target companies. Unilever declined to comment. Trian could not be reached for comment. Deboo pointed to Peltz’s role in the shake-up of the now defunct Cadbury plc more than a decade ago. He prompted the business to split into separate companies, one focused on confectionery and the other on soft drinks. The restructuring led to a listing of the soft drinks arm and the eventual sale of Cadbury to Kraft. Last week Terry Smith, the founder of Fundsmith and one of Unilever’s top shareholders, described the company’s failed offer for GSK’s consumer healthcare division as a “near-death experience” and said management should focus on improving its core business – or step down. GSK rejected three Unilever bids for the consumer products arm, the last of which was worth £50bn. However Unilever investors balked at the blockbuster deal and started dumping their shares. The revolt drove its share price down by as much as 11%, however, it regained some ground after Unilever promised not to raise its offer any further. Smith had already declared that Unilever had “lost the plot” accusing management of burnishing its sustainability credentials at the expense of business performance. He mocked its desire to own brands with “purpose”. “The Hellmann’s brand has existed since 1913 so we would guess that by now consumers have figured out its purpose (spoiler alert – salads and sandwiches),” said Smith. The furore saw Jope rush out a strategy update in which he promised to grow its health, beauty and hygiene business and sell slower-growing operations. There is also more change on the way with the company set to unveil a new “operating model that will drive greater agility”.