Too much of a good thing can make anyone queasy – as many will be aware after a week of turkey leftovers. The same applies to the economy and markets, if analysts’ predictions for the year ahead are anything to go by. Sitting around doing nothing (or passive investment) is an admirable strategy in most years. In 2021 it was masterly. London’s stock benchmark, the FTSE 100, ended December 14.3% higher than last January, and in the US buying shares has been even more rewarding: the S&amp;P 500 went up more than a quarter in value. But even though money was apparently so easy to make last year, investors and economists are putting on a show of wariness for 2022. “Investors have enjoyed bumper returns over the past 18 months, but these returns are, in large part, borrowed from the future,” says Joseph Little, chief global strategist at HSBC Asset Management. He thinks a “pay-back period” is in order. Guy Foster, his counterpart at wealth management firm Brewin Dolphin, says 2021’s gains increased at “breakneck pace”, and the best we can hope for is a gentle deceleration rather than a painful crunch. And Emiel van den Heiligenberg at Legal &amp; General Investment Management even mentions the dreaded b-word – “bubble” – even if only to point out that we’re not quite there yet, despite some of the market madness of 2021. Forecasting stock index movements is always a bit of a mug’s game – as the pandemic has underlined – so some limited kudos must go to those who still place their bets publicly. The brave souls who have put their reputations on the line to make forecasts for the year ahead range from Morgan Stanley (S&amp;P 500 down 9%) to Wells Fargo (S&amp;P 500 up 11%) – a sign of the uncertainty among investors. Credit Suisse is one of the few banks to have nailed its colours to the FTSE 100 mast, predicting London blue chips will gain a fairly measly 7%. Stockbroker A J Bell is even more pessimistic, going for only 4%. Analysts at HSBC and Deutsche Bank predict that economies in the US and Europe will grow at between 3.75% and 5% during 2022. Yet Japan’s Nomura cautions that US growth could slow considerably in the second half of the year. Among those lining up to spoil the party are China’s president, Xi Jinping, who has already turned down the music on his country’s tech tycoons. Sino-experts suggest Beijing is taking away the punch bowl with tighter credit and regulations. Then there is inflation, the dog that may finally be barking after 12 years of conspicuous silence. This time things really could be different: UK consumer prices have risen by 5.1% in the past year and US prices by a scorching 6.8%. Andrew Bailey at the Bank of England has already done his best Mervyn King impression, raising interest rates just as a slowdown looked imminent (though it may be only a slight, Omicron-related one). Nevertheless, the rate rise is a signal that central banks are really feeling the constant digs about inflation – even if some of the price increases are caused by pandemic disruption rather than widespread wage increases. Stopping the flow of money to the economy while not damaging the recovery could turn into a nail-biting balancing act. “It is devilishly difficult to achieve a soft landing,” says Deutsche’s David Folkerts-Landau. “But it can be and has been done.” Buckle up.Click here to access the print version. Fill the grid using the numbers 1 to 9. Each number must appear just once in every row, column and 3x3 box. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Click here to access the print version The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. Special announcement We regret to announce that, until further notice, we are unable to offer prizes for solvers of the Azed weekly crosswords. The special monthly Azed clue writing competitions are not affected and will continue as normal. Entry rules for these will appear as usual.Click here to access the print version. Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.The body of Archbishop Desmond Tutu will undergo aquamation, an increasingly popular and environmentally friendly alternative to traditional cremation methods, using water instead of fire. With aquamation, or “alkaline hydrolysis”, the body of the deceased is immersed for three to four hours in a mixture of water and a strong alkali, such as potassium hydroxide, in a pressurised metal cylinder and heated to around 150C. The process liquifies everything except for the bones, which are then dried in an oven and reduced to white dust, placed in an urn and handed to relatives. Like human composting, a technique of composting bodies with layers of organic material like leaves or wood chips, aquamation is still authorised only in certain countries. In South Africa, where Tutu died last Sunday, no legislation at all governs the practice. First developed in the early 1990s as a way to discard the bodies of animals used in experiments, the method was then used to dispose of cattle during the mad cow disease epidemic, said US-based researcher Philip R Olson. In the 2000s, US medical schools used aquamation to dispose of donated human cadavers, before the practice made its way into the funeral industry, Olson wrote in a 2014 paper. Tutu, who died on Boxing Day aged 90, was known for his modest lifestyle. He left instructions that his funeral ceremony should be simple and without frills. The anti-apartheid hero, whose funeral was held on Saturday, specifically asked for a cheap coffin and an eco-friendly cremation. With burial space in urban areas worldwide becoming increasingly scarce and expensive, aquamation has obvious attractions. Its advocates say water is a gentler way to go than flames. They also claim a liquid cremation consumes less energy than a conventional one, and emits less greenhouse gases. According to UK-based firm Resomation, aquamation uses five times less energy than fire, and reduces a funeral’s emissions of greenhouse gases by about 35%. Aquamation is also used to dispose of animal carcasses in slaughterhouses, where it is considered to be more efficient and hygienic.The positivity rate for Covid-19 cases in New South Wales has hit a high of 20% as the number of people in hospital with the virus passed 1,000 for the first time since the highly-contagious Omicron variant arrived. On Sunday there were 1,066 people in hospital with Covid-19 – an 18% increase a day after the number had already doubled between Boxing Day and New Year’s Eve. The positivity rate also reached 20.3% on Sunday, meaning one in five people tested had Covid, well above the 5% the WHO deemed an acceptable rate of infection at the beginning of the pandemic. The state recorded 18,278 new cases of Covid-19 on Sunday, a drop on the previous two days following a significant fall in the number of tests conducted. NSW Health said that 90,019 people had been tested in the previous 24 hours, down from 119,278 in the previous reporting period. The fall in testing follows frequent urging from the NSW government for people not to line up for PCR tests unless they have symptoms or have been deemed a close contact. The government has also changed its definition of a close contact in line with changes agreed to by National Cabinet last week. “Testing capacity in NSW is currently under enormous pressure and the only people getting a PCR [nose and throat swab] should be those who have Covid-19 symptoms; live in a household with a confirmed Covid-19-positive case; or have otherwise been advised by NSW Health to get tested,” the health department said in a statement on Sunday. “Interstate travellers and international arrivals are not required to have a PCR test and should instead undertake Rapid Antigen Tests, as per the guidelines for the respective states and territories.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Covid rates continue to rise across the country with 7,172 cases in Victoria and three virus-related deaths, while Queensland reported 3,587 cases. Extreme heat caused the closure of eight of Victoria’s testing sites on Saturday, blowing out queues and test result wait times. Early childhood minister Ingrid Stitt said the state’s health minister would make an announcement on widening access to rapid antigen tests within days. “We will have more to say in the next few days about how we will distribute rapid antigen tests for those who are eligible to use that as a way of ensuring they remain Covid-safe,” she said. Queensland’s chief health officer, Dr John Gerrard, said on Sunday that of the state’s current cases there are 112 hospitalisations. In South Australia, premier Steven Marshall announced 82 people were in hospital after the state recored 2,298 new Covid cases from 21,140 tests performed yesterday. Seven people were in ICU. Marshall also said the state had “dodged the bullet with a very vulnerable community” after an outbreak in Port Augusta, where roughly one in five people are Indigenous, appeared to be less serious than previously thought. Tasmania also recorded 404 new cases with three people in hospital and a positivity rate of 26% from 1,542 tests performed. The high rate comes after changes to testing requirements that ask only those with symptoms to get tested. But while cases in Australia continue to reach record levels, there is growing evidence Omicron may lead to milder symptoms. A study from London’s Imperial College found the risk of being admitted to hospital is up to 70% less for people with Omicron compared to those infected with Delta. Of the 112 people in Queensland who are in hospital, only five were being treated in intensive care. “The issue we are facing is of course that with the degree of contagiousness of this virus, we are going to be seeing very large numbers of cases, even though the severity is clearly going to be less, we are going to see very large numbers of cases and a small proportion of a very large number is still a large number,” Gerrard said. The speed of infections with Omicron across the globe is causing concern for the world’s health authorities, who warn that even a milder variant could lead to health systems becoming overwhelmed. Last week the WHO’s Europe Covid incident manager, Catherine Smallwood, warned that a “rapid growth of Omicron … even if combined with a slightly milder disease, will still result in large numbers of hospitalisations, particularly amongst unvaccinated groups, and cause widespread disruption to health systems and other critical services”. In NSW, there is increasing evidence the state’s health system is wavering under the rate of infections. The health department announced late on New Year’s Eve that in “exceptional circumstances”, frontline workers who are asymptomatic close contacts will be exempt from having to self-isolate for seven days, to avoid disruption to key services, a decision experts labelled evidence of an “extremely desperate situation”. It followed revelations in a leaked memo that revealed St George hospital in Sydney’s south was already planning to fly in nurses in an attempt to deal with staffing shortages and surging Covid cases.It’s break time at Valayanchirangara primary school and the pupils run freely beneath the mango trees and palms. Girls race against the boys, hitching up their knee-length shorts, cargo green for girls and teal blue for boys, as they go. It’s been three years since this small government primary school introduced gender-neutral uniforms for its pupils, and in doing so set in motion a quiet revolution that is now sweeping across the south Indian state of Kerala. “I feel very thrilled and comfortable with the uniform. It’s quite distinct from that of my friends studying in nearby schools. I can play well with this dress,” said 10-year-old Sivananda Mahesh. Inspired by the Valayanchirangara model, more than a dozen schools in Kerala have shifted to gender-neutral uniforms and the state’s ruling Communist party of India has pledged to support the movement being implemented across the state. Several women’s rights groups have also come out in support of the unisex uniform initiative, saying it will help bridge the gender gap. Kerala has India’s highest literacy rate, but there is still a higher literacy rate for men than women and gendered and patriarchal expectations continue to be placed on women in society. However, this initiative to tackle gender inequality at a young age is now facing stiff opposition from a section of Muslim organisations in Kerala, which accuse the schools of forcing western dress on their children and denying girls the right to wear what they deem to be appropriate feminine clothes. In December, a protest rally was organised by the Muslim Coordination Committee in Balussery, a town in north Kerala, when the local secondary school introduced a unisex uniform of trousers and shirts for boys and girls. Prominent Muslim organisations in the state warned the state government against enforcing gender-neutral uniforms in other educational institutions in Kerala, a state that is 26% Muslim, saying it would be un-Islamic for girls to wear trousers. The decision at Valayanchirangara primary came after Benoy Peter, the former head of the parent-teacher association, noticed the difficulties that girls often faced wearing skirts in the playground and while playing sports. The school enlisted the help of a local fashion designer Vidya Mukunda to create a gender-neutral uniform that had “style and elegance”. The school, which has 756 pupils who are mostly Christian and Muslims, said only one parent objected to the uniform, and after the benefits of the initiative were explained, in particular how it would make it easier for girls to move about comfortably, the resistance was dropped. “When the idea came up, we were worried about the reaction of parents who prefer their girls’ wearing skirts. But we were able to implement it easily and without any protests,” said KA Usha, the school’s former headteacher. Usha said the uniform had not only bolstered the performance of pupils, but parents were flocking to send their children to the school. “Parents are keen to get admission here as the new uniform evoked a lot of goodwill,” she said. The school has also pushed its gender-equality initiatives beyond uniforms. After concerns that the school materials were filled with content “often in conflict with gender parity”, they created their own gender-neutral textbooks, which are designed to sensitise children to gender equality from a young age. “We made our books with teachers writing the content and a former student doing the drawings. The books carry images of women driving vehicles and men cooking in the kitchen. The books convey the message that no job or task is gender-specific,” said Usha. The school has also designed a new logo with the image of a girl and a boy to spread the message of gender equality. KP Suma, a teacher at the school, said: “Now the boys and girls have equal happiness and freedom. The uniform has boosted their confidence. Gender sensitivity is at the heart of the school, and we are ensuring easy mingling of boys and girls without bothering about gender.” After the successes of Valayanchirangara primary, the state education minister, V Sivankutty, said he was determined to see unisex uniforms rolled out across Kerala. “We are anticipating similar attempts at every educational institution in the state. On its part, the state government is committed to promoting gender equality in education and other fields,” he said. At Kerala’s Balussery school, the site of the all-male uniform protests this month, the principal, R Indu, said it was students who had heard about the Valayanchirangara experiment who prompted her to evolve gender-neutral uniforms. This year, the school introduced the uniform with approval from the staff council and PTA. Indu said Balussery students who wish to wear shawls for religious reasons were still allowed to do so, and there would be no interference in religious identity. “The opposition against gender-neutral uniforms will not last long. My Muslim neighbours feel nothing wrong with it. Only the orthodoxy is opposing it. My children can do any activity with ease using this uniform,” said V Vivek, the PTA’s president. Many female Muslim students also praised the unisex uniforms on social media. But Jafer Neroth, a leader of the Islamic organisation Sunny Students’ Federation who was leading the protests, said the uniforms were “political tools”. “The government is helping the implementation of liberal ideologies on students and without consultation with religious leaders. Biologically, men and women are different, and it is the denial of diversity,” he said. Sivankutty said the protests from some Muslim groups would not halt government plans to make gender-neutral uniforms the norm in Kerala. “We are unmindful of the protests from the orthodoxy,” he said.Politics Toby Helm Liz Truss In the latter part of 2021, Liz Truss has been everywhere in the media. And as she sets her sights on reaching No 10 one day, we should expect to see and hear much more of her in 2022. Appointed by Boris Johnson as foreign secretary in September, Truss has been frantically upping her profile ever since. Late last year, Russian state media mocked her as “the new Iron lady” after she appeared atop a British tank in Estonia. Then Truss issued a Happy Christmas message to the nation – and the world – via Twitter, posing Queen-like, in front of a giant globe and the union jack. It seems to be working. In a recent ConservativeHome poll of Tory activists, Truss topped the list of potential successors to Johnson, ahead of the chancellor, Rishi Sunak. In her new international role, Truss, 46, has been busy playing up her enthusiasm for personal liberty at home and a small state. She also stresses her patriotism and her enthusiasm for Brexit. But it was not always so. Truss was a Liberal Democrat at Oxford University and campaigned against Brexit in 2016, warning it would be bad for freedom and the economy. Now she wants to be ready for a possible 2022 leadership contest in which the votes of pro-Brexit Tory members will be key in determining the final outcome. Wes Streeting While Labour’s progress under Keir Starmer has at times been faltering, the rise of Wes Streeting has been relentless. Streeting, who was brought up in a council flat in Stepney in the east end of London, was promoted in Starmer’s recent reshuffle to be shadow health and social care secretary, at the age of just 38. After one of his first Commons appearances in his new role, in a debate on more Covid restrictions, even Tory MPs noted his ability, marking him out as a potential future leader. Streeting was educated at a London comprehensive school and was one of the first pupils who had received free school meals to reach Cambridge University. He funded his time at university, where he became Student Union president, by working part-time as a shop assistant. He is also a former president of the National Union of Students. Before being elected to parliament as the Labour MP for Ilford North in 2015, Streeting worked in the charitable, voluntary and private sectors, and as a Labour councillor. He was head of education at Stonewall, the charity for LGBT rights, and is a patron of LGBT Labour. Earlier last year, he had to take time out of politics having been diagnosed with kidney cancer from which he is now recovered. Heather Hallett The name Baroness Hallett may mean little to most people outside the upper echelons of the legal establishment, but from early 2022 she will be in the news as much as anyone in public life. Lady Hallett, 71, a former senior appeal court judge, who also served as coroner in the inquest into the July 2005 terror attacks on London’s transport network, has been appointed to chair the official inquiry into the Covid-19 pandemic, which begins in the spring. The fact that hearings will be held in public means she will be firmly in the media spotlight. The draft terms of the inquiry are expected to be published early in the new year, after which Hallett will undertake a public consultation – including with bereaved families and other affected groups – before getting the process under way. Organisations representing families who have lost loved ones from Covid have welcomed the appointment of the respected crossbench peer. But they insist that they will be pressing her to uncover the full extent of mistakes by government and the reasons why it and the NHS were so underprepared for the pandemic. Science Robin McKie Martin Landray Prof Martin Landray, of Oxford University, is co-founder of the Recovery trial, the world’s largest study aimed at finding potential treatments for Covid. Over 46,000 patients have been recruited to the project whose successes have included the discovery of the benefits of dexamethasone, a cheap steroid drug that has subsequently saved the lives of more than a million severely ill patients. Now Landray is expanding those efforts. First, he and his colleagues stand ready to include potential treatments for flu as part of the Recovery project. In addition, he is set to launch Protas, a not-for-profit organisation which will work with the NHS and others around the world to harness the power of large-scale randomised trials to assess potential treatments for cancer, heart disease and dementia. “We have seen in this pandemic just how important clinical trials such as Recovery are in understanding which of many promising treatments are truly beneficial for patients and which, despite hope and expectation, are not. We now plan to apply the lessons learned from that experience to find new ways to prevent and treat other diseases that place huge burden on patients and the NHS.” Melissa Thorpe Melissa Thorpe has a simple goal for 2022. She wants to put Cornwall on the map – as a space power. She has plans to make the county the first place in Britain to host the launching of a satellite into orbit round the Earth. Later this year a modified 747 jet, run by Virgin Orbit, will take off from Spaceport Cornwall, based at Newquay. It will carry a rocket strapped to its underside and, at a height of 35,000 feet, it will separate from the plane and be fired to propel its satellite cargo into orbit. The probe, Kernow Sat 1, will measure levels of plastic pollution in the ocean. Virgin Orbit has already launched satellites this way – over the Pacific – and has plans to use Spaceport Cornwall as its European base. “Instead of customers having to take their satellites to a rocket pad, Virgin Orbit comes to a site near you to offer a launch,” says Thorpe, a Canadian economist with a background in the aviation industry. At least six other UK spaceports – one in Wales and the rest in Scotland – are set to begin launches over the next few years, with Britain aiming to corner a significant share in the placing of small- to medium-sized satellites into low orbit round the Earth. In the case of Spaceport Cornwall, Thorpe says it is hoped to create about 150 jobs for those working on satellite assembly, programming and data analysis with a further 240 jobs likely to be set up in the supply of goods and providing other services for the Spaceport. Megan McCubbin Zoologist, conservationist and photographer Megan McCubbin has become a regular stalwart on the BBC’s seasonal Watches series, on which she has worked on with her stepfather, Chris Packham, since 2020. She had stepped in to join the programme when Packham’s regular Cape Town-based co-star, Michaela Strachan, was unable to travel to the UK because of Covid travel restrictions. Since then, McCubbin – who is an experienced wildlife photographer and who studied zoology at Liverpool University – has become the youthful face of conservation in the UK after presenting Springwatch, Autumnwatch and Winterwatch on BBC Two in 2020 and 2021. She is now set to return to our screens with Winterwatch 2022, where she will be stationed at the wetland centre at Castle Espie in Northern Ireland. Arts Vanessa Thorpe Freddie de Tommaso It is certainly the era of the overnight, stand-in star in the world of live performance, largely courtesy of the virus that has disabled many performers. The problem is now so widespread among casts that those stepping up into lead roles at short notice are no longer even the official understudies. It is a chance that can sometimes mark the start of a long career, of course, as the life of the late Sally Ann Howes showed. The Truly Scrumptious actor from the musical Chitty Chitty Bang Bang, who died last month aged 91, was originally the replacement for Julie Andrews on stage in My Fair Lady. But tenor Freddie de Tommaso, from Tunbridge Wells, Kent, was already on the radar of many opera fans when he took over the role of Cavaradossi in Puccini’s Tosca at the Royal Opera House earlier than planned a few weeks ago. Since then, the 28-year-old has consolidated his right to the spotlight. The Observer’s music writer, Fiona Maddocks, was not the only one to suggest the rather tired accolade “the new Pavarotti” might actually be justified. De Tommaso came on halfway through the production when American singer Bryan Hymel, suffering with a cold, could not continue. In doing so, he became not only the first Briton to sing the role at Covent Garden in almost 60 years, when Charles Craig sang the part, but also the youngest ever to do so at the famous venue. De Tommaso was also following in the footsteps of Luciano Pavarotti, who made his own debut there as an understudy in La Boheme in 1963. Liz Kingsman Two of the nation’s favourite small-screen actors, Ruth Wilson and Jodie Comer, are due to make appearances in one-woman shows at the West End’s Harold Pinter theatre this spring – Wilson first in the The Human Voice and then Comer in Prima Facie. And yet perhaps the most interesting speculation surrounds the future of Liz Kingsman, whose own solo effort, which is actually called One Woman Show, is now selling out at London’s Soho theatre. The writer-performer has created an affectionate spoof of the popular new genre of women’s shows inspired, like the triumphant Fleabag, by the personal experience of 21st century womanhood, in all its gory glory and unlikely chaos. Kingsman’s comic parody of the use of the “hot mess” heroine as a dramatic device has been winning plaudits across the board. Monica Ali Readers who have been drawn into the fictional worlds created by Monica Ali, the writer who came to fame with the acclaimed bestseller Brick Lane in 2003, will soon have a new work to seek out. The author’s much-anticipated fifth novel, Love Marriage, is out in February. It tells the story of Yasmin Ghorami, a medic engaged to fellow doctor, Joe Sangster. As their wedding day draws closer and Ghorami’s parents get to know her fiance’s uncompromising, feminist mother, both families are forced to confront old secrets and ancient treacheries. Ali’s heroine also begins to question what the phrase “a love marriage” really means, when set in opposition to the arranged marriages that are still often the norm in south Asian culture. The book, like Brick Lane before it, is also earmarked for a screen treatment, with Ali adapting a script. World affairs Simon Tisdall Valérie Pécresse Valérie Pécresse has a fair-to-middling chance of becoming France’s first female president in the spring when she challenges Emmanuel Macron, who is seeking a second term. This prospect came about due to two unexpected developments. First, Éric Zemmour, a racist, Islamophobic TV pundit, threw his hat into the ring. His candidacy looks like splitting the far-right vote that the veteran National Rally (formerly National Front) leader, Marine Le Pen, thought was her own. Second, Pécresse last month became the first woman to lead Les Républicains – the mainstream conservative Gaullist party – after besting other presidential hopefuls such as Michel Barnier, the Brexit negotiator. Pécresse, 54, is no ingénue. She is president of the Île de France regional council, which includes Paris, and was a senior minister during Nicolas Sarkozy’s presidency. She will also face Paris mayor, Anne Hidalgo, the Socialists’ candidate, in the first round. If Pécresse prevails, her most likely run-off opponent is Macron, who currently leads in national opinion polls but whose support is soft. Pécresse, controversially, has moved to the right in order to neutralise Le Pen and Zemmour. Macron’s advisers worry she could also steal centrist voters on whom he depends. Xi Jinping Xi Jinping is often described as the most powerful Chinese leader since Mao Zedong. He may also be the most dangerous. Since becoming president in 2012, Xi, 68, has eliminated most internal opposition within the Communist party, in part through anti-corruption purges. He has cracked down on dissent in traditional and online media and limited personal freedoms. His unoriginal “Thoughts” have been written into the party’s constitution and his “China Dream”, a developmental vision, has led to large-scale economic reforms, centralised control of China’s cutting edge technology sector, and the ambitious Belt and Road global investment project. But it’s Xi aggressive foreign policy stance, more than his domestic authoritarianism, that worries western leaders. He has greatly boosted military spending and is building new nuclear weapons. Having crushed democracy in Hong Kong, Xi threatens Taiwan with invasion, even as he asserts China’s sovereignty over the South China Sea and oversees border clashes with India. At this autumn’s 20th party congress, Xi is expected to win an unprecedented third presidential term. But that will not slow him down. Xi is a man in a hurry, intent on making China the undisputed global No 1 and securing his historical place in the party pantheon. Amy Coney Barrett Amy Coney Barrett’s lifetime appointment to the US supreme court in autumn 2020, on the eve of the presidential election, was celebrated by Donald Trump and his far-right supporters as a watershed moment. Her confirmation gave conservative-minded justices a 6-3 advantage on the court. Democrats found it all the more galling in that Barrett, 49, replaced the highly respected liberal justice, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, who died in September 2020. In the coming year, the consequences of this shift in power are likely to be sharply felt, most saliently in the case of Roe v Wade, the landmark 1973 ruling that underpins nationwide abortion rights. Arguments in recent test cases, to be adjudicated by the court in 2022, strongly suggested Barrett will vote to overturn or severely limit abortion rights. Her recent suggestion that women should put their newborn babies out for adoption, rather than terminate unplanned or problematic pregnancies, caused widespread offence. Liberals fear Barrett may also cast regressive votes on other hot-button issues such as same-sex marriage, the climate crisis and voting rights, amid widespread fears that Republicans are planning to steal the 2024 election, as Trump tried to in 2020. Fashion Priya Elan Lourdes Leon Madonna’s daughter Lourdes “Lola” Leon has been in the public eye since she was in the womb. So it’s no big surprise to see her tipped to be one of the big models in 2022. Following in the footsteps of Lennon Gallagher, Iris Law and Kaia Gerber, Lourdes – a trained dancer like her famous mother – has already appeared in campaigns for Swarovski, Mugler, Marc Jacobs and Jean Paul Gaultier. Her poses stand out in their precise choreography and her recent shoot for Paper magazine was on-point in its slinky Y2K stylings. However, Leon has been vocal about not piggybacking on Madonna’s fame (in fact she made headlines for her outspoken roasting of Madonna fans when they flooded her Instagram with geeky comments). The 24-year-old, who first graced the catwalk in 2018, told Vogue “people think I’m this talentless rich kid who’s had everything given to her, but I’m not.” She also believes in the importance of standing out from the crowd, or, in the case of TikTok, the algorithm. “I don’t know if it can go back now because of what social media has done to fashion, but I think that’s what it needs: [to be] based on the individual and how they choose to dress and live their lives,” she told Paper magazine. How very 2022. Steven Stokey-Daley Despite the pandemic, a flurry of new British designers have found exposure through social media and celebrity endorsements. Since graduating, Liverpudlian Steven Stokey-Daley, who operates under the business name SS Daley, gained exposure by dressing Harry Styles for his Golden music video. His oversize, billowy shirt and hand-embroidered trousers were showcased on Styles, causing the clothes to sell out immediately. Trained at the University of Westminster, Stokey-Daley once described his work as “micro-subversions”. As well as disrupting menswear through his feminine clothes, there’s a modernity to his sustainable, made-to-order business model too. His underlying aesthetic obsession (the British class system viewed through working-class eyes) remains of perennial interest. Consciously uncoupling from the fashion system (he says he was never into fashion as a youngster; “It’s bullshit,” he said), instead he draws from British culture for inspiration: a mood board he shared with Dazed magazine featured Kate Bush, Princess Diana and old Etonite schoolboys. Saul Nash Virgil Abloh’s death underlined the importance of what the late designer did to streetwear: transforming it into luxury garments and forcing a discussion about cultural expectations and dress codes, in the process. The next generation of designers have weaved Abloh’s philosophy around athleisure into their collections, and none more effectively than Saul Nash. He is a Fashion East (Marine Rose, Dior’ Kim Jones, Grace Wales Bonner) alumni, and Hypebeast magazine called him the “next superstar of sportswear”. Nash combines utility with Abloh’s architectural conceit, which drove all of his designs. During the pandemic, his digital presentations used choreography to express conversations around masculinity, sexuality and weaving in his cultural heritage (raised in London, he has Bajan and Guyanese heritage). This made his collections a talking point above and beyond the clothes. “My work is rooted in metamorphose,” he told Vogue, and we can’t wait to see what he comes up with next. Sport Barry Glendenning and Suzanne Wrack Leah Williamson In many respects, every England woman football player will be a sporting face this year with a home Euros, which kick-off at Old Trafford and conclude at Wembley, likely to intensify the spotlight. For Williamson, though, this summer could be transformative. With more than 100 appearances for Arsenal, their youngest player to reach a century, the ball-playing centre back has been eased into the Lionesses squad and was primarily left on the bench during the 2019 World Cup despite a title-winning season with her club. Now, though, she is arguably no longer the future of the England back line but its present, with new manager Sarina Wiegman having handed her the captaincy for her first two camps in charge (both long-time captain Steph Houghton and Lucy Bronze are out with long-term injuries) as well as a starting berth. Scheduled to return from a hamstring injury in the new year, should the 24-year-old be fit enough she will likely get her first meaningful stab at a senior competitive international at the Euros and have the opportunity to really test the belief of Arsenal fans that she is one of the world’s best at the back by going up against some of the world’s finest forwards. SW Keely Hodgkinson Despite not having Olympic funding at the start of 2021, Hodgkinson wrapped up the year as the surprise leader of a new vanguard of British middle-distance female runners. It was an annus mirabilis for the teenager, who won the European Indoor 800 metres title just four days after her 19th birthday, becoming the youngest British winner of an indoor gold since 1970. It was her first tilt at a major title but even better was to come. A keen swimmer as a child until her father nudged her towards the track, Hodgkinson took Olympic silver at the delayed Tokyo 2020 Games in a time of 1min 55.88sec. It was an improvement on that posted in victory by a 34-year-old Kelly Holmes in Athens six years before Hodgkinson was born. It made her the 26th fastest woman in history over two laps of the track. “That record has stood since ’95, is that right?” asked an incredulous Hodgkinson post-race. “And Kelly is a legend of the sport.” Hodgkinson is well on her way to achieving legendary status of her own, having finished the season with victory in the 800m Diamond League final. This year she will go for the track trinity of Commonwealth Games, and World and European Championships glory. BG Phil Foden Comfortably scaling the exalted heights many predicted even when he was a football-obsessed toddler, the so-called “Stockport Iniesta” already has three Premier League titles, an FA Cup and four League Cups to his name. While many pundits insisted the teenage Foden would have been better served spending time on loan away from Manchester City, the benefits of a daily training-ground education from his manager, Pep Guardiola, and the likes of skilled technicians such as David Silva, Raheem Sterling and Sergio Aguero are now apparent in a commendably patient and humble player who seems a model of high performance and low maintenance. During England’s run to the final of Euro 2020, Foden was used sparingly until a foot injury ruled him out of the final defeat by Italy, but Ahead of 2022’s winter World Cup in Qatar it seems inconceivable that he will not feature prominently in Gareth Southgate’s plans. “Phil can play in five positions up front,” said Guardiola, when asked about the 21-year-old’s strengths. “He can play in both attacking midfield positions in the pockets and he can play in three positions up front.” Southgate’s dilemma is not whether, but how best, to use a young man of his obscene talents. BG Technology Ian Tucker Parag Agrawal Twitter’s new chief executive took over in November from co-founder Jack Dorsey and is already making changes to the organisation and the platform. Two senior executives have departed, and the company has been restructured with the aim of making it speedier to innovate. Observers and shareholders have long argued that the service needs to quickly grapple with some long-running fundamental problems: how to clamp down on misinformation and hate speech (without losing its rumbustious appeal); how to make some money (without bombarding users with ads); and how to attract younger users away from TikTok and Instagram (without alienating the older crowd). Last year, the company added an array of new features such as its subscription Twitter Blue service, paid Superfollows, Spaces live audio rooms and fact checking service Birdwatch. The jury is out on the success or otherwise of these innovations but the additions and iterations are likely to continue – a few days after Agrawal’s appointment, with an eye to revamping its messaging features, the company announced the acquisition of Slack-like app Quill. A different order of acquisition is predicted by one pundit, Scott Gallaway, who has suggested Salesforce should reheat its 2016 takeover attempt of Twitter, although last year he suggested that the platform should buy CNN – and that hasn’t happened YET. Last but not least, another item in Agrawal’s in-tray is Donald Trump’s legal challenge to his January 2021 permanent suspension from the platform. A bigly year is in store. Christel Schaldemose The limbering-up is over: this year legislators will be attempting to land a few punches on the tech heavyweights. In the US, Joe Biden’s new Federal Trade Commission head, Lina Khan, will be trying to curtail Silicon Valley mega-companies with her fresh interpretation of antitrust laws. And Europe has some Danish reinforcements in the form of Christel Schaldemose MEP. In recent years EU efforts have been led by the impressive European commissioner Margrethe Vestager yet her landmark data privacy laws are haphazardly enforced and competition cases have become bogged down in legalese. The EU’s answer is more rules – the Digital Services Act and the Digital Markets Act – to regulate illegal content and improve competition respectively. Schaldemose has been tasked with shaping the former into something which will become law – which has involved wrangling 2,000 amendments. The act aims to crack down on everything from images of abuse to the sale of dangerous products online. Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen says the legislation has the potential to be the “global gold standard”. The act should be put before legislators this month, and of course, will also require the agreement of the 27 states and the European Commission. How effective the act is will be determined by the interplay of Schaldemose’s horse-trading skills and the multimillion-dollar leverage of Silicon Valley lobbyists. As Schaldemose told Bloomberg, “We are taking a giant leap forward on regulating platforms, but we’re… not on the moon yet.” Anu Duggal In a recent round-up by Fast Company of 10 of this year’s rumoured tech IPOs – from online credit facilitator Klarna to gaming communication platform Discord – one factor was common to all: none had a female founder. Predictably, tech bros tend to invest in other tech bros. According to Dealroom in 2021, 90% of European venture capital went to male-only founded companies – a proportion unchanged in five years. But this year a new cohort of investors has the funds to initiate some change. The doyenne of this generation is Anu Duggal. In July her New York-based Female Founders Fund announced its third and biggest pot of money so far – $57m – partly financed by Melinda French Gates. Duggal said they hope to invest in 25 companies. “From day one, we have been committed to building the largest, most powerful network of female operators in technology,” she added. In November, a new German venture capital fund, Auxxo, announced it had $15m to invest in companies where at least 20% of the founding shares are held by women. And in the UK, this year Pink Salt Ventures will begin its second round of funding female-led start-ups. Screen Wendy Ide and Barbara Ellen Suzanna Son Wholesomely freckle-faced, with guileless blue eyes, surrounded by novelty doughnuts: Suzanna Son makes an instant impression in Red Rocket, the latest film from Sean Baker (The Florida Project). Mikey, the down-on-his-luck adult movie actor who is the film’s central character, is immediately beguiled. And so is the audience. Son, who makes her acting debut in the film released in March , owes her career to that electrifying first impression – she was spotted by Baker on the street in Los Angeles. He told her he liked her look, but at the time nothing more came of the encounter. Then two years later, he invited her to audition for a low-budget movie following the comic misadventures of a narcissist ex-porn star, which was to be shot under the radar in Texas during the pandemic. She jumped at the chance. Son plays Strawberry, a coquettish highschooler who is bowled over by Mikey’s perma-tanned charm offensive. It’s a terrific performance: sparky, fresh and unaffected. In a film which doesn’t skew towards a particularly flattering view of human nature, she effortlessly captures the sympathy of the audience. She also sings, delivering a memorable rendition of N Sync’s Bye Bye Bye in a key scene. Next up for Son is another role which taps into her musical talent: she is starring in The Idol, a new HBO series set in the music industry which is currently filming. Baker, who praised her “dead-on” instincts, predicts a career path which could mirror that of Oscar-winner Emma Stone. WI Reda Elazouar All three of the central performances in Reggie Yates’s joyous directorial debut Pirates are terrific, but the stand out, in this energetic portrait of young male friendship and London at the turn of the millennium, is Reda Elazouar. With crisp comic timing and infectious humour, he steals every scene. WI Mike Faist Although Tony-award nominated for his Broadway theatre work, Faist was not a familiar face for cinema audiences. The live-wire volatility of his performance as Riff in Steven Spielberg’s West Side Story is set to change that. WI Gabrielle Creevy Welsh actor Gabrielle Creevy, 25, is one to watch in 2022. She burned bright in 2021, playing working-class lesbian teenager Bethan in the second series of semi-autobiographical BBC dramedy In My Skin, written by Kayleigh Llewellyn. In this study of love, dysfunction and survival – Bethan’s mother (Jo Hartley) suffers bipolar disorder, while her father (Rhodri Meilir) is a brutal alcoholic – Creevy brings Bethan to defiant, vulnerable life as she navigates school, family and her sexuality. Raised in a council flat in Port Talbot, Creevy won a Bafta Cymru award in 2019 for In My Skin, returning to her shift in a coffee shop after hearing she’d been nominated. With roles including The Pact (BBC One), she’s set to feature in John Madden’s upcoming war drama Operation Mincemeat alongside Colin Firth and Matthew Macfadyen. Creevy has also been cast as Maggie in the US television adaptation of Lisa Taddeo’s non-fiction bestseller, Three Women. BE Tahar Rahim Tahar Rahim, 40, a French actor of Algerian heritage, was subtly petrifying in 2021’s BBC One drama series The Serpent as real-life serial killer Charles Sobhraj, who duped, drugged, and murdered western travellers on the 1970s hippy trail. Rahim embodied the stylised menace and thin-skinned resentment of Sobhraj, turning The Serpent into one of the most compulsive and unsettling cult-watches of 2021. A character actor par excellence, Rahim’s career is ripening into one of chameleon-like versatility and uncompromising intensity. He won two Cesar awards for his breakthrough role in Jacques Audiard’s A Prophet (2009), and he’s been Golden Globe and Bafta-nominated for Kevin Macdonald’s 2021 Guantanamo Bay drama The Mauritanian. In 2022, Rahim will appear in Apple TV+’s climate change anthology drama Extrapolations, directed by Scott Z Burns, co-starring Meryl Streep, Marion Cotillard, and Ed Norton. BE • This article was amended on 4 January 2022 because an earlier version referred to “Verdi’s Tosca” when Puccini’s Tosca was meant. It was also amended on 6 January 2022 to clarify that the description of Valérie Pécresse as the “first woman to lead Les Républicains” was in reference to her leading them in the context of the French presidential election; the party has a president, Christian Jacob, as well as leaders in both houses of parliament.The company that twice incorrectly informed a grieving man he had been bequeathed £14,000 from his late sister’s pension plan, and then mistakenly told the deceased’s father to expect £19,000, was Legal &amp; General, not NS&amp;I as an article said (“And the awards for the worst customer service of the year go to...”, 26 December, page 56). We apologise to NS&amp;I for this error. It is the average price that Londoners paid for properties outside the capital that has risen from £450,460 in 2020 to £486,890 in 2021 (according to estate agents Hamptons), not the average UK house price. The same research said Londoners bought more than 112,000 homes outside the capital last year, but incorrectly equated this figure to “creating two new cities roughly the size of Leeds” (“Tired of life? No, just tired of London: record £55bn spent fleeing the capital”, 26 December, p24). The headline of a letter said: “Let refugees work and we all win”. As the writer made clear, their plea was for the rights of asylum seekers; people with refugee status are allowed to work in the UK (“This week’s issue”, 26 December, p48). Homophone corner: “… the most likely scenario remains a second-round dual between [Macron] and Le Pen” (“ ‘The right is back”: Gaullists pick female candidate to take on Macron”, 5 December, page 30). Other recently amended articles include: Bookseller Samir Mansour: “It was shocking to realise I was a target” What questions should you ask when you hear a claim based on data? Revealed: the secret ‘forced labour’ migration route from Vietnam to the UK $10bn James Webb space telescope launches on ‘eternal search’ mission Good chablis and ‘halfies’: life with the other Duchess of Argyll Citrus-baked salmon with beetroot boiled potatoes by Lopè Ariyo Write to the Readers’ Editor, the Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736There are valid concerns about conventional livestock, but vegans also have blindspots (“No meat please, we’re British: now a third of us approve of vegan diet”, News). Stem-cell meat may feed richer countries some day and less conventional livestock such as snails, mussels and capybara may also help, but dramatic reductions in the impact per head of cattle, chickens, etc, are already possible via changes to feed and additives and regenerative methods. Food security is also crucial. Crops can fail badly but free markets absurdly punish suppliers if surpluses are produced, land is used for short-term gain and there is still no defined responsibility for food security. Failure to restore fish stocks could prove suicidal if crops fail badly because of climate change, pests and diseases. The whole “eat this, not that” approach is the wrong way round; naive idealism and factory farming apologists are opposite sides of the same counterfeit coin. Better supplies must be the priority, with future consumption based on this. Iain Climie Whitchurch, Hampshire Going plant-based prevents animals from enduring miserable lives and violent, terrifying deaths. It’s better for the environment and slashes the risk of suffering from cancer, diabetes, heart disease and strokes. Fortunately, ditching meat, eggs and dairy has never been easier. Vegan options are plentiful in supermarkets, restaurants and takeaways. From plant-based eggs to vegan meat, dairy-free cheese, and ice-cream, the choice is huge and growing by the day. Eating vegan is a compassionate choice that stops suffering and can boost your health. Jennifer White Peta UK, London N1 Publicly fund political parties Michael Savage’s piece about John Caudwell potentially withdrawing financial support for the Tories because he’s disappointed with Boris Johnson raises the question – should anyone be funding any political party? (“Top Tory donor slams Johnson as new poll shows strong Labour lead”, News) Surely the way to indicate our dislike of the direction a party is going is at the ballot box. The idea that individuals or companies influence politics with money is distasteful. The main parties should receive funding solely from public funds so that they are beyond the influence of lobbyists and the wealthy. Should the wealthy have spare money they could over-pay their taxes, or contribute to deprived areas of society rather than trying to influence power. Government should be to the benefit of all members of society. Robert Morgan Harlow, Essex Do unto others… If the individualists are incapable of collectivist engagement then those of us who view this pandemic as a public health issue first and foremost can adopt their libertarian philosophy (“Which philosophy helps us confront the crises that beset us... ‘we first’ or ‘me first’?”, Comment). Therefore, I exercise my right to not teach you, your children or husband or wife or partner who refuses to wear a face mask in class, to not stack the supermarket shelves with the food you want to buy, to not spend my money in sectors you think vital to the economy and beneficial to your consulting role or pension plan or dividend, to not drive your train and any other myriad roles where I serve you. Good luck on your own. Dr Michael Sheard Ingleby Arncliffe, Northallerton North Yorkshire Put vouchers to good use As two of the 500,000 participants in the Covid-19 infection survey, led by the Office for National Statistics and the Department of Health and Social Care, my wife and I have been receiving initially weekly, and now monthly, £50 of vouchers (“Infection survey hands out £210m in high street vouchers”, News). By donating an equivalent gift aided amount to an aid agency we will, over the year of the survey, have recycled £1,000 of the government’s own money back into overseas aid and so done something to mitigate the effect of its cut in funding last year. If all participants in the survey did the same thing the government would have repaid, through us, a quarter-of-a-billion pounds. Negative test results for us (so far) have turned into positive results for developing nations. Cliff Harris Bedford Underestimating Farage David Olusoga is quite right to say that Nigel Farage made himself look a complete idiot over his attack on the RNLI (“Culture warriors sallied forth, only to be defeated by their own ineptitude”, Comment), and not for the first time. But let’s not underestimate him. After all, the Conservative party has allowed his ideology to take it over without the need to fire a shot. Dave Pollard Leicester The decline of insects In David Spiegelhalter and Anthony Masters’ column on whether to trust statistics (“What questions should you ask when you hear a claim based on data?”, Comment), they throw doubt on whether the number of insects are declining as the researcher only looked for articles about decline. I am afraid I am even less reliable as my belief in their decline is based on the fact that when we started holidaying on the west coast of Scotland, we would return with the car plastered with dead insects. Now they are barely noticeable. Only one case, but if they are declining on the narrow strip between Oban and St Andrews, then they could be declining everywhere. Margaret Squires St Andrews, Fife Pig-hoo-o-o-o-ey! I’ve been reading William Keegan’s missives for many decades and this one trumps all of them for wit, intelligence and sheer mischief (“Johnson’s pig-headed reign nears a tragicomic climax”, Business). Who would have guessed how perfectly the Empress of Blandings could enlighten us upon the economic pickle we are currently wallowing in? Robert Kelso Frome, SomersetNew York City’s new mayor, Eric Adams, was sworn into office soon after midnight yesterday. It was a fitting time of day for a cop-turned-politico who has indicated that he plans to return some personal panache to a metropolis knocked by a pandemic, political strife and an outgoing mayor whose polling ranks beneath even Donald Trump with state voters. For the moment, Adams’s administration is, as one acquaintance put it, “in the ether”. The Democrat told the city council last week: “We must allow our city to function. We have thrown $11bn at Covid, so the day has come when we need to learn to be smarter.” Adams got right to work. He took the subway to City Hall on 1 January to be at his desk by 8.30am, and held a cabinet meeting half an hour later. Signs are he’ll be more focused than his predecessor Bill de Blasio, who campaigned on raising taxes and spoke divisively of a “tale of two cities”. On Friday, the New York Post described Democrat De Blasio as the city’s worst ever. And that’s with 109 mayors to choose from. The New York Times, nominally friendly, found space to list his achievements only as creating universal kindergartens, eating pizza with a fork, setting a record for tallest mayor and accidentally dropping a groundhog named Charlotte, which later died of its injuries. De Blasio’s major achievement, the Times noted, was spending money – the city’s budget is at a record $102.8bn and its workforce at a 325,000 record high. Yet over the eight years of De Blasio, the city has come to seem slower and more ponderous, as if the mayor were re-making it in his own image. Traffic lights were set for delayed green, confusing the timing of jaywalkers, incensing drivers and perhaps benefiting only angry cyclists. Ubers began clogging up the city where yellow cabs had sped – sometimes without stopping for a fare in a fashion that looked anti-Darwinian. Adams comes with less ideological baggage than De Blasio, whom the Post calls “Cuba-loving” . He is unlikely, for instance, to make his first order of business to try to ban horse-drawn carriages from Central Park and then pointedly allow wealthier sections of the city to go unploughed after a major snowstorm to indicate that he, as a populist Brooklynite, does not consider Manhattan the centre of the New York City universe. He appears, in many ways, more accustomed to the rhythm of the city and its relationship with its commercial reason for being. Business leaders, hoping to stem an exodus of firms and high-earners, say they see signs that Adams will be more focused on economic development and on addressing rising crime levels. He has promised not to restore “stop-and-frisk” policing that unfairly targeted minorities, and to revive a plainclothes police unit to focus on gun crime. A prominent activist, Hawk Newsome, threatened “riots, fire and bloodshed” if Adams restored the unit. Adams replied: “We’re not going to surrender to those who are saying, ‘We’re going to burn down New York.’ Not my city.” He has told business leaders to construct a database to match vacant jobs to jobseekers, adding: “This is going to be a place where we welcome business and won’t turn into the dysfunctional city that we have been for so many years.” But he may find resistance from the city council, centre of New York’s shift to progressive politics. Clashes are brewing over a plan to reinstate solitary confinement at the city’s brutal Rikers Island pre-trial detention complex. “I’m going to ignore them,” Adams said last week. “If they like it or not. I’m the mayor.” But there are subtleties to Adams’s approach. He loves the nocturnal nightlife scene, looking in on a charity dinner, or a play, before dropping by Zero Bond, one of the city’s new private clubs. “When you’re out at night, it helps decrease crime. It attracts tourists to the city,” he said recently, adding that every time a New Yorker goes to a restaurant “we’re making sure that a dishwasher, a cook, a bartender and a waiter is employed.” It’s a strategy that Serge Becker, nightlife force behind art nightclub AREA, La Esquina restaurants and others, says helped the city reinvent itself in the late 70s and 80s. “Populated streets are safer than abandoned ones. It helped build communities, and Mayor Adams is sending encouraging signals that he has a nuanced view of nightlife – that it has a positive role to play in revitalising the city.” But there’s a question mark over where Adams sleeps. Some say New Jersey, others Brooklyn or that he puts his feet up at the office for a few hours. It seems that he’s happy to keep people guessing. “I’m just as flexible as the city. I’ll be in New York,” he told NY1 in November. “The 24-7 city that never sleeps. We have heard the alarm clock. We are up now.”The question My teenage daughter has been depressed for 18 months. During the past two years, I have been in the process of separating from her dad and their relationship has deteriorated to the extent that when we move apart she says she no longer wants to see him. She is not attending school and is struggling to engage with learning despite it being an important exam year. I have taken a step back and, together with the school, we have allowed her to only go in when she can, maybe for an hour or two. Her father sees this as giving in and allowing her to be “lazy” and says giving her this freedom means she will just take advantage. According to him, she needs more structure and discipline, and she needs to get used to the fact that pressure is a part of life. It feels as if he can’t acknowledge that she is depressed, despite her GP confirming this to be the case. I can see she has started to respond well to having the pressure taken off. My daughter and I have always had a good relationship and she confides in me a lot. Her dad and I have very opposing parenting styles, which is partly what led to us splitting up. He lacks the ability to empathise and listen to her. Unless both her parents believe in her, she tells me, she won’t be able get through her depression, so there’s no point in trying. We are due to move apart soon. In the meantime, how can I help her to believe in herself? Philippa’s answer I think what I’m going to say might be very difficult for you to hear. But I hope for the sake of your child you hear me out. You seem to be so driven and burning to be right that you cannot see that there might be another way of looking at this situation. Now, I might have got this wrong, I have only your email to go on and I am reading between the lines, but it feels as though you may be playing a game of “me-right, you-wrong” with her dad. It almost feels to me as though your child might be a pawn in this fight. I know you are desperate to do your best for your child, but I’m fearful that – unintentionally – you may not be. You have got the school and the GP on side. I’m fearful that this is like lining up chess pieces to win a game. If you could try to understand your ex’s fears and concerns for your daughter he might be more willing to listen to yours. Your teenager sounds conflicted. On the one hand she very dramatically doesn’t want to see him again, but on the other, she wants him to believe in her, she needs his good opinion. When your ex moves out of the family home, your daughter will lose her dad in her everyday life and from your letter I don’t see anyone focusing on that. I imagine, to her, it might feel as bad as losing a leg. It might feel like she is being convinced one of her legs, that’s held her up all her life, is no good. A greater part of your world when you are a child is your family, your mum and dad. And in lockdown that world will have got even smaller. Imagine what it does to you when that world splits apart in an unamicable way. It’s not as though she’s an adult and can just choose another house share. A child may unconsciously see themselves as part mum and part dad and if one part or both parts say the other one is bad, well it’s not surprising if it makes a child feel uneasy in themselves. Some kids are more resilient than others, but some are sensitive and when their parents argue or appear to hate each other they experience this as trauma. To a child, the only solution their psyche may come up with when parents are warring is to throw in their lot with just one parent. It’s quite complicated to see each one as a mixture of good and bad and so it’s easier to make one good and the other bad. These processes are largely unconscious and when we cannot process our difficult feelings into words it can be a cause of depression. You and your ex-partner have taken up polarised positions. You both need to exercise some give and take to come to a compromise. Your daughter has thrown in her lot with you. And if you describe him to her as somehow lacking, you are in danger of alienating her from her father. Don’t be in league with her against her dad. Her home being in flux and about to fall apart could be a reason she is too distressed and depressed to go to school, as there is a crisis at home. It is not unknown that when parents war a child may become ill. I’m sorry if this is hard to take in and, as I said, I may be reading the situation wrong, but to make sure your split doesn’t exacerbate your daughter’s depression I urge you to make an appointment for the three of you at the Family Separation Clinic (familyseparationclinic.com). This clinic offers a specialist service to families experiencing separation, in particular where a child is rejecting a relationship with one of their parents. Also, I recommend listening to my BBC Radio 4 documentary about parental alienation called When Parents Split, available online. If you have a question, send a brief email to askphilippa@observer.co.ukThe contrast between the upbeat tone of the prime minister’s new year message and the political cloud hanging over him as he goes into 2022 could not be starker. Boris Johnson said Britain is in an “incomparably better” state in the fight against Covid than it was at the start of 2021; thanks to the scientific research that produced a vaccine in less than a year, that is certainly true. But Johnson begins the new year as an irrevocably weakened political figure, his poll ratings significantly down from a year ago, his authority within his own parliamentary party eroded. Just two years after winning a decisive parliamentary majority of 80, this will be the year that requires him to fight for his survival. While 2022 will hopefully bring a diminishing of the disruption and harm caused by Covid, it will also see the launch of the independent inquiry into the government’s handling of the pandemic. Johnson’s dreadful errors of judgment over the last 21 months will be raked over: his decisions to hang back in introducing social restrictions not once, not twice, but three times cost too many people their lives, and still more the hardship of living under harsher social restrictions for longer as a result of his delays. The inquiry may also uncover further revelations about Johnson’s hypocrisy in his approach to enforcing the social restrictions he imposed on the country within his own residence. The Cabinet Office investigation into the Downing Street parties will report and, if it generates evidence that the law was broken, may even lead to a police investigation. Johnson will also continue to face scrutiny over his lack of probity around declaring political donations. The country is facing an acute cost of living crisis that the government has made immeasurably worse through its policies. A decade of tax credit cuts enacted by successive Tory chancellors – which effectively paid for tax cuts for more affluent families – has eroded the incomes of low-paid parents, for some households by thousands of pounds a year. Yet this did not stop Johnson enacting a further tax credit cut of £1,000 a year in October, the biggest overnight benefit cuts for low-income families with children in history. The increase in generosity of the universal credit taper rate the government introduced in November still leaves three-quarters of families on universal credit worse off, and despite the pandemic, unemployment benefits are now at their lowest real rates since 1990. These cuts will hit families living in the constituencies the Conservatives won from Labour in the so-called red wall much harder than those in their heartlands and will make it even harder for families to cope with fast-rising housing, energy and food costs. It is likely that the cost of living crisis – and the lack of government support to help the lower-paid weather the storm – will further damage Johnson in the coming months. The Brexit that Johnson so coveted as a cynical route to the premiership will also continue to throw up difficulties. The key Brexit conundrum remains unsolved: there is no Brexit that involves a complete break with all of the EU’s regulations and institutions that is compatible with both no border in the Irish Sea and no border on the island of Ireland. Given that the UK willingly sacrifices sovereignty in exchange for trade in other trade agreements, it seems extraordinary that this should become the sticking point of principle over which Conservative politicians are willing to undermine the Good Friday agreement. But thanks to the ideologues of the Eurosceptic right, that is where we are. Johnson’s approach thus far has been to pretend this irresolvable dilemma does not exist, misleading the public that the Northern Ireland protocol would involve no customs checks on goods coming from Northern Ireland into the rest of the UK. And the insidious economic impact of Brexit will continue; voters do not need to associate its economic malaise with Brexit itself to hold the government responsible for the state of the economy as we move towards the next election. Voter discontent with the government has translated into a consistentpoll lead for Labour in recent weeks. This creates a window of opportunity for Keir Starmer to position Labour as a government in waiting, one the country can get behind. There have been some important achievements in the first 20 months of Starmer’s leadership. He has begun the journey towards rooting out antisemitism from his party, suspending Jeremy Corbyn from the party after he minimised the findings of the statutory regulator, the Equality and Human Rights Commission, on antisemitism in Labour. He has introduced rule changes that should help ensure future leaders are more appealing to Labour voters. And after a botched reshuffle last May, he has recently promoted promising talent to Labour’s frontbench. What he has not yet succeeded in doing, however, is communicating to voters how Britain would be different under a Starmer premiership. To be fair, this is difficult for any opposition leader to achieve in the first year or two of a new parliament and even harder when there is an ongoing national crisis that has quite rightly dominated the political discourse. But 2022 will be a make-or-break year for Starmer as to whether he can succeed in mustering enthusiasm among voters alongside their growing disenchantment with Johnson. It is far too early to write him off altogether, but we begin 2022 with a glimmer of hope that there may be an end in sight to the corruption, hypocrisy and incompetence of Boris Johnson and the damage his premiership continues to wreak on Britain. That is sufficient to make the new year wishes for good health, wellbeing and prosperity glow with a political optimism that was absent 12 months ago.Sarap Filipino Bistro, 10 Heddon Street, London W1B 4BX (020 3488 9769; saraplondon.com). Starters £8.50-£13; mains £18-£25; desserts £5.50-£7.50; wines from £27 Eating a whole piglet is like staging an orgy; you need more than two people to get the job done. The problem is that, when I review a restaurant there are only ever two of us, and that makes both propositions very tricky. Admittedly the latter is rarely on the menu during restaurant visits; neither of us is likely to be orgy fit. But at Sarap Bistro the former most certainly was an option, and I was at least four people short of a piglet party. Sarap belongs to the chef Ferdinand “Budgie” Montoya, and is part of his ongoing exploration of the food of the Philippines, where he was born. Key to that is the famed lechon: roast piglet, with golden, shattering skin and the tenderest, sweetest of meat. (If you are a meat eater with a taste for lamb, but still want to be absolutely livid about the consumption of young pigs, muster your arguments now.) Here, the lechon comes stuffed with lemongrass and truffled adobo rice. Sounds great doesn’t it. There’s only one problem: you have to order a whole damn piglet two days in advance, and muster a party of six to eight people to do the eating. It costs £295. About 10 minutes after we arrive there is a cheer from the far end of the dimly lit dining room. A small crowd is gathered, cameraphones aloft. I wander down to find them recording the portioning up of their piglet, plumes of steam rising from the chopping board as Montoya works the cleaver over the meat. The legs go one way, the snout another. I take a few pictures, but end up feeling like an interloper at the celebration of a stranger’s birthday. I am not friends with these people. I cannot share their piglet. Well, in truth, I probably could have done if I’d asked nicely. I could have told them I was Grace Dent and they’d instantly have told me to fill my boots. I can rock a leopard-print wrap dress, me. The point is that, the most diverting item on the menu here at Sarap (which means delicious) is the one I can’t order. Still, there are a bunch of other things available and by the end of the night, following the beguiling instructions of our waiter, I will have tried all but one of them. Montoya has been on a long and twisting journey to get here, both figuratively and literally. He only started cooking professionally when he arrived in the UK in 2012 from Australia. He worked at Restaurant Story, Foley’s and the Dean Street Townhouse, while all the time nurturing a desire to interrogate his family’s favourite dishes. It began with a supper club which led in turn to various pop ups, and then a casual place in Brixton Market. Now he has taken over this spot on Heddon Street, which has become a bit of an incubator for new restaurant ventures; previously, it was home to the rugged nose-to-tail Italian Manteca, which has moved on to Shoreditch. Montoya describes what he is doing here as delivering authentic flavours “proudly inauthentically”, a thoroughly engaging term I first came across in chef Ravinder Bhogal’s Jikoni cookbook. It’s a short menu. Our enthusiastic waiter tells us we should order three starters between the two of us. There are only three starters. The food here strikes me as a softer, often warmer version of the sharp, sweet and salty flavours I am used to from elsewhere in southeast Asia. Pearly pieces of seabass are cured in a soft sour coconut vinegar. There is a gel made from calamansi, or Philippine lemon, and for crunch there are pieces of cucumber. It’s all bright and refreshing. In the mellifluously named Ensaladang Talong it is the addition of crumbled salted duck egg which shifts a rough smoked aubergine purée and slices of tomato away from the Mediterranean. But the most compelling dish, because it nods towards the lechon, is a boned out, rice-stuffed pig’s trotter, with skin that is hinged in a remarkable place between crisp and chewy. It feels a little like a consolation prize for not being able to give the piglet a seeing to. It’s a good consolation prize. There are four main courses. We are told we should order three. The most diverting are the hunks of roasted celeriac in a ripe, creamy peanut sauce, with the lightest waft of truffle. Poussin has been marinated in lemongrass, citrus and vinegar before being grilled over charcoal to produce the kind of savoury blackened skin which gives point to these small, often flavourless birds. Finally, there are rosy slices of beef, in a thick citrus and soy sauce. It’s very good beef indeed, though the £25 charged for four less-than-vast slices is ambitious. (Amusingly, they plated six slices of the beef for the dish prepared for the photographer who visited a few days later.) Still, we have a bowl of rice with which to absorb the gorgeous liquor. These are I think, all meant to be showstoppers. Intriguingly, the most thrilling dish is actually a simple side of kale braised for hours in coconut milk, ginger, garlic and chilli. It is both comforting and a wake up; an intense, rich vegan stew which I wanted to lean over and focus on. At £6 it also feels like the best moment of value on the menu, for we are just off Regent Street and that is rarely a cheap place in which to be. I am amused by what feels like blatant upselling by our waiter at the start, however encouragingly done. It does mean the bill mounts. Then again, we do not finish up over fed. Desserts are solid and sustaining rather than light and refreshing: a mildly rubbery cassava cheesecake with coconut milk; a log of sweetened glutinous rice with a coconut caramel. Those aside, I like Sarap Bistro very much. The food is unfamiliar in a good way and the execution is precise. It just seems unfortunate that lechon which, for good or ill, is the Philippine’s most famous dish, is not available to individual punters. Without a way to access that roast piglet it makes the experience feel a little like the culinary equivalent of Hamlet without the prince, or Jaws without the shark. Or maybe it’s just that it forces me to confront the fact that I don’t have enough friends; or at least not the kind of friends happy to help me demolish a piglet. Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1For its final issue of 1986, the Observer Magazine looked back at ‘The Good, the Bad, the Ugly… and the boring’ of the previous 12 months. It was the year, we said, when ‘the North/South divide became an abyss’ as junior health minister Edwina Currie badgered northerners about their drinking and smoking, saying they would die of ‘ignorance and chips’. The Jeffrey Archer book she’s brandishing on the cover, First Among Equals, was made into a TV series in 1986, and ‘Archer resigns again. Shock, horror, yawn,’ was our line on him quitting as Tory deputy chairman. Hang on, what’s Ron Atkinson doing in the Good section? Ah, ‘good’ as in ‘riddance’ – ‘Poor old Ron Atkinson, the Flash Harry of football, was sacked from Man Utd in early November: nobody loves a loser and Manchester least of all.’ His replacement, Alex Ferguson, did rather better, but I see they’ve since gone back to sacking managers. Other items were good or bad, depending on your view, including the news that Wham! had split up, to the ‘inconsolable grief of music lovers,’ apparently. The ‘People’s Party succumbed to the image makers, abandoning the red flag for the red rose,’ presaging New Labour. And there was a great in-joke with a deliberately distorted colour picture of newspaper boss Eddie Shah, which used to bedevil Today, which he launched that year. In the Ugly section, not only had ‘a sinister new drug, “crack”, concentrated cocaine in capsule form, crossed the Atlantic to Britain’but there was also ‘the ubiquitous puffball skirt’, which ‘ inflated ugliness to new widths’. In September our ‘future philosopher king’ first revealed to ITN, ‘I just come and talk to the plants… they respond, I find.’ Even more boringly, there’s a picture of Margaret Thatcher astride an empty middle lane opening the last stretch of the M25. ‘I cannot stand those who carp and criticise,’ she said. ‘Now you can go round London in 80 days,’ we carped.Guinness, 0.0%, from £4, 4x440ml can, Tesco, Asda, Morrisons There are two ways to approach a month off the sauce, as many of us have vowed to do this January. Either you go for non-alcoholic drinks that are their own thing, and always have been (of which more below). Or you can adapt what I like to think of as the Linda McCartney model: weaning yourself off your favourites with a clever simulacrum that doesn’t contain the substance (animal products for Linda; alcohol for you) you’re trying to avoid. As someone who would happily own up to being vegan-curious but not quite ready to move beyond flexitarian status, I’ve eaten my share of Quorn sausages, beetroot-blood burgers and fake chicken schnitzel- type things, and I’m impressed by just how far they’ve developed in the past couple of years. Realistic booze substitutes have moved on, too, with the choice now extending far beyond the lonely bottle of Clausthaler (itself much better than it was), and with the latest big brand 0.0% contender from Guinness coming extremely, satisfyingly close to the real thing. La Gioiosa Italian Sparkling White, 0.0% £5, 75cl, Morrisons Other convincing low-alcohol beers that I’ve found can fill in a flavoury gap without the alcohol include Estrella’s crisply refreshing Spanish lager Free Damm (from £4.50, 6x330ml, Sainsbury’s Morrisons and others) and two IPAs: Connecticut-basedzero-alcohol specialist craft brewer Athletic Brewing Co’s citrussy, balanced IPA (£10.99, 6x355ml, uk.athleticbrewing.com) and East Anglian brewer Adnams’s 0.5% version of its trusty Ghost Ship (£10.99, 8x500ml bottle, adnams.co.uk). What all four beers I’ve mentioned here (and other top-notch no-alcohol brews)get right are the richness of texture and depth of flavour : there’s nothing watery about them. This is something winemakers haven’t managed to achieve just yet. The best wines are low-alcohol (with around 7-9% abv)rather than no alcohol. The most drinkable zero-alcohol wines make up the textural shortfall with sugar and bubbles, so the sweetly fizzy end result of a wine, such as La Gioisa’s, is more fizzy pop than prosecco-alike. LA Brewery Strawberry &amp; Black Pepper Kombucha, £35, 12x300ml, LA Brewery The most common advice that vegan chefs proffer to people making the switch to a plant-only diet (as, again, so many of us are doing for what I suppose I’m going to have to call ‘veganuary’ this year) is to try to break away from meat-centred thinking – don’t treat vegan cuisine as coping with something missing; think of it as an opportunity to celebrate all the many and diverse ingredients found beyond the meat counter. And of course, you can take the same approach to going alcohol-free. Admittedly, this is easier to achieve online: outside big urban centres, pubs and restaurants still rely on standard sweet fizzy drinks or mineral water as alcohol-free alternatives. Still, it would be hard I think, for any palate used to the complexity of the best alcoholic drinks to feel they were missing out if they were offered something as deliciously sweet-sour-spicy as the strawberry and black pepper kombucha (fermented tea) of Suffolk’s LA Brewery. Follow David Williams on Twitter @DaveydaibachAnne 9pm, ITV “I need to know why my son died at a game of football.” This four-part drama tells the story of Anne Williams (Maxine Peake) and her 23-year campaign for the truth about the 97 victims of the Hillsborough tragedy. It is particularly hard to watch two teenage mates excitedly head off to support their team, and Peake’s trembling performance as she looks for them afterwards will break your heart – but it is sensitively done, and serves as a fervent call to never back down in the fight for justice. Hollie Richardson Around the World in 80 Days 6.20pm, BBC One Episode three of the stylish, lively adaptation of Jules Verne’s classic adventure novel sees Phileas Fogg (David Tennant), Passepartout (Ibrahim Koma) and Abigail Fortescue (Leonie Benesch) stuck on Yemen’s west coast and facing a dangerous desert crossing. Lindsay Duncan guest stars and episode four follows straight after. HR The Great Pottery Throw Down 7.45pm, Channel 4 Mash Report presenter Ellie Taylor fills in for the injured Siobhán McSweeney, as another dozen of the UK’s nicest people descend on Stoke to palpate clay competitively. Task one is to make crockery based on childhood memories, plus as many milk bottles as can be thrown in 15 minutes. Jack Seale Call the Midwife 8pm, BBC One It’s Easter at Nonnatus House, which should be a time for hopeful new beginnings, though a case of dry rot unearths something more sinister in the attic floorboards. Meanwhile, an expectant mother and her partner – who was exposed to radiation during his national service – cope with memories of their first baby’s death. Henry Wong Gogglebox Festive Special 9pm, Channel 4 A Very British Scandal, Walk the Line and The Greatest Snowman are just some of the festive telly bits we hope our favourite armchair critics will cast their eyes over in this special. Then, of course, there’s the Queen’s speech and whatever else the government has thrown at us over the last couple of weeks. HR Film choice Cast Away, 6.05pm, Channel 5 There are few actors who could carry an entire film by themselves – and then make you want more of them – but Tom Hanks is that guy in Robert Zemeckis’s 2000 drama. His FedEx executive, Chuck, is stranded on a desert island in the remote Pacific Ocean after his cargo plane crashes, with only a volleyball for company (which he names Wilson and personalises with a bloody handprint for a face). Chuck’s initial mishaps and despair give way to practicality and acceptance – the seven stages of grief, in effect – all orchestrated deftly by Zemeckis. Simon Wardell Live sport Premiership Rugby Union Gloucester v Harlequins 2pm, BT Sport 2. Coverage of the league match from Kingsholm Stadium. Premier League Football: Chelsea v Liverpool 4pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Mason Mount (pictured) and co host another title contender. Brentford v Arsenal is at 2pm.New year, new you, new sowing plan? Happy 2022. May your gardens grow. Rows of cockleshells, optional. Now we know January can be a cold month, likely to harbour frost. So it’s worth checking your plot one early-ish morning to see where the icy patches are. Avoid siting tender plants there. There’s still much other stuff to do – Including staying snug inside. It is time, from now, to order seed potatoes for planting out in late February or March. We stick to first earlies, probably something waxy, though I am also prone to being seduced by a pretty burgundy or purple potato. Rules as usual: leave in a tray on a cool (unheated) dry place in natural light. I will stick to chitting in egg trays with most ‘eyes’ upwards as I learned from Dudley, my dad. You must do what you think best. If your ground isn’t frozen, you can catch up with broad beans. And even garlic, but we will wait a couple of months and maybe add onions (though I’ll admit to quite constant disappointment). I often choose to admire Mary’s instead. Either way, you should be able to buy/order onion sets and garlic now. Sort though seed packets and planting plans for the year if you haven’t already. It takes me a few goes in a fairly futile attempt to be ruthless. If nothing else, it’s good to check for damaged packs or insect infestation, particularly if you store seed in a shed. We’ll also order our rarer stock around now in case it sells out later in the season. We’ll flirt with making plans for what to grow where through the year, though it is unlikely we will stick to it if past years are an indicator. Howard or I tend to stand where we think the bed or row might go while the other has a think. So please be more you than me. Allan Jenkins’s Plot 29 (4th Estate, £9.99) is out now. Order it for £8.49 from guardianbookshop.comSo long festive period. We are now looking forward to, well, real life. So let’s think of things to lift our spirits. Things that make us look, feel and smell nice. Shallow yes, but a mood booster. Gucci’s primer balances skin that (like mine) has the capacity toproduce an oilfield. You’ll be matte but not comatose. Charlotte Tilbury’s 30-shade-strong foundation is infused with skincare ingredients and leaves skin looking like skin. For an overnight treatment that works wonders on thirsty skin, Elemis’s Midnight Facial is magic. And if you have parched hair, Aveda’s super-hydrating masques will make a difference immediately. Anyone who uses eyelash curlers will dump them after trying Maybelline’s Colossal Curl Bounce. Cerave Micellar Water – chock-full of niacinamide (great for pigmentation issues) and nourishing ceramides – cleanses skin without stripping it. I also love Inkey List’s new cleanser – the hyaluronic continues to work post rinsing off. Genius. Most eye creams are useless, Tata Harper’s, however – reformulated to tackle puffy eyes and dark circles – is worth a shot. To combat winter’s moisture-depleting powers, use Keys Soulcare Body Balm. For a sensuous, comforting and, dare I say it, sexy scent, I cannot recommend Jo Malone London’s Velvet Rose and Oud highly enough. Look I’m not saying healthy skin, fluttery lashes and skin health, smelling nice and having fluttery lashes will cure the world of January blues – but it will bring an element of joy. Happy New Year. 1. Inkey List Hyaluronic Acid Cleanser £10.99, cultbeauty.co.uk 2. Elemis Superfood Midnight Facial £40, elemis.com 3. Charlotte Tilbury Beautiful Skin Foundation £34, charlottetilbury.com 4. Keys Soulcare Melting Body Balm £30, cultbeauty.co.uk 5. CeraVe Micellar Cleansing Water £10, lookfantastic.com 6. Jo Malone London Velvet Rose &amp; Oud Cologne Intense £92, jomalone.co.uk 7. Aveda Nutriplenish Masque from £35.50, aveda.co.uk 8. Gucci Sérum De Beauté Fluide Matifiant £41, selfridges.com 9. Tata Harper Restorative Eye Crème £113, net-a-porter.com 10. Maybelline Colossal Curl Bounce £10.99, maybelline.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFettoBritain’s electricity generation went through an unfortunate phase last year. According to the UK-based website Carbon Brief, it got dirtier for the first time in years as renewable sources failed to provide sufficient power to help the nation’s economy recover from lockdown restrictions. More coal and gas had to be burned to generate electricity. This jump occurred – in part – because 2021 was notable for its low winds. Wind farm output dropped by almost 15% from 2020, despite the fact that more turbines had been installed across the nation. At the same time, nuclear power generation fell by almost 10% because of problems with ageing reactors. It is a sobering reminder that the road to limit climate change is going to be a long one, though, in this case, the news is particularly unfortunate, given that Britain is still in charge of the negotiations that followed the Cop26 summit in Glasgow last year. Indeed, the nation will remain in this position of leadership until Egypt takes charge at the end of 2022, when its Cop27 summit opens in Sharm el-Sheikh. Until then, the world will be looking to Britain to set a lead and to play a major role in ensuring that the promises made in Glasgow are fulfilled. What other nations will have witnessed so far will not have made a good impression, however. The fact that the UK last year failed to clean up its power generation, one of the easiest ways to start on the business of cutting carbon emission, is bad enough. Sadly, there have been many other setbacks in the UK’s attempts to fight climate change. Another example was provided by the public accounts committee, which last month savaged the government over the failure of its green homes grant scheme in England. The programme underperformed so badly it risks damaging future efforts to deliver net zero, the committee warned. Hailed by Boris Johnson as a key plank in his green industrial revolution, the scheme was intended to help the public make their homes more energy efficient and less reliant on fossil fuel heating. This was to be done by providing grants for installing heat pumps and other equipment. A total of 600,000 homes were targeted but in the end just 47,500 were upgraded, while only a small fraction of the expected jobs were created in the process. As Dame Meg Hillier, chair of the committee, put it: “This scheme was a slam dunk fail.” Power generation and carbon-friendly housing are clearly issues that need to be tackled urgently. But they are not the only problems that lie ahead. As another government body, the Climate Change Committee, made clear last month, the UK desperately needs a strategy to reduce carbon emissions from agriculture and to review how tax policy can help deliver net zero. This last issue is particularly important because the Treasury is now under pressure to reduce VAT on gas in response to the energy crisis – at a time when it should be making it more expensive in order to discourage its use. However, the committee’s key message was even more direct: the UK must now focus on implementation rather than targets. In other words, we need action, not words, when it comes to tackling climate change in 2022 and that action should come not just from Alok Sharma, currently president of Cop26, but from all senior ministers, including Boris Johnson. Certainly, if they do not act firmly over the coming year, and provide international leadership, then the goal to limit global warming to 1.5C will be dead.When Hungarian opposition leader Péter Márki-Zay was in Brussels at the end of last year, he visited the street where an MEP from prime minister Viktor Orbán’s ruling party, Fidesz, had fled down a drainpipe to evade a police raid on a “gay orgy” that broke lockdown rules. The MEP, who later resigned, had been an architect of a clause in Hungary’s constitution defining marriage as a heterosexual institution. The drainpipe visit was easy political capital for Márki-Zay, seeking to draw attention to the hypocrisy of the governing party, while stressing his commitment to LGBT rights and conservative credentials. It’s the kind of move that has discombobulated Fidesz, who weren’t expecting to face this kind of challenge in Hungary’s parliamentary elections in spring 2022. Márki-Zay, a conservative churchgoing father of seven, is the candidate for prime minister of six opposition parties, spanning social democrats to the former far right, who united to take on Orbán. “After 16 years it’s the first time the opposition has a real chance to win,” Róbert László, an election specialist at the Political Capital institute in Budapest, said. Hungarians go to the polls in April or May in a contest that could bring down Orbán, whose 11-year experiment with “illiberal democracy” has resulted in Hungary becoming the first EU member state to be classed as only “partly free” by the NGO Freedom House. “Nobody expected the left and centre parties who dominated the opposition could be led by an outsider coming from the right,” László said. “One of his super-powers is that he can’t be blamed as the puppet of the past leftist parties, or the ex-prime minister Ferenc Gyurcsány,” a wealthy former leader who remains deeply divisive. Fidesz was preparing for a left-liberal candidate, such as the mayor of Budapest, Gergely Karácsony, or the leader of the Democratic Coalition, Klára Dobrev, who is married to Gyurcsány. “Now we can see that the Fidesz propaganda machine is confused,” László said. “[Márki-Zay] is not a liberal intelligentsia, he seems to be much more like a Fidesz member.” Márki-Zay was never a party member, but he did vote Fidesz. He hasn’t since 2010. “I just became more and more upset with their populism, their betrayal of western values … corruption mostly,” he told the Observer. “Orbán has changed, not me.” Speaking to journalists, Márki-Zay sought to distinguish his faith from Orbán’s professions in defence of Hungary’s Christian culture. “I was a Christian way before Orbán. Orbán was still in the Communist youth movement when I attended church every Sunday in communist times.” It’s a typically blunt statement from Márki-Zay, who is equally plain-speaking in English and Hungarian. He polished his English during nearly five years in North America, where he worked for a car-parts company. Márki-Zay, who has two degrees and a PhD in economic history, spent five weeks in Canada working as a door-to-door salesman. His firm later promoted him to a job in the US, where political curiosity took him to 2008 campaign events for presidential contenders Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton and John McCain. Known to the Hungarian political world as MZP, Márki-Zay made his political debut in his hometown of Hódmezővásárhely, a Fidesz stronghold in southern Hungary. Two days after he announced his mayoral run in 2018, he was dismissed from his job at an electrical components company. Soon after, five surveillance cameras appeared on his street. Government-friendly media launched vicious attacks on his wife. More recently he has been called an American spy, a CIA agent and a tool of Gyurcsány. This kind of smear campaign is typical, says Zoltán Kész, a former MP who has thrown his support behind Márki-Zay. Kész says he saw Márki-Zay’s potential in 2018: “He is a statesman, he is not the kind of guy who wants to be a politician just for the sake of politics… You can see it in his eyes that he has determination to change the system for the good.” Kész offered his support, despite their political differences. “He’s a conservative, I’m a liberal [libertarian]. He’s very religious, I’m not, but we both believe Hungary isn’t democratic now.” So far, Márki-Zay has managed to unite the six opposition parties while keeping his distance. “The electorate – including myself – have put huge pressure on these opposition parties to unite and defeat Mr Orbán,” hesaid, underlining that he does not belong to any of the six. “So yes… it took them too long to understand this and to put aside disagreements.” However, Daniel Hegedüs of the German Marshall Fund noted Márki-Zay has not yet boosted support for the opposition, with most polls showing a tight race. The situation is worse than opinion polls suggest, he adds, as the redrawing of electoral districts by Fidesz has given the ruling party an advantage. “The united opposition should win at least 3 to 5% more votes to get a majority mandate in the Hungarian national assembly. That’s a huge difference and we don’t see this advantage in the polls yet,” Hegedüs said. “The political race isn’t taking place on an even playing field; it’s heavily tilted to Orbán,” Hegedüs added. The integrity of the 2022 election will be even worse than in 2014, or 2018, which were “free but not fair”, he said. “It’s already a dirty contest and it will be a huge task for the opposition to win.” Meanwhile, Marki-Zay treads a fine line between attracting disillusioned Fidesz voters while retaining urban left-liberals. The Hódmezővásárhely mayor supports some of Orbán’s migration policies. While he has promised to repeal Hungary’s “homophobic” anti-gay law, his tone strikes analysts as reminiscent of Fidesz, by suggesting being gay is a handicap that can be used as leverage in politics. “It’s not necessarily an attractive offer for [some opposition voters] if the joint candidate is similar in some respects to the incumbent,” Hegedüs said. His close associate, Kész, thinks the opposition will stick together. “There’s no other choice. If he can’t hold the six parties together he’s lost, the whole of Hungary’s lost. Each party understands the gravity of the situation.” • This article was amended on 2 January 2022 to correct misspellings of Zoltán Kész’s surname as “Késv”.How does Sunday start? The same as every morning, just a little later. Most mornings we’re up at 7am for school runs and all that nonsense. You can tell we’re middle-aged: sleeping to half eight feels indulgent. A slow start? If the boys have a football match we’re up and out. If the game is nearby, I’ll join them. My husband always ends up being referee; it seems very political. I come with my fold-out chair and flask of tea and sit on the sideline happily. I never have a clue what’s going on, but I’ll cheer them on anyway. If there’s no sport? We take the dog for a walk. I like to get a sandwich from a cafe and chuck the dog a sausage. It’s the only exercise I enjoy, and has improved my health immensely. Since getting a dog I’m always out and about, and my asthmatic lungs are grateful. A special Sunday? My twin boys were born on a Saturday, four weeks early, on a weekend our whole family was visiting. On the Sunday they came in to meet the little ones. I stayed on the ward with the kids; they all went home for Sunday dinner. Did they bring me any? Did they heck. Thankfully, I was delirious from all the drugs so didn’t notice. Sundays growing up? Mum and dad ran a club, so I spent Sundays with my grandparents. Gran did a cracking roast, except for her four-day boiled cabbage. I was a teenager before I knew vegetables had crunch or flavour. Grandad would drink the cabbage water, it was a proper northern romance. I try to carry those family- time traditions on, it feels important. Sunday evening? We spend an hour arguing about what to watch on TV and usually settle on a film that leaves us all disappointed. After putting the boys to bed we might sneak in a glass of wine while doing diaries. Then I fall asleep. God, we’re dead boring. Support Alzheimer’s Society by signing up for an epic trek – help stop dementia in its tracks, alzheimers.org.uk/Trek26One of the pleasures of this Ashes series has been Michael Atherton’s daily despatches. (I see your eyes rolling at the word pleasures - I’m sure you have your own epithets.) In his report on the second day of the Test in Melbourne, he managed to wrest some dark humour from another calamitous day with a couple of gags from Australian wits - on England failing to materialise - “Only one team at the ground? That’s how it’s been all series.” Caught Covid? “About the only thing they have caught this series, cobber.” In these dire sporting times, we must take comfort where we can. I mentioned in my last column that my wife was doing an MA in medieval literature and was always turning up fascinating words. This week is no exception. She drew my attention to a review of Personal Pleasures: Essays on Enjoying Life by Rose Macaulay in the London Review of Books, in which the reviewer pointed up Macaulay’s passion for words and cited the following that particularly delighted her: cantiferous, sedilian, empatining and hagiary. Sadly, none of these made it into the OED and they pretty much fox Google, but I feel that we should celebrate her ardour. There was a very decent line from Joanna Lumley in Meltdown, a Radio 4 play, last week: “Social media? Shouldn’t it be antisocial media?” Good point. Finally, to the reader who upbraided me for confusing Augean and Aegean (he wrote: “What a pity that Jonathan Bouquet spoilt his column by mis-spelling the filthy stables - the Augean stables were named after a king of Elis, and have no link with the photogenic Aegean Sea”). This was preceded by the phrase “the most wonderful malapropism”. There was a clue there. • Jonathan Bouquet is an Observer columnistTheatre: big names on stage Kathryn Hunter appears in The Chairs, Eugène Ionesco’s absurdist apocalypse drama, translated, adapted and directed by Omar Elerian at the Almeida in London from 5 February. One of the great reimaginings of the past decade, Martin Crimp’s version of Cyrano de Bergerac, in which the fights are rap battles, returns with the incandescent James McAvoy; Jamie Lloyd’s fiery production is at London’s Harold Pinter from 3 February, before moving to Glasgow. At London’s Donmar Warehouse from 11 February, Kit Harington stars in Max Webster’s modern staging of Henry V, which sets out to investigate England’s relationship with Europe and asks if we get the leaders we deserve. Also in London, from 10 March at the Gielgud, Rafe Spall becomes Atticus Finch in To Kill a Mockingbird. Aaron Sorkin’s adaptation of Harper Lee’s novel is directed by Bartlett Sher and designed by the mighty Miriam Buether. Susannah Clapp Music: pioneering solo females go from strength to strength A clutch of female auteurs are readying new albums, edging their way out of left field or heading straight for the mainstream. Japanese-American one-woman show Mitski follows up her breakout 2018 LP, Be the Cowboy, with the 80s-influenced Laurel Hell, due in February. Hurray for the Riff Raff, the vehicle for singer-songwriter Alynda Segarra (pictured above), promises a manual for Life on Earth, a “nature punk” album for tough times (February). Fresh from a slew of awards for her Broadway musical, Hadestown, cult figure Anaïs Mitchell steps into the spotlight with a self-titled album this month, with Aaron Dessner and Nico Muhly guesting. There’s more to come too, with projects expected from talents as diverse as Spanish pop sensation Rosalía and Korean multi-instrumentalist Park Jiha. Kitty Empire Art: blockbuster solo shows The new year offers a great resurgence of solo shows, starting in January with the Royal Academy in London’s Francis Bacon: Man and Beast, already postponed by a year, but in this case better late than never. Dogs, hawks, monkeys, baboons: Bacon painted them like people and people as if they were creatures. Eventually, as the show reveals, the two became savagely indistinguishable. In February, Louise Bourgeois’s eerie stitched and stuffed figures get an overdue outing in The Woven Child at London’s Hayward Gallery, while Ai Weiwei juxtaposes new works against ancient Chinese objects to acute political effect at Kettle’s Yard in Cambridge. The Ikon Gallery in Birmingham has what promises to be a riveting show of paintings by Carlo Crivelli, arguing that the Italian Renaissance master was as radically outlandish as Magritte. And in March, the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge focuses on David Hockney’s interactions with the different technologies of viewing, old and new, and with past art from Fra Angelico to Ingres and Manet. Laura Cumming Film: stories of complex, complicated women A welcome addition to cinemas in the coming months is a collection of stroppy, unpredictable, unreliable and thoroughly difficult women. And the movie landscape is a whole lot more satisfying for it. Depictions of women have been freed up by a rejection of the traditional good versus bad mother binary, in films such as Maggie Gyllenhaal’s The Lost Daughter (now on Netflix) and Pedro Almodóvar’s Parallel Mothers (28 January). In the former, Olivia Colman’s self-described “unnatural mother” abandons her children for several years to pursue her career; in the latter, Penélope Cruz’s character, facing an impossible situation, makes all the wrong choices. But, crucially, neither is portrayed as a villain. Meanwhile, Harry Wootliff’s True Things (11 March) and Joachim Trier’s The Worst Person in the World (25 March) embrace the chaos of relationships and the car crash of career ambitions. Both are formally bold, bracingly unconventional films giving praise to the messy bitch, someone we can all relate to, one way or another. Wendy Ide Classical: three opera firsts British Nigerian actor-director Femi Elufowoju Jr makes his operatic debut directing Verdi’s tragedy Rigoletto (opens 22 January), conducted by Opera North’s music director, Garry Walker. The American baritone Eric Greene sings the title role, with American soprano Jasmine Habersham and Russian tenor Roman Arndt. On 5 February, the company launches its first ever staging of Alcina, Handel’s opera of witchery, deception and disguise, conducted by world-class Handelian Laurence Cummings, directed by Tim Albery. There’s more Handel at the Royal Opera House in London: a new staging of Theodora, the first at Covent Garden since 1750, directed by Katie Mitchell with an all-star cast (opens 31 January). Fiona Maddocks TV: literary adaptations A quirk of pandemic production delays was that literary adaptations were unusually thin on the ground during 2021. Happily, that means there’s a backlog waiting for broadcast this year. Indeed, the TV drama slate will begin to resemble your bookshelf come to life. First out of the blocks this month is Len Deighton’s The Ipcress File on ITV, with Joe Cole taking on the role of bespectacled spy Harry Palmer. This will be followed in February/March by Sally Rooney’s Conversations With Friends, from the same BBC team that brought us lockdown hit Normal People. Coming in early spring, screenwriter Steven Moffat has adapted Audrey Niffenegger’s romance The Time Traveler’s Wife for HBO/Sky, with Rose Leslie and Theo James as the magical lovers. Keeley Hawes stars in Sky’s modern-day reimagining of John Wyndham’s sci-fi classic The Midwich Cuckoos. On Netflix, Benedict Cumberbatch leads a reboot of John Buchan’s conspiracy thriller The 39 Steps, while Game of Thrones showrunners David Benioff and DB Weiss tackle Richard Powers’s sweeping eco-epic The Overstory. Later in the year, Fleishman Is in Trouble will air on Disney+ and Anatomy of a Scandal on Netflix. Phew. Our page-to-screen cups overfloweth. Michael Hogan Music: post-punk is evergreen Here’s a growth industry: less a genre than a state of mind, the post-punk tendency continues to throw out apposite sounds for straitened times. Kicking off the year with a polemic are hotly tipped Leeds underground heroes Yard Act, whose debut album, The Overload, is out 21 January. From atonal, jazz-strewn beginnings, Black County, New Road’s second album, Ants from Up There, dials up the tunefulness on 4 February. Indie sensations Wet Leg crown their dizzying rise with their debut album, expected in the spring. Meanwhile, you can see Bristol guitar powerhouses Idles playing their very recent album, Crawler, through big PA systems starting on 16 January. KE Theatre: reappraising famous men Two reputations with opposite trajectories. In Dr Semmelweis, Mark Rylance appears as the doctor who, in 19th-century Vienna, introduced antisepsis into medical practice. He now appears self-evidently a pioneer, but died reviled and self-doubting. Based on an idea by Rylance, developed with Stephen Brown and Tom Morris, the play is at Bristol Old Vic from 20 January to 12 February. At the Bridge theatre in London from 16 March to 18 June, Ralph Fiennes stars in David Hare’s Straight Line Crazy, a portrait of Robert Moses, “for 40 years the most powerful man in New York”, at first regarded as an idealist, later as an intimidating manipulator with a divisive vision of city life. SC Architecture: three brilliant new buildings The Burrell Collection in Glasgow is a quirky but brilliant building designed around both its parkland setting and a personal, magnificent and eclectic array of objects – a Romanesque arch, for example, is built into its fabric. In March, 39 years after the building was completed, it will reopen with a revamp by John McAslan + Partners. The challenge is to update it without losing its soul. Also due in March is the new campus for the Royal College of Art in Battersea in south London, composed of rugged-looking brickwork, by the Swiss architectural powerhouse Herzog &amp; de Meuron (authors of Tate Modern, the Beijing Olympic stadium). In February, a brand new theatre will open (not something you see every day): the Brixton House in south London. Its architects, Foster Wilson Size, a practice with a number of performance spaces under their belt, promise a “purposefully robust” and adaptable building, “in keeping with the spirit of studio theatre”. Rowan Moore Film: Tilda Swinton double feature We only saw Tilda Swinton in one film (one-and-a-half, counting Almodóvar’s short The Human Voice) in 2021, making it a fallow year by the prolific star’s standards. The year 2022, however, is serving us a double scoop of Swinton genius straight off the bat. As a woman journeying into the Colombian jungle to seek the origin of a psychological disturbance, she’s on mesmerising, minimalist form in Thai auteur Apichatpong Weerasethakul’s dreamy experiment Memoria (14 January), while she tenderly supports her real-life daughter Honor Swinton Byrne in Joanna Hogg’s exquisite autofiction follow-up, The Souvenir Part II (4 February). Guy Lodge Art: contemporary art Contemporary art shows include the witty and spatially complex figurative paintings of Canadian artist Allison Katz at Camden Art Centre in north London (from 14 January), alongside poetic multimedia installations by French-Caribbean rising star Julien Creuzet. Goldsmith’s CCA in London devotes its whole space to the evergreen question of monuments and what they are for, with works by 50 artists (from 21 January). Sculptors in glass, at the Henry Moore Institute in Leeds (from 18 February), includes Alexandra Engelfriet, Mona Hatoum and the Guyanese-British artist Hew Locke, who also undertakes the latest Tate Britain Commission in March. Look out, too, for US artist Howardena Pindell’s beautiful abstract paintings at the Fruitmarket in Edinburgh (now showing), and Chinese installation artist Wang Gongxin at White Cube Mason’s Yard in London (from 19 January), with his response to the ubiquitous presence of shadows. LC Theatre: Our Generation Alecky Blythe, author of London Road, has opened the ears of theatregoers with her verbatim dramas. Her new play, Our Generation, is based on interviews gathered over a period of five years. It follows the lives of 12 young people growing into adulthood, and is directed by Daniel Evans, artistic director of Chichester Festival theatre, where the production will move after playing at the National Theatre in London from 10 February to 9 April. SC TV: returning gangsters Cue Nick Cave and don your flat cap because Peaky Blinders is back to start 2022 with a Brummie bang. This will be the BBC period epic’s sixth and final series, although a film spin-off is also in the works. Down the M6, three stylish returning dramas portray different strata of London’s contemporary criminal underworld. In February/March, Netflix’s Top Boy continues the battle for drug-dealing supremacy on Hackney’s fictional Summerhouse estate. BBC One’s McMafia finds James Norton reprising his role as the ruthless British son of a Russian mafioso. And Sky Atlantic’s swaggering Gangs of London sees turf wars erupt as rival syndicates fight to fill the power void left by the debut season’s corpse-littered carnage. MH Podcasts: The Sweat 7 and Blip Blip From the producers of The Smart 7 , a hugely successful daily podcast that packages news, both serious and light, into seven stories in seven minutes, come two new audio offerings. First up is The Sweat 7 (10 January), a daily keep-fit show with, you guessed it, seven HIIT exercises to bash through in seven minutes. Hosted by personal trainer Georgie Okell, there’ll be accompanying explanatory animations on Instagram to show how the exercises should be done. More innovative is Blip Blip (17 January), a super-short podcast for a scrolling, visual generation who find seven minutes an eternity. Just 90 seconds long, Blip Blip will pop up on TikTok, Snapchat, YouTube Shorts and WhatsApp three times a day, offering all the showbiz news that gen Z needs to know. An interesting experiment that, if it does well, could herald one way of enticing young people into listening as well as looking. Miranda Sawyer Classical: Voices Unwrapped The year-long Voices Unwrapped at London’s Kings Place celebrates everything that’s singable, from Renaissance and baroque masterworks to jazz, gospel and folk, close harmony and performance poetry. The baritone Roderick Williams and Gaelic/Hebridean singer Julie Fowlis are artists-in-focus. The opening event (13 January) features top ensemble Voces8, with composer-conductor Eric Whitacre. Expect to hear singers from Denmark, Estonia, Australia and the African diaspora, plus the Tallis Scholars, Black Voices and the evergreen Swingles. FM Film: unusual queer love stories The year is kicking off with a rich seam of LGBTQ+ cinema, with a number of films granting new political and historical dimensions to queer relationship stories. Jonas Poher Rasmussen’s Oscar-tipped animated documentary Flee (11 February) weaves a gay love story into its powerful study of an Afghan immigrant in Europe reflecting on his harrowing refugee childhood. Meanwhile, Sebastian Meise’s wonderful, Cannes-awarded drama Great Freedom (4 March) examines the history of Germany’s anti-gay Paragraph 175 law through the long-term bond between a repeatedly incarcerated gay man (the superb Franz Rogowski) and his initially homophobic cellmate. GL Theatre: Punchdrunk’s The Burnt City Immersive theatre maestros Punchdrunk return to their home town of London after an absence of seven years. In their lofty new quarters at Woolwich Works – three Grade II-listed buildings stretching over 100,000 sq ft – the company will tell the story of the fall of Troy, transposing the tragedy to a future parallel world. Palaces and a “pulsating underworld” are promised. The Burnt City is booking from 22 March to 28 August. SC Music: the tome of their lives There will always be blockbuster music memoirs. Often, though, the good stuff is in the margins. In 1969, Vashti Bunyan set out in a horse-drawn wagon from London to Scotland, writing a cult folk album, Just Another Diamond Day, as she went. Her reminiscences, Wayward (out 31 March), capture the times with great poignancy. Former punk Kathy Valentine was in the Go-Gos, the first all-female band to get to No 1 in the US playing their own instruments; therein lies a tale (All I Ever Wanted, out March). However well we feel we know the Wainwright clan, the forthcoming memoir, Stories I Might Regret Telling You (March), by Martha Wainwright looks set to supply new insights into the folk dynasty. KE Radio/podcast: Now You’re Asking With Marian Keyes and Tara Flynn The hilarious writer Marian Keyes and actor Tara Flynn return to Radio 4 next Sunday with a new problem-solving show. Having asked people to email in their dilemmas, the dynamic duo set out to solve them at their “virtual kitchen table”. A neighbour’s garden ornaments, a daughter’s messy house and a difficulty with a father’s will are all tackled in the first episode. “Most things are survivable,” insists Keyes, while Flynn confesses that, actually, her “three favourite words are ‘I don’t know’”. Both are warm and kind enough to not only be funny but also offer genuinely thoughtful, if left-field, advice. MS TV: screen stars in game-changing roles Prepare to do a double take as three scene-stealing young actors tackle starkly contrasting roles. Erin Doherty, who won admirers as Princess Anne in The Crown, drops the plummy accent to star in BBC Three’s Chloe, a psychological thriller about social media and identity. Jamie-Lee O’Donnell, AKA wild child Michelle in Derry Girls, embraces her dark side in gritty Channel 4 prison drama Screw. And in Disney+ bio-drama Pam &amp; Tommy, yes, that is Britain’s own Lily James beneath that peroxide wig in the true story of Pamela Anderson’s scandalous sex tape with Tommy Lee, arguably the first ever viral video. MH Music: live music is back* (*unless it isn’t) At the time of writing, the prospect of live music is very much still on for 2022. Some much-missed big beasts are due back in arenas early this year and there are few more major than Stormzy, who has yet to tour his 2019 hit, Heavy Is the Head. Fingers crossed, from 13 March, the rapper will play his rescheduled 2021 dates, bringing some of his Glastonbury-headlining gravitas to arenas countrywide. Fellow national UK hip-hop treasure Dave takes his lauded second album, We’re Alone in This Together, out to audiences starved of togetherness from 15 February. KE Art: surrealists take over From 24 February, Tate Modern’s Surrealism Beyond Borders goes further than so many previous shows by expanding its survey to 45 countries across five decades. A fresh appraisal of the eye-popping, mind-boggling, ID-twisting art that now includes wild and weird objects and paintings from nations as far apart as Syria, Thailand and Romania. Arriving from the Metropolitan Museum in New York, the show has already been hailed as startling, chaotic and glorious. LC Classical: Britten’s got talent For Coventry’s year as city of culture, and the 60th anniversary since the consecration of the city’s cathedral, composer-performer Nitin Sawhney has written Ghosts in the Ruins, a site-specific “war requiem” in response to Benjamin Britten’s War Requiem, premiered at Basil Spence’s new cathedral in the 1962 Coventry festival. Exploring themes of refugees, migrants and asylum, Ghosts will include singers and musicians moving around the building and out into the bombed ruins of the old cathedral (28 and 29 January). Two other Britten masterpieces head the operatic season. At Scottish Opera, Dominic Hill, artistic director of Glasgow’s Citizens theatre, directs Britten’s dazzling take on Shakespeare’s A Midsummer Night’s Dream, conducted by Stuart Stratford (opens Glasgow, 22 February, Edinburgh, 1 March). At London’s Royal Opera House, Deborah Warner directs Peter Grimes, starring Allan Clayton as the anguished fisherman, with a top cast conducted by Mark Elder (opens 17 March). FM Film: the return of Bradley Cooper There’s an interesting paradox regarding the casting of Bradley Cooper. As a hero, he can be bland – a synthetic shiny smile pasted on to wholesome catalogue-model good looks. But in the role of a villain, that glittering charm takes on a devilish quality. He’s thrilling and dangerous and utterly compelling. The good news for fans of bad Bradley is that he’s back after a career hiatus and, for the next two films at least, Cooper has taken up residence on the dark side. In Guillermo del Toro’s neo-noir Nightmare Alley, he’s a magician with blood on his hands; in Paul Thomas Anderson’s just released Licorice Pizza, he plays a monstrous Hollywood producer. WI Radio: channel hopping Andrew Marr will make his big move from the BBC in early 2022, taking up new slots at LBC and Classic FM. His Radio 4 Start the Week hosting duties appear to have been taken up by the three remaining hosts, Tom Sutcliffe, Amol Rajan and Kirsty Wark, though, if a headliner is needed, Wark would seem the obvious choice. Reportedly, Marr moved because he wanted the freedom to express his climate emergency opinions. At LBC, he will find ex-BBC compatriots Eddie Mair and Shelagh Fogarty; at Classic FM, he’ll be joining Moira Stewart. On Heart, a personnel shift means that another ex-BBC host, Dev Griffin, will be on weekday afternoons, while Yasmin Evans, who left 1Xtra late last year, is taking up a weekend slot on the same station. Clearly, commercial radio’s dynamism and editorial freedom are tempting some BBC long-termers away from the mothership. MS Theatre: Anna Karenina Tolstoy’s novel takes to the stage in a version by Helen Edmundson, scriptwriter of Mary Magdalene, whose plays include adaptations of Small Island and Coram Boy for the National and, for Bristol Old Vic, the musical Swallows and Amazons. Anna Karenina (how will they do the train?) will be directed by Anthony Lau, associate artistic director at Sheffield Theatres, and can be seen at the Crucible, Sheffield, from 5 to 26 February. SC Photography: a trio of treats The photography year kicks off with the surreal and extravagantly staged scenarios of the LA-based artist Alex Prager, known for her genre-crossing images of raw contemporary Hollywood shot through with old movie glamour. At London’s Lehmann Maupin (from 21 January), her new works insert present reality into a cinematic past. The annual Deutsche Börse shortlist is on show at London’s Photographer’s Gallery from 25 March, with very strong contenders including Jo Ratcliffe’s celebrated geopolitical landscapes of South Africa and Deana Lawson’s exacting tableaux of America’s black diaspora. Also in March, Milton Keynes Gallery has a retrospective of Ingrid Pollard’s poetic photo-meditations on racial displacement and identity, from 12 March, travelling to the Turner Margate in July. LC TV: This Is Going to Hurt Ben Whishaw hasn’t done any homegrown TV since his Emmy-winning 2018 turn in A Very English Scandal. In February/March he makes his BBC comeback in this anarchic, visceral adaptation of Adam Kay’s bestselling memoir about working on an NHS labour ward. Expect exhaustingly long hours, life-or-death decisions, battles with the hospital hierarchy, “a constant tsunami of bodily fluids” and plenty of gallows humour. MHA growing body of evidence indicates that the Omicron Covid variant is more likely to infect the throat than the lungs, which scientists believe may explain why it appears to be more infectious but less deadly than other versions of the virus. Six studies – four published since Christmas Eve – have found that Omicron does not damage people’s lungs as much as the Delta and other previous variants of Covid. The studies have yet to be peer-reviewed by other scientists. “The result of all the mutations that make Omicron different from previous variants is that it may have altered its ability to infect different sorts of cells,” said Deenan Pillay, professor of virology at University College London. “In essence, it looks to be more able to infect the upper respiratory tract – cells in the throat. So it would multiply in cells there more readily than in cells deep in the lung. This is really preliminary but the studies point in the same direction.” If the virus replicates more in the throat, that makes it more transmissible, which would help to explain the rapid spread of Omicron. A virus that is good at infecting lung tissue, on the other hand, will be potentially more dangerous but less transmissible. Researchers from the University of Liverpool’s Molecular Virology Research Group published a pre-print on Boxing Day that shows Omicron leading to “less severe disease” in mice, according to Prof James Stewart. The paper showed that mice infected with Omicron lose less weight, have lower viral loads and experience less- severe pneumonia. “It’s one piece of the jigsaw,” he said. “The animal model does suggest that the disease is less severe than Delta and the original Wuhan virus. It seems to get cleared faster and the animals recovered more rapidly, and that ties in with clinical data coming through. “The early indications are that it’s good news, but that’s not a signal to drop our guard, because if you’re clinically vulnerable, the consequences are still not great – there are deaths from Omicron. Not everyone can rip their masks off and party.” The Neyts Lab at Leuven University in Belgium found similar results in Syrian hamsters, with a lower viral load in the lungs compared with other variants. Prof Johan Neyts said this may be because the virus was better at infecting humans than hamsters, or that it was more likely to infect the upper respiratory tract, or that it provoked less-severe disease. A further pre-print, submitted to Nature last week by researchers in the US, also found that mice with Omicron lost less weight and had a lower viral load. And researchers at the University of Glasgow’s Centre for Virus Research have found evidence that Omicron has changed the way it enters the body. Omicron was substantially likely to evade the immunity of people who had had two doses of the vaccine, but a booster dose gave a “partial restoration of immunity”. The slew of Christmas research builds on a study from the University of Hong Kong last month showing less Omicron infection in the lungs, and on research led by Prof Ravi Gupta at the University of Cambridge, whose team investigated blood samples from vaccinated patients. They found Omicron able to evade vaccines, but less able to enter lung cells. The latest scientific research comes amid a debate about how best to carry out home-testing. Last week, some scientists suggested that lateral flow tests (LFTs) might be more accurate if people took swabs from the throat as well as the nose. Prof Jennifer Rohn at University College London said that her experience of using LFTs was that she had tested negative using nose swabs but positive when taking a sample from her throat. That seemed to be supported by a study from South Africa showing that saliva samples subjected to PCR tests were better than nasal swabs at detecting Omicron. However, Prof Lawrence Young, virologist at the University of Warwick, said the study was not significant enough for conclusions to be drawn. “This is a small study on acutely symptomatic, non-hospitalised patients. On the one hand it confirms previous studies indicating that salivary testing could be useful as a more easily performed sampling approach. I don’t think this study is significant enough to conclude anything about the behaviour of Omicron.” The UK Health Security Agency said there was no indication that rapid tests differed in their ability to detect the Omicron or Delta variants, although the tests were continuously monitored by researchers. “All lateral flow devices used by NHS Test and Trace have gone through rigorous validation and are proven to be highly effective at detecting Covid-19 in people,” a spokesperson said. “We are currently seeing high numbers of positive lateral flow device tests reported. This means we are detecting tens of thousands of cases that might otherwise have gone undetected.” • This article was amended on 3 January 2022 because an earlier version said: “If the virus produces more cells in the throat, that makes it more transmissible ...”. The reference should have been: “If the virus replicates more in the throat...” This has been corrected.In their terrific new book, the veteran reporters Mark Bowden and Matthew Teague argue that the mob that invaded the Capitol in Washington almost exactly a year ago “had no more chance of overthrowing the US government than hippies in 1967 had trying to levitate the Pentagon”. The “real insurrection” was the one “led by Trump and his coterie of sycophants” in Georgia, Wisconsin, Nevada, Michigan, Pennsylvania and Arizona. It “was only slightly better organized than the mob but considerably more calculated and dangerous”. That real insurrection is the subject of this timely and important volume. The authors have used a stethoscope to examine the minutia of the American election process. The result is a thrilling and suspenseful celebration of the survival of democracy. The attempted coup was led by Donald Trump. Its intended denouement, in which the vice-president, Mike Pence, would ignore the votes of the six states above plus Washington DC in order to swing the election to Trump, was outlined in an insane memo written by the lawyer John Eastman, described here as “surely the most seditious document to emerge from the White House in American history”. That final act, of course, never happened. Not even Pence, the most sycophantic vice-president of modern times, could bring himself to violate the constitution so blatantly to keep his boss in the White House. But the genuine heroes, brought to life here, were the “hundreds of obscure Americans from every walk of life, state and local officials, judges and election workers. Many of them were Republicans, some were Trump supporters. They refused to accept his slander of themselves, their communities and their workers, and they refused to betray their sworn duty to their office and their country. They were the real patriots.” Bowden and Teague – the latter a Guardian contributor – take us through six battles that lasted from the night of the election, 3 November 2020, until Joe Biden’s election was finally certified by Congress early on 7 January last year. Their book performs a vital service, demonstrating just how well our tattered democracy managed to function despite vicious partisanship and all the new challenges created by the pandemic. For the first time, I understood how brilliantly new machines used to count the votes performed, the intricacies of opening outer and inner envelopes, capturing the images of both then preserving the vital paper ballots inside, making it possible to confirm electronic results with a hand count in case of any failure in technology. In Arizona, the elections department conducted “the mandatory hand count of election day ballots from 2% of the vote centers and 1% of the early ballots as required by Arizona law and it yielded a 100% match to the results produced by the tabulation equipment”. Scott Jarrett was co-director of elections in the populous Maricopa county, and he is one of the crucial bureaucrats celebrated here: “A pale slender young man … dressed in a plain gray suit, the very picture of an earnest functionary, a man happily engaged in the actual machinery of government and quietly proud of his own unheralded importance and competence.” In a public hearing crowded with crazed conspiracy theorists, Jarrett carefully explained how only one of the two “encrypted memory cards (both with tamper-proof evidence seals)” was transported from various polling centers to the main counting location, “so that the results on one card could be double-checked against the other as well as the precinct ballot report they had generated. Backing up that memory were, of course, the actual ballots that had been run through the machines. The memory cards and the ballots were sealed and delivered by “two members of different parties”, escorted by county sheriffs. Clint Hickman, chairman of the Maricopa county board of supervisors, noted that if the eyes of some in the audience were glazing over, he just wanted “people that are watching this” to understand “we don’t glaze over”. The authors point out that Hickman was touching on a fundamental feature of The Steal, the factitious narrative concocted by Trump and his cronies: conspiracy theorists depend on ignorance. “They begin with distrust: only a sucker believes the official story. They then replace the often tedious, mundane details of an intricate process … with a simpler narrative”: theft. They invent colorful stories about a “deal struck with a late Venezuelan dictator to deliver tainted election machines, or a plot to preprint fake ballots in the dead of night”. This creates what cognitive scientists call “a community of knowledge”. The big problem that didn’t exist even 30 years ago is the speed with which such idiotic stories are spread through the internet and by the Twitter feed of a malevolent president like Trump, exploding the reach of such stories and their power to undermine democratic norms. The book reminds us that democracy itself depends on a modicum of trust. That is why Trump’s ability to persuade so many Americans of the truth of so many lies has had such a disastrous effect on our body politic. Bowden and Teague have performed a singular service by revealing the details that disprove Republicans’ unceasing inventions about voter fraud. The problem is that so many Republicans will continue to ignore the lessons of this book. American democracy could still be destroyed by the torrent of voter suppression laws already passed by Republican-controlled state legislatures, spurred by lies invented by Trump and amplified by insidious “journalists” like Maria Bartiromo and Tucker Carlson, whose perfidy is brilliantly dissected in these pages. If democracy does prevail, it will survive because of the ability of authors like Teague and Bowden to make the truth even more compelling than Fox News fictions. The Steal is published in the US by Atlantic Monthly PressIn more innocent or credulous days, the faithful sat in the dark to gaze at strange beings with detachable heads who were actually phantasms of light. Among the stars in this custom-made galaxy, the most alluring and yet the most distant was Greta Garbo, whose persona alternated between carnal heat and ascetic frost. After wickedly enticing her male victims in The Temptress, she redeemed herself as the dying courtesan in Camille; in Queen Christina, she was exalted by sacrifice and in a last mesmerising closeup all emotion blankly drained from her face as she renounced the throne and sailed into exile. Gradually this astral creature edged down to Earth. Publicists issued an excited proclamation when Garbo talked for the first time on screen in Anna Christie, even though she began by gruffly demanding a whisky in a waterfront bar. In Ninotchka, she made headlines all over again by contorting her alabaster features in a sudden fit of laughter. Then, in 1941, she abruptly abandoned her career. Middle-aged fault lines in her perfect countenance have usually been blamed, but Robert Gottlieb’s book points to a change in the temper of the times. The young Fellini, puzzled by Garbo’s lunar pallor, mistook her for a ghost. In wartime, movie goddesses had to be less ethereal: they were now called bombshells because pilots painted their bodies on to the fuselage of the planes they flew into battle. Wispy and tremulous, Garbo lacked the ballistic sexual impact of Rita Hayworth in Gilda and unlike the pistol-packing Joan Crawford she was no spitfire. “I had made enough faces,” Garbo remarked when explaining why she quit. She knew herself to be a product, not a person, and disowned the mystique manufactured by the studio. The surname that MGM assigned to her was supposed to be Swedish for sprite, although alliteration prompted impish schoolboys to nickname her Greasy Garbage. “You are in love with Garbo,” she told her besotted co-star John Gilbert, implying that he would not have been so infatuated by Greta Gustafsson from Stockholm, a shy mouse who late in life jokingly offered to work behind the counter in a Scandinavian deli near her New York apartment. Affecting anonymity in retirement, she insisted on being addressed as Miss Brown. Despite a succession of lovers, Garbo’s only long-term relationship, as Gottlieb says, was with the lens. She surrendered gladly to the Hollywood cameramen who trapped her soul on emulsion; later, she had to fend off paparazzi who stalked her in the street and tried to penetrate her disguises. When Chaplin became the most recognisable man in the world, he chummily acknowledged the applause of the multitudes. But Garbo fled from crowds in genuine terror and felt no sense of charitable obligation to her fans; it’s alleged that she even refused to sign an autograph book pitifully proffered by a soldier who was in uniform and on crutches. Some called her divine, while for others she was a demon. A photograph by Clarence Sinclair Bull superimposes her imperishable head on the recumbent body of the Sphinx, which crumbles in the Egyptian desert. In Mata Hari, she performs an orientalised belly dance, dressed as a profane priestess and wearing a pagoda-shaped hat. Her earliest American films cast her as a vamp, a successor to the bewitching Theda Bara, whose invented name was an anagram of Arab death; the widow of Garbo’s saturnine protector George Schlee called her “that vampire” and after Schlee died, summoned a Russian Orthodox priest to exorcise their fridge because, when the purported blood drinker visited, she sometimes reached into it to grab a can of beer. Favouring men’s shoes and clothes, Garbo cultivated a teasing androgyny and one of the later projects with which she toyed was an adaptation of Oscar Wilde’s The Picture of Dorian Gray in which she would play the ageless, cruelly insensitive dandy; for the nubile actor who commits suicide when seduced and then spurned by Dorian, she wanted Marilyn Monroe. Envious and venomous, Marlene Dietrich boosted the emasculating myth by claiming that Garbo “raped men, she unzipped her fly and pounced on them”. Garbo retaliated with hazy hauteur. “Who is this Marlene Dietrich?” she once asked a reporter. Gottlieb is a renowned New York editor who at the age of 90 has earned the right to be self-indulgent and he chats wittily about his idol while leaving others to do the hard work of analysing Garbo’s appeal. In a small anthology of critical comments, Kenneth Tynan’s empurpled rhapsody about her physique – a neck that could be tilted at right angles to her spine, concave pectorals, a wayward, loping walk – is supplemented by a mystical reverie in which David Thomson regrets that “the church of cinema” where Garbo’s worshippers gathered has now been deconsecrated. The Swedish actor Fritiof Billquist contributes a sharp insight that makes sense of her craving for solitary boredom and domestic banality, a condition she attained in her long, vacuous phone monologues about paying bills and shopping for groceries. “Hers,” Billquist says, “was the artistic nature’s jealousy of real life.” Best of all, Gottlieb dispenses with words in a gallery of photographs in which Garbo cups her head like the calyx of a flower, lowers her eyelids to semaphore desire or perhaps drowsiness and smokes a cigarette as if lighting a candle to place on her own altar. The mutable human face is saved from decay and flesh and blood are somehow sculpted into the likeness of Pallas Athene. • Garbo by Robert Gottlieb is published by Farrar, Straus and Giroux (£32). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThis picture of a young couple arriving at Gatwick airport from the Caribbean on 30 June 1962 was taken on the evening before the Commonwealth Immigrants Act came into force. The act had been passed by Harold Macmillan’s Conservative government to halt the flow of citizens from current and former British colonies. It was designed in particular to bring to an abrupt end the “open door” welcome for people from the West Indies – characterised by the arrival of the Empire Windrush in 1948 – to help rebuild the so-called “mother country” after the war. Macmillan had been under pressure from his militant backbenchers, some in the newly formed far-right Monday Club, to introduce the bill. Labour leader Hugh Gaitskell called it “cruel and brutal anti-colour legislation”. The couple in the picture, striding confidently across the tarmac from their BOAC plane in their Sunday clothes, therefore represent perhaps the last moment that Commonwealth citizens from the Caribbean arrived in Britain with unclouded hope. In the subsequent decade, two further immigration bills tightened the legislation against the free movement of families, and the subject became an emotive and divisive political issue right up to the present moment, with the draconian nationality and borders bill passing through parliament. This photograph is included in an exhibition, Changing the Story, that uses pictures from the TopFoto archive to challenge received ideas of the “whiteness” of Britain after the first world war. The exhibition, brought to life by poet and performer Rommi Smith, includes images from between 1917 and 1962 that question the monocultural stereotypes of nation that conservative forces promoted. “I open the album and am spellbound,” Smith writes of encountering this archive. “I am immediately struck that what unites these stories of people and places across time and space is the racial diversity of the protagonists in them. These photos flip the script on Britishness: my history lessons did not look like this.” Changing the Story: Photographs of British Life in Black and White, 1917-1962 is at the North Wall Arts Centre, Oxford, 10-29 JanuaryGuilty, five times over, Ghislaine Maxwell, shackled, sits in the sweat box as it crawls over Brooklyn Bridge along with the rest of the rush-hour little people she used to fly over, saying a last goodbye to the Imperial City’s billion-dollar stalagmites. The one-time Princess Mwah-Mwah is now the Demon Queen, facing 30 years, the rest of her life in prison, not some Disneyland of rightwing fantasy but a bone pit of the bad, the mad and the broken locked up until the end of age. She has a secret key that could unlock her shackles. What if she sings, tells the feds what she knows, gives up the overmighty men who, along with her one-time lover Jeffrey Epstein, abused women more child than adult back in her pomp? She could cut her jail time down to 10 years and be out in seven, thanks to good behaviour. But to do that, Maxwell – once the bosom pal of the second son of the Queen of England, two US presidents, and our prime minister, Boris Johnson, on the word of his sister, Rachel – would have to admit that she had been Epstein’s $30m pimp, that she treated a host of underage women as nothings, trash, that she did great wrong, that she was sorry. No sign of that. I do feel pity for Maxwell, for the dark chasm between how her life was and the wretched place she is in now but her lack of remorse, her failure to address reality, her unwillingness to express a smidgen of regret to her victims hardens the heart. And therein lies her tragedy, the darkest fairytale of modern times. Her first chance at coming clean was in 2002 when reporter Vicky Ward was checking out claims by Annie Farmer, who said that in 1996, when she was 16, she was flown to Epstein’s Zorro ranch in New Mexico where, her story goes, she was sexually abused by Maxwell and Epstein. She tricked Farmer, giving the teenager a massage. It became sexual, then Farmer realised the door was open, her fear being that Epstein was standing in the dark, watching. Later, Epstein came into Farmer’s bed but she resisted, then fled. To Ward, Maxwell said: “I can guarantee that I didn’t give her a massage… Why do you say this? Some kid who just says she came to the ranch that I gave a massage to… It’s wrong. OK? It is wrong! I don’t like the implication of what you’re saying either, for the record. At all. I don’t like it at all. Disgusting.” That story never ran until far too late. Ward, by the way, went on to blog in 2011 that she admired Epstein and: “I like Ghislaine, everyone does.” No one at all who knew Maxwell back in the day comes out of this story well. Maxwell’s second chance to set evil to rights was in October 2005 when the Palm Beach police department raided Epstein’s house on El Brillo Way. The socialite who got a countess to write a 50-page manual on such things as how full a box of tissues had to be before it was thrown away – half – never noticed the fresh child factory production line of underage girls coming and going. But she would have registered the fact of the police raid, surely? Would, perhaps, have wondered what had happened to all the house’s computer hard drives, including, one would think, her own, when they were mysteriously removed before the raid, as if a bent copper in on the police investigation had forewarned Team Epstein? Nothing from Maxwell then. Not a word in 2007 when she got her final dollop of Epstein’s $30m, a single $7m transfer for a helicopter to be owned by her own company. Silence in 2008 when her ex Epstein was convicted of procuring an underage girl for prostitution, effectively that he was a paedophile. She was still taking his money in 2009, by her own account. In 2016 she swore on oath, in a civil suit brought by Virginia Roberts Giuffre, that there had been no underage sex, nothing to see here, folks. She was still watching the paedophile’s back. Silence, too, in 2019 when Epstein was arrested a second time in July and in August when he killed himself in jail. Instead of facing the music, Maxwell ran, only to be caught and tried. She could have told the jury that she was innocent, that the four women who said they had been abused were making it up, as were their three boyfriends, as was the butler, Juan Alessi, as was the chain of photographs showing an intimacy from the early 90s, as was the chain of money transfers proving that Epstein paid her $30m over eight years for being a fancy janitor. Instead, she held her tongue, only telling the judge: “The government has not proved its case beyond a reasonable doubt. So there is no need for me to testify.” Her bark of arrogant command echoed her father, Robert Maxwell, the first monster in her life, a man who stole £400m from his pensioners, who took pride in pissing off the roof of his helicopter pad in the heart of London, who evacuated his bowels within earshot of reporters, who used to wipe his bottom with cloth towels and let the maids pick them up. Her pattern of denial over two decades suggests that his daughter will find it impossible to do a plea bargain with the feds and so her future looks impossibly bleak. And that can only be down to her – and the rest of the Maxwell family. Questioned about the evidence against her on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, her brother Ian Maxwell said that conditions in her remand prison were grim. We all agree. But Maxwell in court looked fantastic, as if she had stepped off a yacht. Brothers Ian and Kevin both hit their stride, proclaiming their sister’s innocence, Kevin saying “she is not the Demon Queen”. One can only ask why did Epstein pay her $30m? The prosecution case was, simply put, that no 16-year-old girl would fly to the middle of nowhere in New Mexico to spend a weekend with Epstein but if her mother were told that Maxwell was going to be there, then you might. The same goes for the other three victims: Jane and Kate and Carolyn. Maxwell got her $30m and in return she provided cover for the paedophile. I sat through the evidence and came to the conclusion that she was as guilty as sin. So did the other reporters. So did the jury. That said, it makes one deeply uneasy that while Maxwell is facing a long, slow, grey death inside, the alpha males in our dark fairytale are walking free. The presidents, the prince, the famous Harvard lawyer, the Wall Street masters of the universe, the scientists with brains the size of planets, hobnobbed with Epstein and Maxwell, many on the Lolita Express, some on Paedo Island in the US Virgin Islands. They all deny doing or seeing anything untoward. True, none of the under-age women say they were sexually abused by Trump and Clinton. Harvard lawyer Alan Dershowitz vehemently denies wrongdoing but he has questions to answer. His primary accuser, Virginia Roberts Giuffre, stands by her story that she was required to have sex with him on multiple occasions. She also accuses Prince Andrew, the Duke of York, saying she was forced to have sex with him three times in 2001 and there is a photograph that shows they met. For the moment, Andrew Windsor denies all, as convincingly as a gimp photographed in a gimp suit denying he’s a gimp. Virginia’s lawyers are asking him to prove that she was wrong to say that he was a sweaty dancer because he can’t sweat. My friend Ashley Grossman, professor of neuro-endocrinology at Oxford, thinks the prince’s claim nonsense. Virginia was 17 when she was trafficked from Florida to London. If only there was some kind of police body in London that could investigate… The dark fairytale of Ghislaine Maxwell isn’t over, not by a long chalk. John Sweeney was the reporter on the Hunting Ghislaine podcast and his book, Hunting Ghislaine, will be published by Hodder this spring.Fresh proof that the Nazis set up fake auctions and phoney paperwork to disguise their looting of art and valuable possessions has been uncovered by an amateur sleuth researching her own family mystery. French writer Pauline Baer de Perignon’s investigation has revealed the fate of a missing collection of art that included work by Monet, Renoir and Degas and also exposed the reluctance of Europe’s leading museums to accept evidence of the deceit. Baer was prompted to look into the past when she bumped into an English cousin who told her he believed the family had been “robbed”. “The whole thing has changed my life,” said Baer this weekend. “I have had to look back at a long-forgotten family story as well as at the hidden secrets of the Gestapo. And then I had to confront the truth about paintings held by galleries such as the Louvre and the state museum in Dresden. I was so naive when I started.” Baer’s three years of research have led not just to a better understanding of the way in which significant works of art were systematically stolen after Germany invaded France, but will culminate later this month in the high-profile sale of a recovered painting at Sotheby’s in New York. Portrait of a Lady as Pomona, by the revered 18th-century French artist Nicolas de Largillière, once belonged to her great-grandfather, the Parisian collector Jules Strauss, and was only returned to his descendants last year. It is now expected to sell for $1m-$1.5m (£750,000-£1.1m). “I could have asked my father to tell me about Jules Strauss, but I never did,” Baer has explained. “My father died when I was 20, before I was bold enough to ask him about the war, about his parents and grandparents, about his emotions and his memories.” Baer’s curiosity was aroused when she bumped into her cousin Andrew Strauss at a concert in Paris eight years ago. The two had not met since she was a teenager, but he told her that he worked at Sotheby’s and believed the apparent sale of the Strauss collection in the early 1940s was “shady”. He mentioned the involvement of dummy companies, Nazi officers and museum inventories to his bemused cousin. “Andrew’s words sent my mind tumbling down a rabbit hole,” said Baer. Armed with a scribbled note listing the names of famous artists, Baer began to piece together the lost past. She was now as interested in finding out what happened to her distant family members as in the fate of the missing art. A book about her efforts, The Vanished Collection, has already made waves in France, where it was published last year and where critics have compared it to a compelling suspense novel. A reviewer for Elle said it was as “devourable as a thriller”, while others have compared the family’s story to those of other famous Jewish families whose art was looted in the war, such as the Camondos, the Rothschilds and the Ephrussis. At the start of Baer’s inquiries, all she had was one photograph of Strauss, her illustrious great-grandfather, and another of the many portraits hanging on the walls of his former home on Avenue Foch in Paris. She knew the apartment had gone, but that there was one elderly living relative with first-hand knowledge of what had happened. She delved into the archives of great museums and asked difficult questions of the French ministry of culture. She was surprised to discover how the thefts had been covered up, but her English translator, Natasha Lehrer, believes the most powerful part of the book concerns howmodern art institutions have dragged their feet and, at worst, avoided doubts about the ownership of important paintings. “What Pauline stumbled upon was an apparent unwillingness among those leading various large state museums to admit that they were holding looted works of art until very recently,” said Lehrer. “This despite the fact that families and collectors often had all the provenance information available to identify them as the rightful owners. There has been a notable reluctance to return artworks.” The English version of Baer’s book is to be published next month by Head of Zeus. Baer tracked down the portrait by Largillière to Dresden’s state art collections and found archival evidence to prove that Strauss had been forced to sell it. The masterpiece had apparently been acquired in 1941 for the Reichsbank in Berlin and then transferred to the ministry of finance, before going to Dresden in 1959. Baer found the words “Collection Jules Strauss” next to the Largillière’s listing in the German Lost Art Foundation, but was then told that the Dresden museum’s director was not minded to return it. She was questioned about whether Strauss was originally happy to sell, despite evidence of laws that prevented Jews from profiting by such deals. “The more I continued with my investigation, the more I realised how unlikely it was that Jules had been able to avoid his collection becoming seized by the Nazis,” said Baer. “Even before the invasion of France, the Germans had compiled a list of large French collections.” Dresden’s state art collections has since said: “The investigation of this complex case was as extensive and thorough as is necessary to ensure that a work of art is returned to its rightful owner.” The portrait’s sale in New York this month will now allow all 20 of Strauss’s heirs a share in its value. Painted between 1710 and 1714, when Largillière was at the height of his powers, the sitter for the portrait is thought to be Marie Madeleine de La Vieuville, the Marquise de Parabère, mistress of Philippe II, Duc d’Orléans. She is depicted as Pomona, the Roman goddess of fruit and abundance. Strauss, a Frankfurt-born banker, built an extraordinary collection of art, ranging from antiques to the Impressionists, while he was in Paris. It is now clear that much of it was then stolen or forcibly sold by the Nazis.With the day drawing to a close, I’ll leave the live blog there. Here’s your sparks-notes list of what happened today: NSW reported 18,278 cases on Sunday, slightly down from yesterday with a record positivity rate of 20% and 1,066 people currently in hospital with the virus. Victoria recorded 7,172 Covid cases and three deaths. Queensland recorded 3,587 cases, an increase on yesterday’s numbers. Tasmania recorded a big jump, reporting 404 new Covid cases, with a positivity rate of 26% from 1,542 tests performed. South Australia has recorded 2,298 new cases, a slight increase on yesterday with 82 people in hospital. There were 506 Covid-19 cases recorded in the Australian Capital Territory. A security guard at a Western Australian hotel quarantine facility has contracted Covid-19 and is now in isolation themselves. In New South Wales, the historic Manly ferry MV Baragoola has sunk in Sydney Harbour. Labor leader Anthony Albanese has announced a future government will prioritise a fast rail link between Sydney and Newcastle should they win the next election. Thanks for reading. We’ll be back bright and early tomorrow morning. A grassfire threatening residents in Melbourne’s outer south-east has been brought under control, AAP reports. Firefighters had warned Pakenham and Nar Nar Goon residents to move at least two streets away from the fire just after 3pm on Sunday. By 4.15pm the alert was downgraded as crews had contained the blaze, although smoke was visible in neighbouring suburbs. A number of fires broke out across Victoria on Sunday, following several days of hot weather. In the state’s north, Kotupna, Lower Moira and Yambuna residents have been urged to stay close to a building where they can shelter due to a bushfire near the Goulburn River. Locals should stay informed and monitor conditions, including increased wind speed, change in wind direction and smoke. A security guard at a Western Australian hotel quarantine site has tested positive for Covid-19. In a statement released late on Sunday, WA Health said the case is not linked to other known outbreaks and is currently being investigated to learn how the guard contracted the illness and what variant of Covid-19 he has. The guard is being transferred to hotel quarantine after returning a positive result on a routine test that is undertaken as part of his employment. Three identified close contacts are also isolating and will be tested. They are all asymptomatic. Western Australia has only 39 active cases with a total of 1,168 cases identified to date. There may be few or no official restrictions, but word is it feels very much like a “soft lockdown” in Sydney today. Residents in Melbourne’s outer south-east are being urged to move at least two streets away from an out-of-control grassfire, AAP Reports. A Watch and Act emergency alert has been issued for a grassfire on Ryan Road in Pakenham, with residents and anyone who lives in nearby Nar Nar Goon warned to move away from the fire. “If you live directly next to grassland, you may need to move two or more streets away from the fire. Grassfires are unlikely to spread past the first row of houses,” the alert, sent just after 3pm on Sunday, said. The fire is travelling north down Ryan Road towards Princes Highway, with firefighters requesting a firefighting aircraft for assistance. Firefighters were battling a number of fires across Victoria on Sunday, following several days of hot weather. A grassfire in Melbourne’s west just after 1pm covered 2 hectares. About 40 firefighters attacked the blaze, on Sheahan Road in Truganina, bringing it under control just before 2pm. A historic Manly ferry has sunk in Sydney Harbour overnight putting an end to a decades-long campaign to restore it to its former glory. Two men called NSW Fire and Rescue for help in bailing water from the MV Baragoola at 10.30pm on Saturday night but were forced to escape on a small boat when the vessel began to take on water. By the time police arrived the 99-year-old boat had sunk 10 metres at its mooring on the former wharf at Balls Head Bay and had begun to break apart. Efforts to conserve the ferry – the last built in Sydney – had been under way for the last two decades with the vessel passing through the hands of several owners before landing with the Baragoola Preservation Association. A post to the group’s Facebook page last night said they had “received word” of the sinking but that the group had “handed the vessel over to” another as “as Covid and lack of access made it untenable”. Efforts are being made to stop debris and other pollutants from escaping into the bay, while people are being asked to stay away from any salvage operation. In more Covid news, an unofficial account tracking the spread in Tasmania puts the test positivity rate in the state at a whopping 26% – though this can be accounted for by the recent changes to testing. You may have seen in the last few days several stories from my colleague Anne Davies exploring the newly released 2001 cabinet papers to understand what the government of John Howard was thinking on issues like social security, refugees and climate change. But did you know that Howard personally reviewed the visa application of Eminem after a campaign by conservative family groups to have him barred from entering into the country? Howard ultimately deferred to immigration minister Philip Ruddock but regretted the decision wasn’t his. The daily release of the latest exposure sites may be a thing of the past across most of the country, but not so in Western Australia where health authorities have added almost two dozen new locations this morning. There are too many to list in full, but most appear to be clustered south of Perth around Bunbury. Find the full list here. Federal communications minister Paul Fletcher is responding to Labor’s high-speed rail pledge, calling Anthony Albanese’s speech an “election stunt”. Fletcher says Albanese should explain how he intends to pay for the project and suggests Labor would look to raise taxes. It is perhaps a good reminder that a federal election needs to be held by May. Get the full story on Labor’s proposal below: Glenn McGrath has tested positive for Covid-19, three days out from the start of the SCG Test, AAP reports. McGrath, who has helped turn Australia’s year-opening Test into a fundraising drive to support those with breast cancer, is isolating at home and feels well. There is hope McGrath will return a negative test in time to attend day three of the SCG Test, now known as Jane McGrath Day. The former paceman will have a virtual presence at the ground on Monday, when both sides are presented with their baggy pink caps. For decades, wave riders have blazed a trail into little-known coastal towns – and in their wake come the planners and developers. When Clint Bryan bought his house 40 minutes north of Perth city, one consideration was paramount: it had to be near his favourite surf break. And sure enough, his Kallaroo home is just five minutes’ walk from the Indian Ocean. The suburb name is a Noongar word meaning “road to the water”. But by the end of this summer, the waves that Bryan built his life around will disappear as the beach is redeveloped for the $252m Ocean Reef Marina. To read Narelle Towie’s summer feature on the battle to protect Australia’s surf breaks, click below: Marshall says he believes transmission rates will be lower in South Australia than other places: It’s probably one of the safest places to have been in the world over the last two years. Now we are confronted with a mighty battle on our hands but just like we’ve risen to the challenge with previous waves, we will do exactly the same with this one. By my count, the South Australia premier has used the word “flex” eight times during this presser to describe efforts to ensure the state’s health system can cope with an influx of cases. Some have noticed this and have thoughts ... Speaking about a situation that developed yesterday among the Indigenous community in Port Augusta, Marshall says there are three people in the area with confirmed cases but the situation now appears less serious than initially thought. “We’ve dodged the bullet with a very vulnerable community in Port Augusta.” On prisons, however, things are not so good: “We now have 60 COVID positive patients within the prison system at the moment. The majority of those are within the Adelaide women’s prison as well as other locations in Adelaide. We now have one positive case among a worker at the Port Augusta prison.” South Australian premier Steven Marshall speaking now, kicking off his press conference with a call for people to get vaccinated as Omicron spreads. The state had 21,140 tests yesterday, with 2,298 cases and 82 people in hospital. Seven people are in ICU. As we’re waiting for the South Australia presser, the ACT have released its numbers. There are 506 new cases in the territory making a total of 1,827. Nine in hospital, one in ICU and one person on ventilation. Victoria’s early childhood minister Ingrid Stitt said the state’s testing system was managing to cope despite “unprecedented demand” in recent days. AAP reports: Despite reports that some people were waiting up to four days for their Covid-19 test results, she said results were “overwhelmingly” still coming through within 24 to 48 hours. I think yesterday’s heat, which affected some of our centres, may have something to do with some of the longer waits. We are committed to making sure that we continue to deliver results as quickly as possible and I know that our hardworking pathology services are working really closely with us on that. She said the state’s health minister will make an announcement on widening access to rapid antigen tests within days. We will have more to say in the next few days about how we will distribute rapid antigen tests for those who are eligible to use that as a way of ensuring they remain Covid-safe. If you’re looking to get tested in South Australia today, wait times at sites across the Adelaide metropolitan area are looking pretty friendly: The speech is interesting as Albanese is laying out his pitch for the prime ministership, outlining a vision for a more active government, an expansion to Medicare and a plan to encourage Australian manufacturing and better services. He has been at pains to pay tribute to coal mine workers, while attempting to thread the needle on climate change: Coal and coal work will continue to play an important part of your economy. But there are opportunities to diversify the products that you export and sell. The energy mix of this region of our country will change. That’s a simple inescapable reality of trading on the global market. Decisions get made in boardrooms in Beijing, New York and Tokyo that directly affect us here. But it’s also the opportunity in front of us now. On the actual proposal, Albanese says his vision is for a high-speed rail line to run up the east coast, with the “corridor from Newcastle to Sydney which includes stops at the Central Coast our first priority”. My vision is for high-speed rail that runs from Brisbane grabbing jobs and connecting communities up and down the east coast of Australia overcoming the tyranny of distance held regions back. And: It will make the region more ambitious of a change to closer collaboration and integration as well as an incentive for people looking to relocate to the route. It will bring economic benefits to local industries like tourism and hospitality. And high-speed rail is a game changer for workers commuting to Sydney. Albanese kicks off the speech not talking about light rail, but talking about aged care, child care and the need to “bring the country back together”. We’re a dynamic nation that is stronger when we work together, when we pull together. The Labor leader then gets fired up, attacking the government and the prime minister over the handling of the pandemic. It is beyond comprehension that the same mistakes are being made on the rollout of booster shots. The same mistakes are being made in aged care. The same mistakes are being made in disability, the same mistakes are being made in testing capacity, and they’re not even pretending to play a role in securing a supply of rapid antigen tests. Labor opposition leader Anthony Albanese is in Newcastle this morning where he is starting a press conference to talk about his $500m plan for high-speed rail to link Sydney and the Hunter Valley. It’s only a brief update this morning but Dr Gerrard hands over to deputy police commissioner Peter Martin who gives an update on tropical cyclone Seth, a category 1 cyclone that is currently sitting 630km east of Hervey Bay. Martin says the cyclone is moving south and is expected to slow down before turning to the south-west on Sunday afternoon before losing its severity on Monday. He also urges caution for anyone in the region who is heading to the coast today: What we are expecting to see is very high tides on the coast in our low-lying areas, potentially some flooding as a result of those high tides, and some severe weather action on the coast with respect to waves and damaging surf. It is really important that anybody going to the coast today and over the next couple of days is very mindful that there will be significant surf on the coast, damaging waves, and some very high tides which will cause rips along the coast and some local flooding. Dr Gerrard says five people in intensive care in the sunshine state, but none are on ventilators. Two are pregnant women, one who isn’t vaccinated. He is also trying to get people used to the idea that there will be large numbers of case numbers: The issue we are facing is of course that with the degree of contagiousness of this virus, we are going to be seeing very large numbers of cases, even though the severity is clearly going to be less, we are going to see very large numbers of cases and a small proportion of a very large number is still a large number. He also includes a call for pregnant women to get vaccinated: Many people are not aware that in pregnancy, your level of immunity is slightly suppressed. The theory is that it is to prevent the mother’s body from rejecting the baby as a foreign invader. So pregnancy it very slightly, it lowers your level of immunity in pregnant women. This means pregnant women are more susceptible to a number of different infections, including Covid-19. That is why it is so critical pregnant women get vaccinated. And we’re kicking off with the numbers from Queensland as the state’s chief health officer Dr John Gerrard is speaking now at the daily press conference. Happy Sunday everyone. It’s a new year, a new day and I’m here with a fresh pot of coffee. I’ll be taking you through to the afternoon, so if you see something you think should be on the blog, you can find me at @RoyceRk2. That’s where I leave you for today. I’ll hand you over to my colleague Royce Kurmelovs. Police in the New South Wales Hunter region are conducting a recovery operation after the body of a man was discovered inside a submerged vehicle in Port Stephens today. Just after 4.30am emergency services were called to the Soldier Point boat ramp, about an hour north of Newcastle, following reports of a vehicle in the water. Officers attached to Port Stephens-Hunter Police District attended and located a white hatchback fully submerged. The body of a man, yet to be formally identified, was found within the vehicle. A crime scene has been established and a recovery operation is underway. Police say an investigation into the circumstances surrounding the incident has commenced and that a report will be prepared for the state coroner. Tasmania has recorded 404 new cases of Covid-19, with three people in hospital. The state has a first-dose vaccination rate of 97.74% in the 16+ population. University of NSW epidemiologist Mary-Louise McLaws with some thoughts on the supply of rapid antigen tests this morning. Fast rail linking Sydney and the Hunter will be prioritised under a Labor government, opposition leader Anthony Albanese says. AAP reports that the first step towards high-speed rail linking major cities, the route would deliver speeds of more than 250km/h, cutting the journey time from Sydney to Newcastle to 45 minutes, down from two-and-a-half hours. The most recent report into high-speed rail found the Sydney to Newcastle route should be the first component of an eventual line to Brisbane. Albanese will announce his government would make the works a key priority for a new high-speed rail authority, and also provide $500m funding in its first budget to begin corridor acquisition, planning and early works. At a speech to be given in Newcastle on Sunday, Albanese will outline a vision for high-speed rail between Brisbane and Melbourne. Australia is the only inhabited continent on earth not developing high-speed rail. Fast and high-speed rail will be an important element of Labor’s smart regionalisation plan that recognises that decentralisation is critical for Australia. As I mentioned earlier, the prime minister is monitoring for Covid-19 symptoms after a positive case attended his press conference at Sydney’s Kirribilli House. Scott Morrison and chief medical officer Paul Kelly held the press conference on Wednesday, 29 December, to announce a snap national cabinet meeting. The press conference was held outdoors and members of the press were wearing face masks. Morrison does not need to isolate or take a PCR test under NSW Health guidelines. Changes to isolation and testing requirements were ushered in by the national cabinet meeting on Thursday as cases across the country soared. Dangerous surf and abnormally high tides likely in south-east Queensland and north-east New South Wales, thanks to Cyclone Seth. Perhaps the most significant figure in those NSW Health stats is the hospitalisations. The state now had 1,066 people hospitalised with Covid-19. That’s 163 more than yesterday, or about an 18% jump since. By yesterday that number had already more than doubled since Christmas. The state’s positivity rate – the number of tests which result in a positive result – is now about 20%. The New South Wales government has been at pains to urge people not to get tested unless they have symptoms or fall under the new category of a close contact, but that doesn’t appear to have totally solved the issue of long lines at testing clinics, as our economic correspondent Peter Hannam is discovering this morning. And in Victoria, it’s 7,172 cases and three deaths. New South Wales has recorded 18,278 new cases in the 24 hours to 8pm last night and two people have died. It is worth noting that while the number of positive cases has dropped from previous days, so too has the number of tests, which dropped below 100,000 for the first time in quite a while. Good morning on this second day of 2022. We’ll have the latest Covid numbers for NSW and Victoria shortly, but first a quick recap. Yesterday, NSW recorded 22,577 cases and four deaths, while in Victoria daily cases rose to 7,442 and nine people lost their lives. The hospital systems are under pressure particularly in NSW where 901 Covid patients are admitted, including 79 in ICU. That’s prompted NSW to exempt health workers from Covid isolation rules. It comes as AAP reports the prime minister is monitoring for Covid symptoms after a positive case attended his press conference at Sydney’s Kirribilli House. Scott Morrison and chief medical officer Paul Kelly held the press conference on Wednesday, 29 December, to announce a snap national cabinet meeting. It was outdoors and those attending were wearing masks.‘For me, history is the record not only of how things change, but how people make things change, how they act individually and collectively to create a better world.” So wrote American historian Tyler Stovall about his approach to his craft. The echoes of historians such as EP Thompson and Eric Foner, Barbara Fields and Robin DG Kelley are unmistakable in his work. Primarily a historian of France, Stovall’s work bears on many important present-day themes – the relationship between race and class, the tension between universalism and particularism, the contradictions of liberalism. Yet few people outside academia know of him and his death last month was almost unmarked in the mainstream media, a testament, perhaps, to the parochialism of our culture. Engaging with his work is a useful means of illuminating many contemporary debates. Stovall’s early research in the 1980s looked at the making of working-class communities, especially in the “red belt” around Paris. Increasingly, though, his attention became drawn to some of the blind spots of French historiography, notably issues of race and imperialism. His studies of French colonialism and of colonial labour in France helped to challenge the idea of a colour-blind nation, not mired by the racism that beset the Anglo-Saxon world, and to unpick the ways in which the traditions of French universalism could be wielded to deny rights and dignity to those deemed not to belong. Stovell’s final book, White Freedom, published last year, was in some ways the culmination of his life’s endeavour. Yet it is also as frustrating as it is enlightening, revealing both the significance of his work and also the confusions that infest contemporary thinking about race. Modern ideas of freedom and liberty, Stovall observes, emerged alongside theories of race. While liberty and racism are usually seen as opposing claims, they are, in fact, he insists, inextricably linked, because ideals of freedom and liberty assumed the exclusion of non-whites. As such, they bear “the unmistakable stamp of whiteness and white racial ideology”. Unquestionably, many thinkers who helped to shape modern ideas of freedom and liberty held racist views and supported exclusionary practices. John Locke, often regarded as the founding philosopher of liberalism, defended slavery and owned shares in a slave-trading company. Immanuel Kant, the towering Enlightenment figure, believed that “humanity is at its greatest perfection in the race of whites”. The French revolutionaries who proclaimed the Declaration of the Rights of Man denied those same rights to slaves until forced to do so by an insurrection in the colony of Saint Domingue. Abraham Lincoln launched the civil war that ended slavery in America but insisted also that he was not “in favor of bringing about in any way the social and political equality of the white and black races”. For all this, Stovall’s own work shows that the struggle over the meaning of freedom was more complex than can be captured by a notion such as “white freedom”. The demand that certain groups be excluded from the benefits of freedom was provoked primarily not by racial concerns, but by political needs, especially by fears of social disorder. Throughout the 19th century, Stovall points out, France was torn between “the radical vision of democracy championed by… the sans-culottes of the French Revolution” and the liberal desire to “not endanger private property”. This struggle sparked the revolutions of 1830 and 1848 and the 1871 Paris Commune. The crushing of these revolutionary challenges led to the institutionalisation of more restricted notions of freedom. The tension Stovall describes here goes back to the 17th century and forward to the 20th. In the famous Putney debates during the English civil war, Oliver Cromwell’s son-in-law Henry Ireton spoke for the officer class in insisting that “Liberty cannot be provided for in a general sense if property be preserved”. A century later, this question was at the heart of the struggle between the radicals and the moderates of the Enlightenment. In the 19th century, the liberal imperialist Thomas Macaulay argued, in response to Chartist demands for democracy, that “universal suffrage… is incompatible with property” and hence “with civilisation”. The notion of race provided a means of casting inequalities as natural and inevitable. This became the justification for enslavement, for the brutal treatment of colonial subjects and for the denial of rights to non-white peoples in Europe and America. It was also the justification for suppressing working-class rights. In the 19th century, as Stovall acknowledges, the working class was viewed as a distinct and inferior race. The French Christian socialist Philippe Buchez wondered how “within a population such as ours, races may form, so miserable, inferior and bastardised that they may be classed as below the most inferior savage races, for their inferiority is sometimes beyond cure?” He was talking not of Africans or Asians but of the working class and the rural poor of France. Racial divisions became also a means of dismantling challenges to the ruling order by persuading white workers that their interests lay in their “whiteness”, not in their status as workers. In the American south, for instance, “Jim Crow” laws, which imposed apartheid-style segregation, were mainly enforced at the turn of the 20th century in response to the “Fusion” movements, which brought together black workers and poor white farmers, to challenge the established order and, in North Carolina, win power. The Democrats, the ousted ruling party, launched a violent “white supremacy campaign” to rupture the coalition, win white working-class support for treating blacks as outcasts and regain political control. This complex relationship between liberties, race, class and whiteness is ill-served by a concept such as “white freedom”. Nor is this just an issue about history. “Whiteness” has become an idea fetishised today both by racists and by many anti-racists, the one claiming that all white people have a common set of interests, the other reframing racism as “white privilege”. In doing so, both, in different ways, obscure the political and structural reasons for racism, on the one hand, and the social problems facing the working class, on the other, making it more difficult to challenge either. Tyler Stovall’s work is important in illuminating previously ignored areas of class, race and colonialism and should be better known and cherished. It should also be challenged and questioned, especially the arguments about “white freedom”. Intellectual legacies, like freedoms, are always contested. • Kenan Malik is an Observer columnistThe harsh midday sun beats down on the withering pawpaw plants in Maureen Adhiambo’s patch of land. The villagers in Kamenya have not seen rain for months, and when it does come, the soil is too dry and loose to retain any of the moisture or nutrients. Last year Adhiambo saw her maize dry up long before it could mature. Like many farmers in the Homa Bay region, on the south bank of Kenya’s Lake Victoria, she is staring at yet another cycle of crop failure. “Farming has been frustrating for us,” says Adhiambo, in the shade of a thirsty-looking banana plant. “Look at my neighbours’ farms. They too will harvest very little, if any. Changing weather patterns and poor soils have made it difficult to make a decent living out of farming.” To support her family, the mother of three had moved to the neighbouring county of Migori in 2016 for a job selling life insurance. But that did not fare well and she went home a year later to take another shot at farming. She planted beans, onions and other vegetables in the hope that the rains due from March to May would arrive on time, but they did not. She tried again in October but the short rainy season failed too. She also lost her 13,000 Kenyan shillings (£84) investment. Frustrated, she decided to try her hand at poultry keeping. About 10km from Adhiambo’s home, in Seka village, 35-year-old Dominic Owuor tends a healthy crop of kale while on a nearby piece of land, tomato plants are thriving. His seven acres, leased from his neighbours, contrast sharply with Adhiambo’s. Here, the soils have a heavier water and nutrient retention ratio, thanks to water that Owuor pumps from Lake Victoria. However, he hasn’t had an easy time switching from paid employment to farming either. After graduating, Owuor took up teaching but he left in 2013 to work in the financial sector before going into full-time farming in 2018. “I tried my hand at farming while still employed, hoping to contribute to food security and provide employment to young people. But I knew little about agribusiness and the kind of plants that can withstand deteriorating weather patterns. I also employed casual labourers who weren’t well versed in farming either. Out of my initial investment of 100,000 Kenyan shillings, I barely managed half of that in returns,” he says. Farming around Lake Victoria is a hit and miss affair. They have seen the impact of a changing climate as the lake’s water level has risen and swallowed hundreds of acres of land. For those on higher ground, prolonged droughts have killed off young crops. The erratic climate and poor knowledge of viable agricultural practices have devastated food security and economic prospects for people who relied on fishing. According to the World Bank Group climate change action plan 2016-2020, the world will need to produce 50% more food by 2050 but estimates that with current practices, there will be a 40% water shortfall between demand and available supply. “Climate-smart land use, applied across the agricultural, forestry, fisheries, and conservation sectors, can increase food production and farmers’ income while offering large opportunities for climate resilience,” says its report. Adapting to the vagaries of an adverse climate is a steep learning curve for small-scale farmers. Adhiambo and Owuor benefited from training offered by UK organisation Practical Action, which assists smallholders to make a living while protecting their environment. Since Owuor switched from maize crops to horticulture, his revenues have grown to 250,000 shillings a month. “Even after deducting labour, farm inputs and marketing costs, I am happy with what I get. Irrigation-fed horticulture puts money in your pocket all year round unlike food crops that depend on an uncertain weather pattern,” he says. Adhiambo took up poultry farming with 17 chicks. Two years ago, she and her husband attended Practical Action-sponsored training to learn about poultry disease management, vaccination and housing. They also learned how to feed red worms with organic waste that are a rich source of protein for the birds. “I knew nothing about poultry when I started but since the training I have multiplied the birds and increased my earnings. I’m also taking eggs to the hatchery for more stock. Poultry works better for me than crop farming,” says Adhiambo. Jim Ouko, the youth and livelihood adviser at Practical Action, says changing rain patterns, high irrigation costs, new pests and diseases have all lowered food production while flash floods have destroyed crops and displaced farmers. “Prolonged droughts or severe flooding contribute to high costs of available food items. Farmers need to adopt climate-resilient farming practices … while cultivating pest-resistant African leafy vegetables.” Like Adhiambo, Merceline Akinyi, a mother of two from Nyakach, Kisumu, also got frustrated after losing maize crops. She learned how to rotate her crops to keep pests at bay and now her land is divided into paddocks where she grows vegetables using water from shallow wells within her compound. “I decided I will no longer wait for the rains,” says Akinyi. “Before 2010, I used to plant food crops and get nothing due to poor rains. I remember spending 7,000 shillings to prepare and plant in my one-acre farm and getting not more than 5,000 shillings in return, a financial loss and reduced food security. With water nearby, I can grow vegetables all year round. People in my area are not food-secure and come to my home to learn about modern ways of farming,” she says. The training has also attracted young people who previously had no interest in growing food. At a farm next to Owuor’s, 29-year-old Dedan Odhiambo is sorting out freshly-picked tomatoes. He is also a teacher who took up farming after failing to find a job. “I learned farming under Owuor’s wings,” he says. “He encouraged me to lease an acre of land and helped me identify a hybrid tomato variety that is bacteria and wilt-resistant. You can see the results.” As the Food and Agriculture Organization warns that 690 million people are facing hunger, the farmers of Lake Victoria are working to buck the trend with climate-smart agriculture – one acre at a time.The Royal National Lifeboat Institution (RNLI) is on course for the highest annual fundraising total in its near 200-year history. Donations swelled after the charity attracted huge public support following rightwing attacks for helping save the lives of asylum seekers at risk of drowning in the Channel. The RNLI said it has received a significant increase in support, with online donations rising by 50% this year. Founded in 1824, the UK’s network of volunteer lifeboats has been inundated with donations and messages of support after high-profile attacks from individuals such as Nigel Farage and elements of the media, who have called the charity “woke” for fulfilling its humanitarian mission to save lives at sea. Their claims are believed to have encouraged a group of fishermen who in November allegedly attempted to block a lifeboat from going to the Channel to rescue asylum seekers, days before 27 people drowned in the Channel. Jayne George, the RNLI’s fundraising director, said that such hostility appeared to have had the opposite effect to what its architects would have wanted. “We’ve had a better response to almost everything that we’ve done in 2021. At the end of the year, we’re going to have more members, we’re going to have more cash donors and more people who give to us via direct debit,” she said.George added that the charity’s database of supporters had also grown appreciably, with the organisation now in regular contact with 300,000 people. Channel crossings have become one of the most politicised issues in British politics, with the home secretary, Priti Patel, staking her reputation on making the route “unviable” yet unable to prevent almost 28,000 people arriving in small boats in 2021, compared with just over 8,400 the previous year. Her controversial borders bill intends to reduce such numbers and contained, until recently, proposals that appeared to criminalise organisations such as the RNLI for rescuing asylum seekers in the Channel. “We can’t help but notice that it’s a really divisive issue that’s in the news almost daily. Whatever the negatives, the positive is that it brings out this significant reaction in terms of people wanting to support us, particularly our work in the eastern Channel,” said George. She added that the boom in staycations during the pandemic meant more people were exposed to its work than usual: 2020 was one of the charity’s busiest on record, with 8,239 lifeboat launches that assisted 8,374 people and saved 239 lives. The organisation has also noted that support is not just confined to coastal areas. “In fact the majority of our most successful cohorts of fundraisers are in the major cities. We’ve got a Leeds business branch that is really successful and two committees in London that have raised significant sums of money, and also Birmingham as well,” said George. Sunday is the 20th anniversary of lifeboats on the Thames, where they were introduced after the 1989 Marchioness pleasure boat disaster in which 51 people died. Despite repeated assertions from the Home Office that it is heavily targeting small boat crossings, a parliamentary report last month said the government’s operations in the Channel “rely heavily on voluntary organisations, such as the RNLI, or independent lifeboats”. George said: “Our core purpose is humanitarian – we exist to save everyone.”With more than one million tickets sold, a host of star athletes signed up, more than 41,000 volunteer applications received and dozens of sold out events, anticipation for the Commonwealth Games in July is high. The games in Birmingham will be the first major international multisport event with spectators since the start of the pandemic, meaning the pressure is on to get it right, but the feeling of excitement is palpable. “This is the biggest thing that’s going to happen in the UK so people want to get involved,” says Ian Reid, the event’s chief executive. “Considering we started asking people to buy tickets about a year out and with all the uncertainty around Covid, and now we’re sat here having sold over one million tickets, it gives us real comfort that we’re going to have pretty much full stadiums at the vast majority of our events. The city’s going to be really jumping.” Layla Guscoth, who plays netball for England, is one of many athletes who believe the absence of crowds has been a major loss for sporting events since Covid. “The past couple of years have been a bit of a car crash for international sport in terms of restrictions and travelling,” she says. “It’s so exciting to think about having a major championship in England, with spectators, fingers crossed. Hopefully, for a couple of weeks, it can just enthral us all.” The Omicron variant and its implication for international travel and large-scale events has naturally caused organisers some concern, particularly after a period when it seemed the worst of the pandemic was over. “We have invested a huge amount of time, resources and money planning for various Covid scenarios,” says Reid. Welcoming people from abroad is likely to be one of the biggest worries, but organisers are expecting at least 90% of spectators to be from the UK. “There are now safety precautions like [vaccine] passports we can put in place and there’s clearly an advantage of the event taking place in summer. Everyone’s very confident that visitors will be coming to Birmingham, and we will put on a full sport programme with full stadiums,” Reid says. Despite the challenges of organising the event in constantly changing circumstances, the team is aiming for the biggest Commonwealth Games, with 286 sessions of sport in the two-week event. It will also be the first time a multisport event has more medal events for women than men (the Gold Coast Commonwealth Games in 2018 had an equal number). It will feature women’s cricket for the first time and T20 cricket makes it debut. “The growth of women’s cricket around the Commonwealth has been incredible,” says Reid. “The International Cricket Council is right behind us, they see this as the biggest event for women’s cricket ever. We’re hoping to put that sport right in the spotlight, and cricket is a Commonwealth sport so the quality will be really high.” The games will also feature more para sports than before and unlike at the Olympics will be fully integrated into the main timetable. Reid says: “We treat every athlete competing in our games exactly the same, they’re on exactly the same stage. We don’t look at it as a para programme and an able-bodied programme, we look at it as a single event. “The great thing about that is we introduce huge numbers of people to elite para sport that perhaps they have not engaged with before, because you may watch an able-bodied 100m race followed by a wheelchair race.” It is being hailed as Birmingham’s big opportunity to showcase itself on the world stage, and building work is increasing rapidly. Alexander Stadium in Perry Barr, which will host the athletics as well as the opening and closing ceremonies, is having a £72m revamp to increase capacity to about 30,000. Sandwell Aquatics Centre is the only venue being built for the games, hosting 11 days of swimming, para swimming and diving, and is due to be completed in the spring. Guscoth, who is from Birmingham, says she is looking forward to the often underrated city welcoming so many visitors. “Birmingham gets put down all the time but it has so much to offer – it’s so vibrant, it’s so multicultural, there’s a huge amount to do,” she says. “I’m pleased the athletics stadium has been rebuilt and other things are popping up around the city which I hope will continue to encourage young people to get involved in sports.” Birmingham has the youngest population of any city in Europe, with under-25s accounting for nearly 40% of its residents, and Reid believes the games will make a real effort to engage with its youthful audience. The city centre Smithfield site will host beach volleyball and, in a first for the Commonwealth Games, 3x3 basketball. “Rather than the traditional 5x5 basketball, 3x3 basketball uses a single net,” says Reid. “It’s a bit more urban, it’s really fast and it’s a really engaging sport, and the fact it’s sold out so quickly shows there’s a huge appetite for it. “There will also be DJs and music performances on that site, much more of a party atmosphere.” Guscoth said the opportunity to inspire young people after two years of Covid is one of the main things she is excited to see. “I’d hate to think how many kids over the last two years have dropped out of sports, because it’s not been there to be played,” she said. “It’s really tough to maintain interest and to keep up with fitness when gyms have been shut and clubs and school sports have been stopped, so hopefully this will reinvest a bit of energy and enthusiasm in sports. “For me, it’s seeing the faces of young women in the crowd and people that I know look up to us as role models. It’s nice to know that the next generation are going to be able to witness that again.” Organisers said ticket sales were given a big boost by the Olympics last summer, which coincided with the launch of the first ticket ballot. A number of athletes who competed in Tokyo, including swimmer Adam Peaty, sprinter Dina Asher-Smith, middle-distance runner Laura Muir and the para sport athlete Kadeena Cox, have signed up to compete. “We’ve undoubtedly been helped by the Tokyo Olympics. People have been watching those athletes compete and then want to watch them in person at a home games,” says Reid. “We just want to put on a really incredible celebration and feel like we’re getting back to, hopefully, some degree of normality.”If 2020 was a year of fear and isolation, 2021 marked one of return – a road toward something like “normal”, despite so many hairpin turns. The mass distribution of Covid-19 vaccines did not restore the norms of pre-pandemic life, as many had hoped, but it did change the rules of engagement. Time and again, people adapted. As we greet a third calendar year of pandemic life, the Guardian turned to experts across disciplines who have helped the rest of us make sense of the past two years for lessons learned, and wisdom to carry forward. The experts: Jessica Richards is the founder of the trend forecasting firm JMR Trend + Creative. Sydney Mintle is the founder of fashion marketing and public relations firm Gossip &amp; Glamour. Thomas Plante is a professor of psychology at Santa Clara University. Kelly Hills is a bioethicist and co-founder of the bioethics consulting firm Rogue Bioethics. Barbara J Sahakian is a professor of psychiatry at the University of Cambridge. Saskia Popescu is an infectious disease epidemiologist and assistant professor at the George Mason University Schar School of Policy and Government. What was something you realized in 2021 that you wish you’d known, or done, in 2020? Jessica Richards: My biggest piece of advice to my 2020 self would be to stop planning and just do the next right thing. Sydney Mintle: I now wish someone had told me earlier on to savor the quiet moments of reflection instead of panicking about when things would return to normal. The truth is, there is no “normal” any more and we have to remain agile and imaginative. Kelly Hills: I wish I’d taken the time to plan out the ideal accoutrements for a really comfortable and fun movie-watching experience at home – what it would mean for lighting, sound, seats, even things like the best way to make popcorn or how get that mixed-at-the-tap taste for soda. Maybe even a tap or two for beer and hard cider. A way to replicate what we enjoy about going to the movies, but at home. I realized that there are aspects of the theatre experience I really miss. Thomas Plante: I wished that I knew this was going to go on for so long. I would have bought stock in Zoom! What unexpected lesson have you learned from this long and challenging pandemic, and how has it changed your approach to work or life moving forward? Plante: Politicizing the pandemic, rather than treating it as a public health crisis being guided by public health experts, is something I didn’t see coming. I am more skeptical of people’s ability to think and behave logically. My wife (also a psychologist) and I often find ourselves saying that after being licensed psychologists for over 30 years, we still apparently have much to learn about human behavior. Mintle: The pandemic has shown us that we all truly want to be seen and connected. Whether that’s taking place digitally or in real life, what we missed most during the pandemic was human connection and the opportunity to share ideas. During the pandemic, I joined a book club and started reading books by authors of color that have deeply resonated with me. Seeking to understand different points of view will be critical as we work to navigate the changes ahead in 2022. Barbara J Sahakian: I’ve prioritized putting into practice things that I already knew were good for me, but did not always do because of my busy work routine. I now get more outdoor exercise and have a better work-life balance. And as soon as pandemic lockdowns ended in the UK, I made sure to do more of the things I enjoy: going to the opera, ballet and theatre, and visiting restaurants with friends and family. Saskia Popescu: I’ve realized the importance of communication that isn’t fixated on a timeline, and instead takes into account the ebbs and flows of a public health challenge. I realized that ending the pandemic requires continued buy-in from people who are exhausted, who perhaps haven’t been supported as best they should have, or maybe don’t understand the severity of the situation. As a result, I find it important to have more conversations with members of the public to better understand and address specific, existing concerns. I also learned that no matter how much we may think pandemic response should be simple and straightforward, it will be inherently politicized, nuanced, complicated and require the ability to lean into change and work to ensure trust from the public as a critical resource. Richards: As a trend forecaster, it’s my job to think about what life will be like six months, or a year, or even two years from now. When I kick off a new season, I ask myself a series of leading questions to shape the research, including “Where are we going?” During the pandemic, asking myself that question – and, more importantly, asking the follow-up question: “How will I get there?” – helped lay the groundwork for personal goal setting, too. Though the pandemic was and continues to be so large and all-encompassing, the practice of focused steps, leading to the next, and then the next, feels like a way to keep moving forward.As Joe Root has discovered, an Ashes tour to Australia can unspool as precipitously as a ball of wool bounding down a fire escape. Five England teams have won since Bodyline: Andrew Strauss’s sprinkler squad in 2010-11, Mike Gatting’s 1986-87 “can’t bat, can’t bowl, can’t field” crew, Mike Brearley’s 1978-79 outfit who beat a Packer-weakened Australia, Len Hutton’s 1954-55 side spearheaded by Frank Tyson and the team led by Ray Illingworth, who regained the Ashes in 1970-71. Illingworth, who died on Christmas Eve at the age of 89, was one of England’s shrewdest leaders, tactically brilliant and able to coax brilliance from tricky customers such as Geoff Boycott and John Snow. Ian Chappell, who watched him at work during that series and took over the Australian captaincy in the crucial seventh Test, considers him the best England captain he played against. “I learned a lot from his captaincy,” he says. “Mostly by observation. He handled Snow better than anyone else and, not that Dennis [Lillee] was John Snow, seeing Ray work with John helped me with Dennis. “There is a lot of bullshit talked about giving players pep talks and so on, but I could see Ray and John had an understanding. When it really mattered, and the battle was elevated, John would perform. “I learned you always had to keep attacking and even when you knew you had to pull back a bit, you still had to let the batsman know you were on him. Ray always had someone in an attacking position and you’d think, what’s going on, I’m doing all right here? That’s not easy to do as captain.” England did not travel without baggage. Illingworth was knocking on the door of 40 and his squad’s average age was 30, dubbed Dad’s Army and the worst side to land on Australian shores before the plane touched down. The side was beset by injuries and there was a divide between the sharp-eyed Illingworth and the tour manager, David Clark, a former Kent amateur captain, a farmer and a supporter of Colin Cowdrey, who had been passed over for the captaincy after injury and never really came to terms with his demotion. Ken Shuttleworth was on his first tour. The Lancashire fast bowler took five for 47 on Test debut at Brisbane and played in the second Test before tearing an adductor in his thigh during an up-country game in Wagga Wagga. He remembers the tension well. “We had a problem with the manager, Ray was at loggerheads with him all the time. It was a split tour really, between north and south. I think Ray was quoted at the time that he thought Clark was more on Australia’s side than ours. “However, it was a happy touring party. People got on with each other, everyone performed and everyone pulled together, Ray had the respect of everyone. He had a tremendous cricket brain and he always backed his players – whatever he said went.” Shuttleworth roomed with Snow, who was outstanding, finishing with 31 wickets – more than double that of the leading Australian, John Gleeson. “We talked a lot together, he played a lot of Neil Diamond all the time on a little tape recorder – it drove me daft. He had his differences with the manager and it was always John who finished the team meeting off with an awkward question.” It was an exhausting tour for England, with long months away from home – Shuttleworth can still remember the fatigue that came with bowling eight-ball overs in the 100F heat of Perth – and they did not win an lbw decision in the series. They played four-day state games as well as travelling out to the sticks on promotional duties. England pulled ahead with victory in the fourth Test after a series of draws, only to find the organisers had tacked a seventh Test on to the end of the tour to make up for the abandoned Test in Melbourne (which gave way to the first one-day international). This gave Australia a chance to pull even in the contest, as well as the promise of a full match fee, while England’s players were instructed to do it for love. Illingworth was not happy and sent away Clark away “with a flea in his ear” while eventually squeezing a £25 fee per player out of the MCC assistant secretary, Donald Carr. The Test was marred when Terry Jenner ducked into a bouncer from Snow and Illingworth took his players from the field after a section of the crowd started chucking bottles. On the last morning Australia needed another 100 to win with five wickets in hand and Greg Chappell and Rod Marsh at the crease, but they collapsed, giving England a 62-run victory. Illingworth was carried from the field by his delighted team. Chappell remembers a typical Yorkshireman who did not waste words, but whose company he enjoyed over a few beers. “The best way to describe him is as an honest cricketer. He made you fight for his wicket, usually at No 8, and you especially felt that when there was a match on the line. “He wasn’t an outstanding bowler but you always knew you were in a battle. He had a lot of pride in his own and his team’s performances – one of the things that is most galling about the current England team is that you wonder how much pride there is. There was a lot of fire in Ray’s side – that is what I came to think of as Test cricket.”If champagne socialism did not have such a bad rap, there should be a decent bottle or two open at Keir Starmer’s place this new year weekend. The party has its first consistent lead over the Conservatives: a seven-point advantage of the kind it requires to turn Labour’s doldrums into territory where it could conceivably claw back an election win from the long-running disaster movie. (The opposition was last in power when Eminem was topping the chart.) To his credit, Starmer has held his nerve in a gruelling house clean after the Corbyn era. Yes, there are still strong far left redoubts in Young Labour and the trade union movement, but the leadership has in essence won a battle to rebalance key roles. Indeed, a revivified Team Keir looks like a centrist revival. Rachel Reeves is an assiduous shadow chancellor who can test Rishi Sunak’s pain threshold this year as concerns over cost of living and failings by the government to offset energy price hikes deepen economic anxieties. Lisa Nandy is finally in the right job, taking on Michael Gove’s defence of the red wall seats in the elusive “levelling-up” agenda, and Yvette Cooper back to the big screen as a formidable cross-examiner of Priti Patel in home affairs. With fresh blood to public service briefs in Wes Streeting at health and Bridget Phillipson, as one of the front bench’s breakthrough talents, at education, Starmer is well placed to portray his party as ready to do more than carp at the failings of a stressed government. “More people have more doubts about the Tories,” says a message-bearer. “That gives us the chance to start to talk about the alternative and get a hearing.” A Starmer speech promising “security, prosperity and respect” is also intended to offset the impression of being the concerned-but-miserable party. Opposition is about opportunity seized and the Tories have handed Labour a generous bunch of year-end disasters. Revelations of vast carelessness in No 10 about the wisdom of holding parties at the outer edge of the Covid rules, to put it generously, to anticipated strong personal criticism of Johnson’s conduct over loans to refurbish his living quarters when (another) report by Lord Geidt emerges in the next week or so remind us of the omni-mess. Add a byelection defeat in Shropshire of epochal proportions and Labour has clearly gained possession of the political ball by dint of government misjudgements. There are, however, some angostura bitters in this mix. Not to put too fine a point on it, Tories do not fear Keir and until they have reason to do so, Labour’s paper gains and more positive polling will remain unconsolidated. Why might this be? Speaking to Starmer advocates in his inner team, the dominant analysis is that Labour has earned the “right to be heard” in recent weeks: an opening in the public mind to arguments that previously seemed irrelevant. Pollsters for both parties conclude that many Johnson assets have turned sour, flipping into incomprehension or distaste. “It’s a bit like looking at the date you thought was incredibly sexy and great fun when you were 16,” observes one Starmerite. “The things that attracted you to them most are the aspects that in a different light can make you really dislike them later.” Yet to torture the metaphor, the electorate has to date someone and simply finding Johnson to be more peroxide than blond will not necessarily do it for his challenger. Starmer is seen as “decent” (not a Johnson asset) and reliable (ditto). The flipside is he can come across as a bit dull. In contrast to the leader he replaced after the Corbyn rout in 2019, there is something wavering in Starmer’s self-presentation that makes it hard for the public to “get” him . The “old” Starmer, a leftish student activist, is happiest empathising with the afflicted and the “crying injustices” of economic inequality. “New” Starmer needs momentum and some sense of va-va-voom. Crucially, the Starmer creed is gaining apostles. Peter Kyle, one of the veterans of the last Labour government re-establishing themselves as forces in the party, put it well in an interview with the Financial Times last week outlining tactical opportunities and the biggest outstanding task: “Our challenge is to light the fire.” In the coming year, which may well be the last before a general election (Brenda from Bristol’s “not another one” horror at early elections is not shared by the government, which is happiest on a war footing), the tactical question Kyle highlights is how broadly Labour should embrace a “progressive alliance” with the Lib Dems in England. Cautiously, would be my advice. Starmer has chosen well so far in terms of keeping out of marshy deal territory with the SNP over the prospect of another referendum in Scotland, not least because that opens a lot of questions that swing English voters would get exercised about. Also, the route to breaking up the union is not promising for Labour. Added to which, a volatile electorate is one to handle with care in trying to steer progressive choices at the ballot box. Standing down in unwinnable seats can have the opposite effect, leaving voters feeling “pre-owned” and surly. (It is also not much fun for candidates running a Potemkin race when resources are being syphoned elsewhere shadow cabinet booster visits are diverted.) So yes to being smart about cooperation when it comes to allocating resources in marginal seats, but the question for tacticians will be how widely this recipe can be applied. Perhaps another reason Conservatives, while rattled at Johnson’s errors, still find it hard to get too worried about Starmer is that he sits at times uneasily between the Blairite legacy and something vaguely to the left of Blair, while eschewing the excesses and economic irrationalities of Corbynism. This is a narrow path to tread and for mere humans outside the sectarian culture of Labour membership such gradations are more puzzling than enlightening. If Starmer is (rightly) channelling competence and pragmatism as core virtues, it muddies the waters when he defines his views on private sector involvement in the NHS by citing his dying mother making him promise his father would not “go private”. I have no doubt this story is true and deeply felt, but that does not make it a shrewd one to deploy. Emotional stories are strong meat in politics, because they are seen to channel the strongest drives of politicians. It sounded either like a signal of a coming clampdown on private healthcare or a bit of a Dickensian throwback. In truth, large swaths of the NHS are already a public-private mix. The intention was vague and that is always dangerous for an opposition leader seeing to acquire a clearer profile. I doubt that Starmer would, for instance, intervene in the operations of outfits such as Totally Healthcare, which delivers out-of-hospital services (physio, podiatry and the like) and provides logistics to reduce waiting times to NHS trusts with no obvious downside. The popularity of out-of-hours GP services via apps or online services such as Babylon suggests a lot of the public are less than zealous about public-private demarcations. One way or the other, health and social care need core improvements in funding and efficiencies and a re-moralised and better trained and managed workforce. Better to start with the pressing issues than embark on a phoney war. More broadly, Britain’s place in the world should be fertile territory for the opposition. Bluntly, Starmer has a negligible profile abroad. (I am frequently reminded to explain who he is when being interviewed on British politics in Germany.) But centre-left revivals in the US and Germany are also an opportunity to return Labour to the global conversation. The revival of a declined centre-left party after years in the wilderness is encouragement for Starmer, given that Olaf Scholz too started out as a lawyer representing trade unions and has also adopted the “respect” theme to win over voters in depressed heartlands. He has shown that a quiet style, self-discipline and weaving coalitions of interest along with canny strategising can pay dividends. Whether dealing with the Ukraine crisis, the handling of Poland’s challenge to EU pluralist norms or how far to ally with the US under an increasingly inward-looking presidency without Britain’s Nato weight being taken for granted, Labour needs to sound like it can return to the top table of defence and security with public trust – hence the upbeat message to the armed forces and upbeat take on post-Brexit possibilities. The weakest areas for the Starmerism recipe are what it means for industrial strategy, beyond outbidding a likely pouring of Tory largesse into left-behind areas, and the quest for an economic and business strategy that can plausibly claim to cut through a muddle of post-Covid, post-Brexit schemes and sound like a solid prospect for a country that is bruised, but seeking resilience. To Starmer’s credit, he took on the job in awful circumstances and is now clear of the risks of leadership challenge. Labour’s prospects for power are still a work in progress, but are no longer a pipe dream. And if the Tories do not yet fear Starmer, they have started to notice he is around. In the long haul of opposition, that’s a small leap forwards. • Anne McElvoy is senior editor at the EconomistOn my parents’ mantelpiece, among the pictures of smiling grandchildren, lopsided graduation hats, old sports cars and a young soldier in smart uniform, is a picture of heroic athletic endeavour. In a little silver frame is a small blond boy in a white vest straining every sinew as he belts around the corner of a grassy athletic field, the parallel lines of the track marked out in white chalk stretching into the distance. He seems to be so far ahead of the pack that he’s almost on his own. He’s a champion in the making! Is the podium ready? Is that the music from Chariots of Fire you can hear? The sad truth is that the little boy is me and I was so far off the pace everyone else that my dad was able to step out on the track to take the picture. “You were miles behind. It was almost as if you were running in slow motion,” he says now, with a laugh. I must have been about eight years old. I remember the day so clearly. My teeth aren’t clenched with the exertion of the race, but because I was terrified I was about to burst into tears. My cheeks burned more than my thighs did, but all for nothing. I can still recall the journey home, gazing enviously at the brace of medals my brother had picked up – as he always did. “Speedy Pete” we called him. Today, I have a shoebox full of medals tucked under my bed. My hidden vice is that even now, at the boyish age of 56, I like to get them out and jangle them across my palms, let them swing around my neck. But thinking back, it’s that little photo that captures one of the most inspiring moments of my sporting life. I didn’t give up. I was last, but I finished the race. And I’ve never stopped – until now. Today, I still love running. Exercise plays a huge part in my life, both physically and mentally. Exertion keeps me ticking over and helps me tackle the mundanities of the daily grind. It keeps me up when I feel down. It’s the wellspring of my wellbeing. Running, swimming, cycling… I’m like a wild-eyed hamster on speed, spinning away on my various wheels, mostly getting nowhere. But through my perpetual motion I get to stay balanced in one place. I’ve run dozens of marathons (38 to be precise – marathon runners never lose count, they always know), I’ve cycled the length and breadth of Britain (and France, and Spain, and a bit of Holland), I’ve never passed a body of water without an overwhelming urge to strip off and dive in… So why then, as the pandemic took hold of the country, did I come to a shuddering stop? As others got started, I ground to a halt. The parks filled with joggers, sitting rooms everywhere were a blur of squats and burpees, but I couldn’t be fagged to walk to the end of the garden and back. I want to know where my motivation went? And, more importantly, how can I get it back again? On a cold and crisp morning in December I visit the deterministically named Max Sharp. I toy with asking him how I can “max up my sharpness”, but instead settle for an elbow bump and a hello. Sharp, 51, is the owner and manager of the FitFor gym and rehabilitation centre on Lordship Lane in south London. There’s an encouraging sign on the door as you go in that states: “Do Not Enter if you are showing any signs of Covid, Racism or Homophobia.” As you’d hope from a man who spends most of his time in and around gyms, Sharp looks fit, energetic and… well, sharp. He also seems very calm. He says his guilty secret is that he still plays competitive rugby every weekend, to the horror of his partner. “In the last few years, I’ve broken more bones on the pitch than you’d believe. But I just can’t stop,” he adds with a smile. “Just before the first lockdown,” Sharp tells me, “gym membership across the country was at about 15%. That’s the highest it’s ever been. Then Lockdown One happened and there was a wave of enthusiasm with everyone running around, doing exercise videos at home, and getting outside for that one precious walk a day we were allowed. In Lockdown Two that exercise effect was less pronounced, but it was still there. Then Lockdown Three happened and everyone seemed to just give up. Sitting at home eating crisps and drinking beer was our top choice.” Why did that happen? “I think it was because we all got progressively more pissed off, more housebound, more reclusive,” Sharp says, “and that then had an incipient effect on our general motivation. We all shrank. Our outlook shrank, too.” That makes sense, but the big question, of course, is how can we put that into reverse? I’m hoping there is a large switch hidden deep inside our brains that can be flicked back on, like an old fuse box, and start us leaping off sofas again, swapping packets of biscuits for a ton of crunches. Sharp shakes his head. Sadly that’s not the case. But there are things we can do to kickstart the motivation revolution. The lucky ones are already “gym evangelists,” he says. “These are the hardcore people who simply snap back.” They will get their exercise fix whatever. They will always find a way to get a session in. “But they are the minority – the challenge comes in encouraging the rest of us, who know we should exercise, who know there are clear health benefits, who want to come back and want to keep coming back, but just don’t.” It’s a cliché of exercise that the “first step is the hardest”. That short walk from your front door to the park, or the gym, or the pool or the pitch can have more insurmountable obstacles on it than the most exhausting Tough Mudder event. Forget rope nets, hero walls and muddy trenches, putting away the shopping or tidying up the spice rack, even gazing out the window can pose a far greater hurdle to you pulling on your trainers and jogging round the block. “The people who are hardest to motivate,” says Sharp, “are those who don’t have exercise in their experience or understanding, who dislike the very idea of exertion.” For them, it’s usually a life event that triggers an interest. It’s often a health warning, for them or a family member, that gets them going. But even a growing awareness that you are more out of breath at the top of the stairs or can’t dig the garden without putting your back out, can be enough to act as a wake-up call. If you hear that alarm, pay attention. It might just turn your life around. And from a public health standpoint, there is growing evidence that even doing light exercise, breaking up the sedentary time with a little walk, can be beneficial. It doesn’t always have to be about exertion. In an unexpected way the pandemic gave many of us a chance to start again, just as the New Year always does. New Year, New You, and all that. Covid allowed us to adjust our routines and try a fresh approach. Motivation is a battle between life choices and time demands: the siren call of the pub vs the dread of another bums-and-tums class. During the various lockdowns we didn’t have much to do. The endless competition for our time stopped. There was a lot less either or. There was also a generalised feeling that we should try to get fit in the face of a health emergency to give ourselves a fighting chance. But once the novelty of a new beginning grows stale, a very different type of motivation is needed to keep going. As we slowly returned to normality and the temptations of restaurants, clubs and cinemas came back into play, our newfound exercise evangelism got zipped back into a smelly gym bag and forgotten about. Staying motivated about motivation is challenging. But one person knows a lot more about it than most. Joan Duda is professor of sport and exercise psychology at the University of Birmingham. She’s spent the past 25 years working with all levels of athletes and performers, on the “determinants of adherence and optimal functioning in sport, exercise, and dance”. She is also the founder of Empowering Coaching, training programmes for coaches, instructors and parents regarding how to “create more optimally motivating environments and experiences”. I am confident that she will have much to tell me – a middle-aged man who has lost his mojo for plodding round the park. “We know from our research,” Professor Duda tells me, “that if you participate for autonomous reasons – because you want to rather than because you feel you have to, then you are much more likely to maintain physical activity. It is also important to engage because the activity is enjoyable or helps you realise personally valued goals.” Umm, does she mean it should be fun? “That would help!” she says. “We are more likely to keep moving if we can find activities that are fun, interesting, perhaps personally challenging and we can see ourselves improving. And, of course, moving doesn’t need to be exhausting to be beneficial. Just getting outside and taking a walk with the dog or going on a bike ride with friends can bring on our inner smile and give us energy.” When it comes to long-term motivation, Professor Duda and her fellow researchers are becoming increasingly aware that self-identity is also a big deciding factor. If you see yourself as a runner, an exerciser, a person who goes to gyms and leads a healthy life, it’s much easier to live up to those ideals. Instead of “doing” exercise, we need to think of ourselves as “being” a person who is physically active. It is part of who we are; part of our life. These “be” motives are less mentally exhausting than “should” motives. It all sounds rather Buddhist, but you need to embrace your “I am an active person” identity. This identity can take years to develop. Sharp tells me that he has clients who come to his gym three or four times a week and still tell him “that they aren’t really people who go to the gym”. I’m still not sure what’s happened to my motivation, though. I like exercise and I see myself as an “exerciser”. More than that, taking part in exercise has brought me so many happy experiences. It’s also the foundation of some of my most enduring and rewarding friendships. I understand the health benefits it brings. I know I’ll feel better if I go for a run, no matter what the weather or how bad the hangover. Joggers like to gee themselves up by saying things like: “You never regret a run!” and “Find your happy pace!” And that inner voice has always been enough to get me up and out there, but recently the urge to pull on my trainers has petered out. I can’t be bothered any more. It’s a matter of routine, says Sharp. “When you are in the habit, your endocrine system kicks in. Your body gives you a dopamine hit that you soon get hooked on. It’s good stuff. If that goes, it’s hard to find it again. But it’s just a habit that you need to reacquire. And habits take time and a bit of grunt. We’ve been forced into a cosy state of hibernation over the past two years. We need to return to our old patterns.” Sharp tells me in simple terms: “If you start again you’ll soon find your body’s hormonal system will reward you and it will become easier and easier to keep it up.” Not for nothing is Nike’s slogan still: “Just do it.” I decide to speak to an old friend named Graham. He’s a former county-level runner and as far as I know has never taken a break from running. “That’s not true,” he tells me. “I often stop, or take breaks. Honestly, I just get bored of it sometimes. So I stop for a few days or a few weeks, but then something changes – it might be the weather or I’ll hear a piece of music – and I feel that itch to get back out there.” “I’ve lost my itch,” I tell him mournfully. Graham laughs and points out that when he’s injured it’s awful to start with. “I feel frustrated and irritated.” But after a while he seems to be able to shut off his “running need”. The problem then “is relocating it when I’ve recovered and I’m back on my feet”. I know what he means and realise that, over the years, perhaps unconsciously, I have done similar things. I’ll enter an event that forces me to train and so get back into my groove; or I’ll treat myself to new shoes and feel I should go running so they aren’t wasted. I’ll watch a trail race on YouTube and fantasise about running stride for stride with the best. And, inevitably, I’ll find that itch and that will get me going again. Towards the end of December, my 20-year-old daughter sends me a snap from university. She is at Oxford and has discovered that the track across the road from her student accommodation is not just any track, it’s where Roger Bannister broke the 4-minute mile in 1954. And there it is, suddenly I feel a familiar tingle. I realise this is exactly what I’ve been waiting for. The track is open to members who can also sign in a guest, so on a blustery afternoon the two of us wander across the grass to the famous 400m track. We decide to run a mile. We don’t bother setting a timer, no records are going to fall. We trot round laughing brightly under a grey sky. It’s fantastic. I feel my legs stretch and my chest start to rise and fall. It’s wonderful to be running on this fabled surface. But more importantly, it’s even better to hear the old familiar rumble of motivation in the distance… Staying the course Five ways to rediscover (and keep) your mojo 1. Do something you like Choose a sport or activity that suits you. It’s so much easier to do something you enjoy. Many gyms offer taster weeks where you can sample lots of classes. Do what you want to rather than what you think you should. You’ll be more likely to stick with a sport you like. 2. Good or bad doesn’t matter Don’t worry what level you are at. Think of yourself as a physically active person. Walk when you can; take the stairs not the lift. Choose the active option whenever you can. 3. Make it simple Get your kit ready beforehand. Choose a time of day that works for you. Find a friend or “gym buddy” to go with. When you finish, schedule the next session. No excuses. 4. Think about numbers Tracker apps and biofeedback tech can be motivational. Men in particular seem to do more exercise if they can track it. 5. Habit of a lifetime Make exercise part of your routine. Be an exerciser. You’ve got this! Put yourself in the zone Whether it’s cooking something delicious, being more playful or dancing on your own, experts from all walks of life explain how to maintain your motivation. By Michael Segalov ‘Find your sense of flow’: Philippa Perry, psychotherapist and OM’s agony aunt It doesn’t matter if it’s your work or not, it is important to practise a skill. Not something you are necessarily good at but something that you get better at, something that takes skill and concentration but you can do it and almost automatically. In other words, we need to find something that gives us a sense of flow. Flow is a concept that the psychologist Mihály Csíkszentmihályi came up with. It is a state achieved when you are absorbed in a task, so much so that the outside world seems to diminish. The trick is to balance your skill with the challenge of the task. If it’s too difficult you get frustrated, too easy and you get bored – to be in flow we need to find that sweet spot in the middle. Sometimes this is called being in “the zone”. The activity that gets you there should be done for its own sake, because it feels good to do it. One of the concepts I use in my psychotherapy practice is that of internal and external referencing. When we internally reference we are noticing how what we are doing feels to us alone; when we externally reference, we are more concerned about how it appears to others. To be in flow, we need to internally reference, this is not about how results look to others but how we feel when we are absorbed in the activity itself. Many things have brought me to a state of flow from learning to bake, to writing my column, or more recently, picking up where I left off at art school and developing my painting skills. The point of whatever activity you do is to enjoy it because of the satisfaction of focusing on the task in hand and being absorbed by it. Everyone could do with developing this type of enjoyment in their lives. It shouldn’t be a luxury. ‘Cooking for yourself can bind you together again’: Andi Oliver, chef I used to have a very serious eating disorder, so I’m vigilant about food and language: the idea that some food is clean and other dirty is dangerous – it’s not a healthy way to think about our bodies, eliciting guilt. Too often when people want to eat “healthily”, they take out all the fun from food. Inevitably, it can’t be sustained. Instead, this January, reinvigorate how you eat by adding colour, and taking time. If you wear bright colours, you feel uplifted. The same applies to eating food: eat browns and greys, you’ll feel that way. Colours bring a joyful vibrancy to your plate, and they’re also a great way to broaden your imagination, helping you identify what’s missing from a meal. A dash of orange gives you squashes, gourds and pumpkins; spinach and chard adds a burst of green. I tend to make a five-day soup to see me through the week in winter – deeply flavoured broths which warm you inside and out. After Christmas, I take the bones and roast them to extract all the flavour, starting a stock by adding everything that’s going a little moody in the fridge. I have a bowl next to the cooker for all my vegetable peelings and chuck that in with garlic, aromatics and herbs. Take your time, let it simmer for hours. You’ll start to feel better as the smell flows around your home. This is your base for an entire week of meals. Food shouldn’t be a place of flagellation, but jubilation. The nutrients shoot to your brain, the warmth will physically soothe you, and the act of making something beautiful will fill your soul once more. When the world feels cold and dark, you need to give yourself love and tenderness. Food is the perfect place to start. ‘Play is what makes life bearable’: Michael Rosen, author Staying silly has always been important to me, it comes from my strong sense of the absurd. The way I see it, there really isn’t much reason why we’re on Earth. When we’re focused entirely on daily troubles and chores, we don’t notice it’s all ultimately pointless. So why not try to look for fun while it lasts? It’s easy to be drawn into the doom of human existence. I have to remind myself that there’s no point to spending a life being totally miserable. You may as well enjoy it before we inevitably die. At times, that can be hard. I had Covid, and struggled afterwards. I knew the world before I became ill. I’d become accustomed to my senses of sound and sight. The virus damaged my eye and ear, and so the world changed, becoming fragmented. At first, it was hard not to think of the world as having been spoiled. Instead, I now focus on how strange it is that my perceptions have changed after so many decades. Deciphering the world is a whole new challenge, it needn’t be melancholic. It’s an adventure, a strange new game. Play, for me, is what makes life bearable, when we’re walking, shopping, working, letting our minds run free and wild. For me, much of the time, that means playing with words. I discovered when my son died that I’m less bothered by things if I write about them. Some are straightforwardly lighthearted and jolly. But penning a poem about sadness or a sense of loss can leave you feeling better as well. It helps, laying things down on paper. I call it “unfolding”. Everyone can do this, it doesn’t take expertise. Think of it as doodling, but with words. There’s a tyranny to education: learning to write frees you, but we’re restricted by being taught that formal sentences are all that’s worthwhile. Instead, scribble down fragments – think up half-lines mixed with song lyrics, lines from films, things people say. Don’t overthink it – it’s like talking with your pen. This process is a liberation for the mind. ‘It’s our primal right to move’: Tracy Anderson, fitness expert to the stars It’s our primal right to move – that’s always my starting point with the people I work with. It doesn’t matter what your movement looks like; you don’t need to look like anyone else. My mom has owned a ballet school for decades. When I was little, she wouldn’t let me into her class because she wanted me to learn to move in my own body before anyone else told me how to. Today, if you feel you don’t know how to move, find a place to be alone and turn on your music. However awkward or embarrassed you feel, don’t stop until something makes you want to move. Exercise helps with depression and anxiety. From sex to energy, creativity to contentment, exercise is the fastest way to give your body a boost. Stepping into something that’s formalised will help you keep your efforts up. I sometimes think it helps to think of yourself as a child, but also the parent: would you let a kid you are responsible for sit around staring at screens and eating sugar all day? In which case, why let yourself? ‘Resilience comes from hard graft’: Joe Simpson, mountaineer and author Resilience is a state of mind, not something you’re born with. Look at top athletes, who train hard and commit completely: if they didn’t give a toss, they’d fail. As a mountaineer, you realise this quickly – there’s no special quality you possess which helps you, but a skillset developed over many years. You know you can endure because you have specific knowledge and experience, technical knowhow and trust in your team. Much of mountaineering results in failure – you’re at the mercy of the elements over which you have no control. The first thing a climber does after something goes wrong is analyse what happened. What went right? What didn’t? What can I learn? There’s no reason why we shouldn’t apply this logic to all walks of life. It might not sound sexy, but resilience comes from hard graft. Losing teaches us a huge amount. And when something really bad happens, like when I had my own near-fatal fall in Peru in the 1980s, focusing on the small things was enough to keep me going. Right, I’d say to myself, let’s not die today. That was a victory enough. I’d repeat the same thing the next day. It’s when we’re up against it that we remember we are designed to survive.Arsenal After a surprisingly lavish summer it’s hard to see Silent Stan sliding down the chimney with a bag full of swag for a January blowout. But, unless Gabriel Martinelli can be converted into a centre‑forward, it’s asking a lot for the youngsters to keep shouldering the scoring burden – hence the links with Dusan Vlahovic and Mason Greenwood. With players off to the Africa Cup of Nations, we might well need bolstering in midfield, too: Milan’s Franck Kessié, Renato Sanches from Lille and Leipzig’s Tyler Adams are on the radar. • Bernard Azulay goonersdiary.co.uk @GoonerN5 Aston Villa It’s hard to know what’s on Steven Gerrard’s mind but I doubt we’ll be overly active: we’re gaining coherence on the park and can wait to the summer. Lazy journalists/click-baiters have us “raiding” Rangers but that’s unlikely, and it’d be pretty low behaviour. We probably need cover at full‑back and at No 6, though, and of course there’s always room for top players, even if it meant moving on good servants such as Trézéguet and El Ghazi. Poaching Sarr or Saint‑Maximin would be coups. Unlikely, yes, but I’d be thrilled. • Jonathan Pritchard Brentford We don’t usually dabble in January given the prices, but we do need depth at right-back and, having not replaced Saïd Benrahma, a left winger. We’ve a couple of bids out on players, so fingers crossed. It’s been interesting to see how we’re spreading our net further: usually our transfer targets are in Denmark or France, now it’s Brazil, Ukraine and, er, Nottingham. The number of ins and outs will depend on when players are due back from injury, but keeper Jonas Lössl is joining on loan to tide us over. Marcus Forss and Dominic Thompson could go out on loan. • Billy Grant Beesotted podcast and blog; @Beesotted; @BillyTheBee99 Brighton It looks like Aaron Connelly is off on loan: he won’t be missed, and nor would Jürgen Locadia if only we could get rid of him. We need to keep hold of everyone else. Lewis Dunk’s knee injury might force us to buy, but Leo Östigard is back from Stoke. And do we need a striker? I’m not convinced – I love watching Neal Maupay cause havoc: he has seven goals and we’ve got a great new song for him. Plus Danny Welbeck seems to be fit again. Anyway, I’m sure Tony Bloom will do the right thing and Graham Potter will make it work. • Steph Fincham Burnley We have players out of contract next summer but we really can’t afford to allow any of them to go early given our current position. And in terms of signings, the two problem areas are central midfield and up front. If we could bring in one for each position, that would be progress. But who? Ross Barkley has been linked as a potential loan while Sunderland’s Dan Neil is apparently a target. This window is one we should use for immediate first‑team strengthening, so I wouldn’t question a couple of good loans. • Tony Scholes UpTheClarets.com, @utcdotcom Chelsea Due to injuries and Covid we could do with cover for Chilwell, Alonso and Kanté. Monaco midfielder Aurélien Tchouaméni has been linked – he looks extremely promising – while Milan’s Theo Hernández has been mentioned as a potential full-back option. I can’t see much activity beyond that, though. It looks like the club are holding fire on centre‑backs until all the contract issues are resolved. I’d be surprised to see any exits: we definitely have a big squad but we’ve been badly hit by injuries and Covid, so can’t really afford to let anyone go. • Paul Baker in memory of Trizia Fiorellino Crystal Palace We went big in the summer so I’m not expecting much this month. If Jes Rak-Sakyi continues not to get a first-team chance then I expect he’ll go out on loan and, despite his goal against Norwich, it really hasn’t worked out here for Jean-Philippe Mateta: his loan could be ended early. If that happens then we’ll perhaps look to replace him in the squad with the Real Madrid striker Borja Mayoral, currently on loan at Roma, with whom we have been linked for months, or Arsenal’s Eddie Nketiah. But any major activity is likely to wait until the summer. • Chris Waters @Clapham_Grand Everton We’re still constrained by previous losses, so signings depend on sales. It seems Digne is off after his falling-out with Benítez, which will generate much-needed trading profits. Bringing in Vitaliy Mykolenko, 22, from Dynamo Kyiv to replace the 28-year-old looks like good business. Signing right-back Nathan Patterson from Rangers to replace Séamus Coleman still depends on negotiating phased payments. And with several players in the last six months of their contracts, there’s potential for loans out, and thus loans in. • The Esk TheEsk.org; @TheEsk Leeds Michaël Cuisance failed a medical. Conor Gallagher preferred Palace. Huddersfield asked too much for Lewis O’Brien. Leeds have been looking for a new midfielder since promotion, but were relaxed about actually finding one. Until now. Now they’re very stressed about it! Or they should be. With more players in the treatment room than points in the league, Marcelo Bielsa and director of football Victor Orta need to get over their queasiness about January shopping. Bielsa is said to like Reading’s John Swift; West Yorkshire’s collective heart rate just needs somebody. As long as they don’t immediately get injured, they’ll do us. • Daniel Chapman thesquareball.net; @MoscowhiteTSB Leicester Main priority: a new set‑piece coach. Honestly, we should spend £50m on it, or whatever it takes … Beyond that, with injuries and Covid ravaging the squad, we face the daunting prospect of having no senior centre-backs or centre-forwards this month. It seemed unthinkable a few weeks ago given the form of Daka, Vardy and Iheanacho but yet another striker may need to be recruited. And at centre-back, the need to spend is just as clear. Tarkowski is always mentioned, but the dirty money on Tyneside will probably talk louder. • Chris Whiting clippings.me/chriswhiting; @ChrisRWhiting Liverpool Up front is one area we should probably be looking at this month – as crazy as that sounds right now. West Ham’s Jarrod Bowen doesn’t score enough goals yet, but at 25 he’s reaching his prime and would only improve with great players around him. Central midfield too. Leicester’s Youri Tielemans continues to be linked with us and would fit right in, as would Leeds’ Raphinha. Though following the defeat at Leicester, it’s obvious we need to dive into the transfer market and buy, buy, buy! • Steph Jones Manchester City The chances of us signing anyone look close to nil – Pep has confirmed as much. But Ferran Torres leaving concerns me from a numbers perspective, particularly as Mahrez is off to the Africa Cup of Nations. The candidates to come in as a top‑class No 9 remain pretty obvious: Erling Haaland, Harry Kane and Dusan Vlahovic – but will those guys move mid-season? My other concern is the lack of cover for Rodri. Fernandinho is a bona fide club legend but age has finally caught up with him. • Lloyd Scragg ninetythreetwenty.com; @lloyd_scragg Manchester United Where do you start? Persisting with a José-era midfield was a mistake. Last season we should have asked PSG for a Pogba/Verratti swap, but I think that ship has sailed. Declan Rice would be great, but West Ham are in a strong position not to sell. The defence needs sorting again, too. Ezri Konsa at Villa looks promising: Ralf Rangnick has a reputation for developing young players and Konsa looks quality at 24. As for players to sell? Jones, Pogba, Martial and the English lionheart hype job Harry Maguire. • Shaun O’Donnell Newcastle It’s going to be a tough window given our position, but it’s good to see us linked with quality in Jesse Lingard and Kieran Trippier. Most important, there’s no room for mercenaries in our relegation fight: players must be prepared to run through brick walls for the shirt. With Wilson’s injury, two strikers are a priority, as is an experienced centre-half and a commanding midfielder who can grab a game by the scruff of the neck. Peripheral players such as Jeff Hendrick should be moved on – if there are any takers. • David and Richard Holmes Norwich Given our estimated £0 transfer pot, expectations are pretty limited. Sporting director Stuart Webber has made clear we have to sell to buy and, quite frankly, aside from Max Aarons, who’s going to want any of our players? There’s little stomach in the club for the fight to stay up, so this window looks more about getting ready for another crack at the Championship. What we need above all is to give Teemu Pukki some competition, but with our budget that’s nigh on impossible. Happy days at the Carra! • Gary Gowers myfootballwriter.com; @Gary_Gowers; @MFW_NCFC Southampton I’d be surprised if we’re particularly busy: there generally isn’t a lot of value in January. But with both keepers injured to varying degrees and Willy Caballero on a short-term deal, I imagine we’ll be looking for another. Fraser Forster will go on a free in the summer, but Alex McCarthy signed a new three-year deal recently, so it’ll be interesting to see if we look for a genuine first choice: there’s not really been a great deal between McCarthy and Forster. Sam Johnstone or Dean Henderson would fit the bill. • Steve Grant SaintsWeb.co.uk; @SteveGrant1983 Tottenham Spurs are always linked to dozens of players, but it feels like Milan’s Franck Kessié is a real target, albeit as a pre-contract for the summer. As for Matthijs de Ligt? Dreamy. We’d need oligarch levels of funding, though. I trust in Fabio Paratici’s and Antonio Conte’s current process of reinvention and elimination, with Dele and Winks perhaps able to save themselves. We do need bolstering in midfield if Ndombele can’t adapt or Lo Celso can’t remain fit. And Fiorentina striker Dusan Vlahovic would be the ultimate chef’s kiss. • Spooky dearmrlevy.com; thefightingcock.co.uk; @spooky23 Watford Priorities for recruitment are defensive: we need a left-back and a centre-back. At least one of those also needs to be a leader and an organiser, and both need to be bloody-minded and shouty. John McClelland and Tony Coton achieved this in 1984, Colin Foster and Keith Millen in 1994, so we’re overdue a defensive revolution. As for exits: it’s hard to see anyone going given Covid and that we’ll be losing a significant proportion of our first-teamers to the Africa Cup of Nations – but Ozan Tufan’s loan isn’t really working out for anybody. • Matt Rowson bhappy.wordpress.com; @mattrowson West Ham We desperately need a striker to deputise for Antonio and give him a break late in games. Maybe new part-owner Daniel Kretinsky can help with his Czech contacts. And with Ogbonna and Zouma injured the other urgent need is for a centre-back – James Tarkowski, or maybe Nat Phillips might benefit from regular football. In midfield, re-signing Jesse Lingard would be a coup as Fornals is toiling and Benrahma is away in Africa for January. And if Cresswell is out for any longer, a loan for a left‑back might be necessary. • Pete May Author, Goodbye to Boleyn; hammersintheheart.blogspot.co.uk Wolves We need goals, but that doesn’t necessarily mean strikers. Adding one or two midfielders/defenders with greater mobility could allow us to ditch the back three and have an extra attacker on the pitch. Lille’s Renato Sanches and Sven Botman could fit the bill. Funding those deals could mean offloading Adama Traoré: he’s into the last 18 months of his contract and it doesn’t seem like he’s going to sign a new one. It would be a shame, but if it allows us to create a more fully formed squad, it might be a price worth paying. • Thomas Baugh wolvesblog.com; @wolvesblogThere’s something propulsively intoxicating about the films of Paul Thomas Anderson. Watching Punch-Drunk Love left me in exactly the state described by the title; Inherent Vice demanded to be inhaled rather than watched; I wanted to wrap myself in the poisonous couture of Phantom Thread. Anderson’s latest takes its title from a hip record store (reportedly named after an Abbott and Costello gag), and appropriately enough the result spun me round like a record. This is heady stuff, an evocation of the San Fernando valley in the early 70s, as personally nostalgic as George Lucas’s American Graffiti, albeit with an insanely adventurous edge. Screen newcomer Cooper Hoffman (son of the late Philip Seymour Hoffman) is Gary Valentine, a high-schooler with a Brian Wilson haircut who’s also a child actor and go-getting entrepreneur. “Where are your parents while all this is happening?” asks Alana (musician and feature first-timer Alana Haim), the twentysomething Gary meets when she’s working as an assistant to the school photographer, and whom he declares to be “the girl I’m going to marry one day”, despite her insistence that “we are not boyfriend and girlfriend”. When Gary needs a chaperone to accompany him to a New York TV special, Alana (upon whose expressively reactive face the movie rests) goes along for the ride, only to fall for his fantastically smug co-star Lance (Skyler Gisondo). But Gary has his sights set on higher things – a waterbed business (“liquid luxury for you!”) in which Alana becomes his partner, keeping them together even as she insists that they will never be “together”. Partly inspired by the early-life adventures of film and TV producer Gary Goetzman, Licorice Pizza pinballs between seemingly random episodes, taking us from a teenage fair (where John C Reilly cameos as Herman Munster) to the Encino hills via fiery motorcycle stunts with movie stars (Sean Penn as a William Holden-esque screen veteran) and close calls with police and politicians (Benny Safdie as mayoral hopeful Joel Wachs) – all played out against the end-of-days background noise of the Opec oil crisis. There’s also a completely unhinged encounter with Jon Peters, the hairdresser turned producer whom Bradley Cooper plays as a wild-eyed cross between Charles Manson and Hart Bochner’s sleazy executive from Die Hard. Bizarrely, what begins as a reprise of the drug-crazed Alfred Molina scene from Boogie Nights mutates unexpectedly into an LA-bound remake of The Wages of Fear, with kids instead of dynamite as the truck’s volatile cargo. What keeps it all grounded is the fact that, in the midst of all this madness, our central odd couple remain entirely believable. From the strangely infantalising hubbub of Alana’s family (played by Haim’s real-life relatives) to Gary’s peculiar half-man/half-boy existence, Licorice Pizza makes us accept a relationship that has something of the dysfunctional charm of Hal Ashby’s Harold and Maude. As for the eclectic jukebox soundtrack, in which tunes such as the Chico Hamilton Quintet’s Blue Sands play contrapuntally across tone-shifting scenes, that put me in mind of Ashby’s other masterpiece, Coming Home. “Do you think it’s weird that I hang out with Gary and his friends all the time?” Alana asks in a moment of blazed reflection, wondering how she wound up with a bunch of 15-year-olds. “It’s whatever you think it is,” comes the reply – and it’s a credit to the movie that we tend to agree. Elsewhere, there’s a divisively absurdist turn by John Michael Higgins as the proprietor of a Japanese restaurant, whose language skills extend only to a pantomime accent, and a killer appearance by Harriet Sansom Harris as agent Mary Grady, who tells Alana: “You remind me of an English pit-bull dog, with sex appeal and a very Jewish nose.” But this is Gary and Alana’s movie, and it’s them that we will remember: his open-faced smile; her left-handed scowl; the giddy way they run through streets together. “How did we survive?” asks Gary after one particularly reckless episode, a question most of us have surely asked ourselves. Like all the best evocations of times past, Licorice Pizza has no answers – only an enraptured sense of awe that makes Anderson’s joyous film feel like a very personal memory.I have an Auld Lang Syne earworm, a hangover from a New Year I didn’t even celebrate. I usually eschew the Hootenanny and head to bed at 10.30, shove in earplugs and wait for the firework-loathing dog to slink in, poke his bony elbows into my kidneys and breathe his foul kipper breath over my face. My signature New Year cocktail is three parts relief to two of fomo with a smugness garnish as I wake early and contemplate stripping the house of every glittering shred of festivity, a prospect somehow as appealing as decorating it a few weeks previously. (I revert to puritanical zealot instantly after New Year, grimly relishing the dark months of fingerless gloves and gruel, while my French husband tries in vain to make his decadent, continental epiphany happen, with its greasy wodge of almond galette, filling-menacing charm, and paper crown.) Even so, something about that “old acquaintance” part is stuck in my head, displacing my usual involuntary theme tune (Kung Fu Fighting – you’re welcome). I think a lot about “old acquaintance” at the moment. Partly, it’s because returning to my home town three years ago means I live in a nostalgia minefield, everywhere liable to detonate a tiny, usually benign, charge of emotion. The waiter from the pizzeria we went to when my mother couldn’t face cooking is still waitering a few hundred yards away; my biology teacher is teaching my son biology; my schoolfriends’ parents still live in the same streets. At choir practice a woman I did not recognise came over with a card with a cat on. “Do you recognise this cat?” she asked. I didn’t, but it was a birthday card addressed to me, with a 1980s postmark. It had, she said, been kicking around her house for decades, and she had no idea why. I would have run a mile from that feeling of being held in a web of connectedness even a decade ago, but now it’s comforting to be seen and known. But it’s also the times, I think. Isolation, pent-up boredom, a hunger for humans other than our cohabitees and that wave of lockdown nostalgia for a time before LFTs and social distancing, back when QR codes were still as ridiculous as Google Glass, have conspired to make “absent friends” an urgent project rather than a vague regret. Surely it’s no coincidence that last year saw both the Friends and the Sex and the City reunions: we’re hungry for reassurance that even when we need reading glasses and HRT or end up looking like Matt LeBlanc, ressembling a benign, slightly confused Irish uncle, we still remain ourselves, that we can still slip into well-worn grooves of connection. A university friend, a primary school classmate and a former neighbour made contact last year, conjuring names I did not know I remembered until I heard them again. I have found myself thinking about my own ones that got away: schoolfriends and colleagues from crappy jobs, doomed dates or group therapy fellow travellers. My new phone backed up recently to a contacts list that is a blast from the past in itself: I scroll through it in baffled wonder. Who was “Liam’s Dad” or “Matthew handyman”? Is Elke still working in Brussels airport? How is my son’s speech therapist from 2008 doing, or the dogsitter from 2010 who sent me a picture of the dog on a sofa eating pâté on toast for Christmas dinner (no wonder life with me is a grave disappointment for him since)? I don’t think we necessarily want, or need, to rekindle most of these relationships. They were often a product of geography and circumstance that has shifted. It’s more about exploring the tendrils of connection and reassuring ourselves that we are still social creatures. In 1993, anthropologist Robin Dunbar set a figure for how many meaningful relationships our neocortex can maintain: 150 (though Swedish research last year argued we can manage far more). I doubt many of us are maintaining anywhere near that many IRL connections at the moment, but our “Dunbar’s number” is bolstered by memories and virtual connections we nourish. Remembering getting so drunk with Caro that I had to leave the Woman in White after 10 minutes, or sprinting through Barcelona airport with Nic when we spent too long buying cakes (is that the equivalent of Robbie Burns’s “ran about the braes”?), feels comforting, like turning on lights in a half-empty house. That was Burns’s point, I think: the not forgetting matters; the “brought to mind”. But if there is an old acquaintance you think about a lot or a missed connection you regret, perhaps don’t assume they will drift back into your life when, or if, it’s meant to be. I got a message this week that Fred, an exuberant, intermittent presence in my life from 10 or so years ago, a warm, flawed, funny man with an irrepressible appetite for creating quotidian drama, had died. Of course, the memories are still there, but for the ones that really matter, send the awkward message; share the cringey reminiscence. For Robbie’s sake.There are a few cultural conundrums out there in gardening which I wonder if I will ever get to the bottom of. As someone who has recently gotten into dabbling in a little home-breeding with rare begonia species, here is one that perpetually fascinates me, even if merely mentioning is likely to get me cancelled: why are so many new plant cultivars so hideous? If you have flicked through any major gardening catalogue recently, you will know what I mean, especially when it comes to bedding plants. Cultivars with ever-more fluorescent hues, often with jarring colour breaks, where highlighter-pink juts up against Day-Glo acid green. Breeders will often layer up these mutations, too, with ruffled petals, dramatically variegated leaves and flowers so huge the poor plants can barely hold them up. Short of spraying them in glitter and dunking them in gold paint, there is very little else you could do to a plant to make it more dazzling. Now, I am fully aware of how much of a terrible horticultural snob this makes me, and also of the incredible level of breeding ingenuity and dedication that is needed to achieve this level of tackiness. However, my question – personal taste aside – is whether these cultivars are any good for horticulture. I absolutely recognise the importance of having a huge range of plant options to help support the widest diversity of gardening styles, but how many people do these Barbara-Cartland-meets-Drag-Race varieties really appeal to? Are they created this way because the aesthetic barometer that breeders work to – as with many cultural aspects in horticulture – is a few decades out of date? After all, plant breeding is a notoriously slow process. These varieties would make perfect sense in an era when crocheted loo-roll covers or chintzy potpourri were commonplace in interior design. But they are totally out of step with really every current trend in fashion, graphic design, architecture and interiors. Is it because these are simply the most common genetic quirks that come up when plant breeders are searching for novel traits? Variegation, colour breaks and ruffled petals are indeed some of the most common mutations that occur, for example, when plant breeders try to induce them using things such as gamma radiation. So is it more about the function of the characteristics that are available to play with, rather than the aesthetic goal they are actively working towards? Or is it just the thirst for novelty? If all you are searching for is something that stands out as visually different in a sea of thousands of identical plants on a breeding bench, maybe that starts to take precedence over something that actually looks good. Who knows? It’s so depressing to see such a diverse range of plants, from begonias and fuchsias to petunias, that look so impossibly elegant, exotic and, above all, different from each other in the wild, all being turned into the same frilly, marshmallowy, pompoms that are virtually interchangeable. They aren’t just in horrible taste, they all look the flipping same. Am I alone in wondering this? Or have a I just become one of the terribly opinionated gardening snobs I have always tried my best to avoid? Follow James on Twitter @BotanygeekFor years, she was described as a “socialite”, a word that conceals more than it explains. Socialites are almost always women from a wealthy if not an aristocratic background and their defining characteristic is being photographed with famous people. Ghislaine Maxwell fitted the bill, appearing in photos with everyone from Donald Trump to Elon Musk to Prince Andrew. But being a socialite is not a job and it was unclear how she financed her opulent lifestyle, especially after the death of her father, Robert. Over recent weeks, during her trial on sex trafficking charges in a New York courtroom, the answer became clear. Maxwell’s wealth came from her erstwhile boyfriend, the financier Jeffrey Epstein, who gave her at least $30.7m (£23m) over a period of eight years. By all accounts, Maxwell went from being in love with him to discovering that her usefulness lay elsewhere, in providing a steady stream of young girls to satisfy his depraved sexual appetite. The girls trusted her, thinking of her as an older sister, and only realised later that they had been betrayed. The “socialite” was actually a procurer, a word with deservedly unpleasant connotations. It does not sit easily with Maxwell’s glamorous lifestyle – the planes, helicopters and visits to Epstein’s private island. Many well-known people will surely be regretting that they ever moved in the same circles as Maxwell and Epstein, let alone appear in the aircraft logs revealed in court. Indeed, Maxwell’s conviction last week on five charges seems to have created a kind of cognitive dissonance in some circles, as though such things simply should not happen to a woman with a degree from Balliol . Well-connected individuals who rarely display an interest in American penal policy have complained bitterly about Maxwell’s prison conditions, as though she is in a different class from other inmates. (Assumptions about class are, of course, all over this case.) Her siblings have rallied round, insisting that they cannot accept the jury’s guilty verdicts, although that seems to be more an expression of denial than in any real expectation that she will win an appeal. We know from rape trials that the public imagination struggles to accommodate individuals who challenge stereotypes about sex offenders, whether it is the good-looking date who turns out to be a rapist or the “socialite” who facilitates a paedophile. It is easier to believe terrible things about Rosemary West, a dumpy, working-class woman who helped lure girls into her husband’s car and joined in his abuse of them, than an heiress who once rested her boot on the thigh of an entranced Boris Johnson. Fred and Rose West committed horrific crimes together, torturing their victims as well as killing them, but Fred West was already a murderer when he chose 15-year-old Rosemary Letts, who had a horrendous history of childhood sexual abuse, as his accomplice. Predators have a sixth sense when it comes to choosing co-conspirators. Maxwell was a grown woman when she met Epstein, and fully responsible for the choices she would go on to make, but it is striking that their relationship seems to have begun around the time of her father’s fatal fall from the yacht he named after her, the Lady Ghislaine. It is no excuse to say that the discovery that her father was a fraudster, so soon after his death, would have shaken Maxwell to her foundations. But it may be that Epstein recognised her weaknesses, seized his chance – and got access to an address book that included the Queen’s favourite son, the Duke of York. Maxwell’s connections boosted his sense of impunity, which is perhaps the single most important factor in allowing predators to get away with their crimes. He would later describe Maxwell in humiliating terms as an ex-girlfriend who had fallen on hard times, framing himself as the benefactor who had allowed her to live in the style to which she had become accustomed. The mystery surrounding the source of Epstein’s wealth has led to comparisons with Jay Gatsby, the enigmatic main character in Scott Fitzgerald’s novel, but such mythologising lends a spurious glamour to sordid crimes. It is a depressing fact that women who identify with powerful men often share their misogyny and reflect it back in a desperate quest for approval. Profiles of Epstein remarked on the disturbing fact that his homes were full of teenage girls. “They’re nothing, these girls,” Maxwell once told a confidante. “They are trash.” It must have occurred to Maxwell by now that the two men she put absolute faith in, her father and her ex-lover, both left her to face the music after their apparent suicides. And for what? The columnist Barbara Amiel, who is married to the former newspaper magnate Conrad Black, recalls a conversation that shows Maxwell in an unexpected and highly unflattering light. “I bet I’m in charge of more lavatories and bathrooms than you are,” Maxwell suddenly said as the two women were walking along a beach. While Amiel thought about it, Maxwell reminded her to include those on planes. “Thirty-nine,” said Amiel and Maxwell’s face lit up. “I win,” she exclaimed. Questions about Maxwell’s relationship with Epstein have now been cleared up. She procured girls for him and it speaks volumes about her moral compass, or lack of it, that she evidently cared more about the number of lavatories in his mansions than the vulnerable teenagers she exposed to sexual assault and rape. • Joan Smith is a journalist and author of books including Misogynies and Home Grown: How Domestic Violence Turns Men Into TerroristsWhen Americans go to the polls in the 2022 midterms, the most important elections won’t be for office in Washington. The most high-stakes races will be statewide contests, in some cases for long overlooked offices, that have profound consequences for the future of free and fair elections in America. The races for governor and secretary of state, the chief election official in many places, will determine which officials have control over setting election rules and the post-election certification process. Allies of Donald Trump and others who have spread baseless conspiracy theories about the election have launched campaigns for several of those offices, both at the statewide and local level, in an effort to take control of election machinery. Trump is expected to run for president in 2024, and if his allies are successful, there are fears they could use their positions to block Trump’s opponent from taking office should Trump lose. Democrats are seeking to hold on to governor’s offices in Michigan, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania, three crucial swing states. The Democratic incumbents in all three states have blocked efforts by GOP-led legislatures to enact voting restrictions so far. There will also be hotly contested elections in Arizona and Georgia, where Republican candidates who have spread lies about the results of the 2020 election are running for governor. Republicans who have embraced lies about the election are also running for secretary of state offices in Michigan, Georgia, Arizona and Nevada. Overlooked for years, there is now a broader awareness of the enormous power these secretaries of state wield over how elections are run and ballots are counted. That power was on unprecedented display in 2020, when secretaries of state made decisions about things like how to establish ballot drop boxes and whether to automatically send out mail-in ballot applications to voters. Secretaries of state wield enormous unilateral power and, if they were elected, election deniers could do extensive damage in future elections. “It feels like the future of democracy depends on our wins,” said Jena Griswold, Colorado’s secretary of state, who is chair of the Democratic Association of Secretaries of State. Few states better encapsulate the stakes for 2022 than Wisconsin. Governor Tony Evers, a Democrat seeking re-election, vetoed a suite of new voting restrictions in August, but Republicans are still chomping at the bit to overhaul the state’s election system. Republicans have launched their own, widely criticized review of the 2020 election and are pushing to get rid of the bipartisan election commission that runs elections in the state. Ron Johnson, Wisconsin’s Republican US senator, has called for the legislature to unilaterally take control of federal elections. Rebecca Kleefisch, a leading Republican candidate for governor, has said she would eliminate the agency if elected. She has also refused to say whether she supports legislation that would allow the Wisconsin legislature, where Republicans essentially hold a permanent majority because of gerrymandering, to overturn election results. Kleefisch’s campaign did not respond to a request for comment. There’s a similar dynamic in Michigan. After Governor Gretchen Whitmer, a Democrat seeking re-election, vetoed a package of new voting restrictions, Republicans moved aggressively to try to enact them around her veto. There’s also a push to unseat Jocelyn Benson, Michigan’s top election official, who became one of the most visible secretaries of state in 2020 when she took steps to make it easier to vote by mail. One of the leading candidates in the GOP field vying to replace Benson is Kristina Karamo, endorsed by Trump, who has claimed Antifa was responsible for the 6 January attack, accused Democrats and Republicans of being “traitors”, and falsely said there was widespread fraud in the 2020 election. Karamo’s campaign did not respond to an interview request. “It’s certainly not by accident that we’re seeing individuals who don’t believe in democracy aspire to be our state’s’ chief election officers, particularly in the states that were under the greatest spotlight in 2020,” Benson said in an interview. “Observers of democracy should be very concerned about what appears to be a coordinated effort to place people in positions of authority over elections who do not believe in elections and would have willingly overturned election results.” Pennsylvania governor Tom Wolf, a term-limited Democrat, also vetoed GOP-backed voting restrictions earlier this year. The GOP candidates running to replace him include Lou Barletta, a former congressman and close Trump ally who has supported the false claim that the election was stolen. Doug Mastriano, a state senator and Trump ally who is one of the most prominent advocates of the election fraud narrative, is also weighing a campaign. Mastriano was at the US capitol on 6 January, pushed baseless voter fraud claims to the justice department, and championed an unusual post-election review in Pennsylvania. In Arizona, Trump has endorsed Kari Lake, a former news anchor seeking the GOP gubernatorial nomination who has called for “decertifying” the 2020 election results, something that is not legally possible. Mark Finchem, a Republican state representative who attended the 6 January rally has called for “decertification” of the election results as well. And in Georgia, Trump has endorsed former GOP senator David Perdue in a primary challenge to Republican governor Brian Kemp. Trump has fumed at Kemp, blaming him for not doing enough to overturn the election results last year. Perdue has said he would not have certified the 2020 election results, even after several recounts and audits showed no widespread fraud. The winner will face Stacey Abrams, who made defending voting rights a core issue in her 2018 gubernatorial campaign and has focused on it since. Republicans are also seeking to oust Brad Raffensperger, Georgia’s Republican secretary of state who refused to find enough votes to overturn the election for Trump. Trump’s pick to replace Raffensperger is Jody Hice, a GOP congressman who supported Trump’s efforts to overturn the election. Griswold, who is also running for re-election in 2022, said that putting someone who doesn’t believe in elections in charge of running them was akin to “putting an arsonist in charge of the fire department”. While she said she has been encouraged by a surge in interest among grassroots activists and some donors in secretary of state races, “it is not enough”. “Imagine on January 6 if you had secretaries of state, disregarding all fact, disregarding all law, saying the election was stolen,” she said. “That is what may be coming.”In March 2020, live classical music and much of cultural life worldwide came to an abrupt halt overnight. Since then, we have seen the gradual reopening of concert halls in all four nations of the UK, as organisers, orchestras and musicians struggle to recover a loss of income, talent and confidence on an unprecedented scale. As we enter 2022, it’s far from life as usual. Most institutions report that only around 65% of pre-pandemic capacity had been reached before the emergence of the Omicron variant. Undoubtedly, more government intervention is needed if the sector is not to be diminished further. Music is the soundtrack to our lives and classical musicians are major contributors to the UK’s reputation for cultural innovation and excellence. However, for all of its darkness, the pandemic has allowed us to reimagine what our musical world could look like if we start from scratch. Throughout the crisis, the industry has begun to construct a new narrative shaped to accommodate great artistic expression for everyone. As we rebuild our society and our economy, I’m convinced, more than ever, that participation in music is part of the solution for national recovery. Participating in musical activity sustains us through the most perplexing and difficult moments of our lives. I have been hugely inspired by the remarkable and uplifting endorsements of the role of music within our wider community and for people of all ages and backgrounds. I have seen what music does for those living with dementia through Wigmore Hall’s pioneering Music For Life and Singing with Friends programmes. We also reach some of the most marginalised people in society, including those who have experienced homelessness, domestic abuse and children living with HIV, a forgotten minority. English National Opera’s Breathe, another example, draws on the expertise of opera singers and colleagues at Imperial College Healthcare to help hundreds of long Covid sufferers across the UK to improve their breathing and anxiety. Now rolled out to 50 health trusts nationwide, it vividly illustrates more than ever the worth of music in social prescribing. As traditional concert venues were unable to operate properly, the vision of Bold Tendencies, which 15 years ago reclaimed the Peckham multistorey car park as an exciting arts destination, for residents, with classical music at its heart, became an even more relevant blueprint for what could be emulated nationwide. Non-professional choral societies abound, connecting communities as never before. Other schemes highlighting the positive social impact of classical music include work in Hull focused on stroke recovery, mental health issues among teenagers (Sound Young Minds) and families affected by the criminal justice system (Lullaby Project). The innovative work of these institutions is just the tip of an iceberg of music lovers across the country who strive daily to embed classical music within the UK’s social fabric. Their work, abetted by the social changes precipitated by the pandemic, has resulted in a radical new musical landscape. Never before has there been such a diverse variety of classical music performed by musicians across socioeconomic, gender and racial divides. Many of our concerts or educational activities can be beamed into any home or school at little cost. A coordinated plan from government to use these amazing resources could work wonders for young people. Exposure to the arts at a young age builds confidence and empowers people to question and to explore and to make change happen. Every arts institution is doing work that could be shared with every child online. Exposure to the arts is life changing, life enhancing and the universal right of every citizen. The industry as a whole has confronted the fact that too many people encounter barriers, real or perceived, to entering, remaining in or being successful in the sector and is determined to do something about it. As Alan Davey, controller of BBC Radio 3, eloquently puts it, “The chance to experience classical music as an audience member, or to follow your talent, or choose a career in it, must not depend on your background or come about by chance.” In 2022 I hope audience confidence grows as we begin to live with, rather than be locked in by, Covid. Concert halls and opera houses are among the safest public spaces and can provide a transcendental spiritual experience for as little as a fiver. Anecdotal reports of a vibrant young audience at concerts signify an uplifting trend that will be embraced by all. We have welcomed thousands of new concertgoers at Wigmore Hall this season, a palpable source of joy for musicians, staff and older audiences alike . Further afield, Hamburg’s Elbphilharmonie celebrates its fifth anniversary, having single-handedly trebled the city’s audience. The David Geffen Hall reopens this autumn to provide a home for the New York Philharmonic. An exciting year lies ahead. John Gilhooly, director of Wigmore Hall and chair of the Royal Philharmonic Society, was made a CBE in the 2022 new year honoursThere was a distinctive moment, at the start of the Covid-19 pandemic, that neatly encapsulated the mistakes and confusion of Britain’s early efforts to tackle the disease, says Mark Woolhouse. At a No 10 briefing in March 2020, cabinet minister Michael Gove warned the virus did not discriminate. “Everyone is at risk,” he announced. And nothing could be further from the truth, argues Professor Woolhouse, an expert on infectious diseases at Edinburgh University. “I am afraid Gove’s statement was simply not true,” he says. “In fact, this is a very discriminatory virus. Some people are much more at risk from it than others. People over 75 are an astonishing 10,000 times more at risk than those who are under 15.” And it was this failure to understand the wide variations in individual responses to Covid-19 that led to Britain’s flawed responses to the disease’s appearance, he argues – errors that included the imposition of a long-lasting, national lockdown. This is a strategy that Woolhouse – one of the country’s leading epidemiologists – describes as morally wrong and highly damaging in his forthcoming book, The Year the World Went Mad: A Scientific Memoir. “We did serious harm to our children and young adults who were robbed of their education, jobs and normal existence, as well as suffering damage to their future prospects, while they were left to inherit a record-breaking mountain of public debt,” he argues. “All this to protect the NHS from a disease that is a far, far greater threat to the elderly, frail and infirm than to the young and healthy. “We were mesmerised by the once-in-a-century scale of the emergency and succeeded only in making a crisis even worse. In short, we panicked. This was an epidemic crying out for a precision public health approach and it got the opposite.” Rather than imposing blanket lockdowns across the nation, the government should have adopted measures designed to make contacts safe, Woolhouse maintains. “You can see from the UK data that people were reducing their contacts with each other as cases rose and before lockdown was imposed. That, coupled with Covid-safe measures, such as masks and testing, would have been sufficient to control spread.” Largely voluntary behaviour change worked in Sweden and it should have been allowed to progress in the UK, argues Woolhouse. Instead, we plumped for an enforced national lockdown, in part because, for the first time in history, we could. Enough business is now done online to allow large parts of society to function fairly well – through video conferences and online shopping. “But it was a lazy solution to a novel coronavirus epidemic, as well as a hugely damaging one,” he adds. However, Woolhouse is at pains to reject the ideas of those who advocated the complete opening up of society, including academics who backed the Barrington Declaration which proposed the Covid-19 virus be allowed to circulate until enough people had been infected to achieve herd immunity. “This would have led to an epidemic far larger than the one we eventually experienced in 2020,” says Woolhouse. “It also lacked a convincing plan for adequately protecting the more vulnerable members of society, the elderly and those who are immuno-compromised.” Instead, the country should have put far more effort into protecting the vulnerable. Well over 30,000 people died of Covid-19 in Britain’s care homes. On average, each home got an extra £250,000 from the government to protect against the virus, he calculates. “Much more should have been spent on providing protection for care homes,” says Woolhouse, who also castigates the government for offering nothing more than a letter telling those shielding elderly parents and other vulnerable individuals in their own homes to take precautions. The nation could have spent several thousand pounds per household on provision of routine testing and in helping to implement Covid-safe measures for those shielding others and that would still have amounted to a small fraction of the £300bn we eventually spent on our pandemic response, he argues. Indeed, Woolhouse is particularly disdainful of the neglect of “shielders”, such as care home workers and informal carers. “These people stood between the vulnerable and the virus but, for most of 2020, they got minimal recognition and received no help.” Britain spent a fortune on suppressing the virus and will still be servicing the debt incurred for generations to come, he adds. “By contrast, we spent almost nothing on protecting the vulnerable in the community. We should and could have invested in both suppression and protection. We effectively chose just one.” And Woolhouse is emphatic that further lockdowns are not the way to deal with future waves of Covid-19. “Lockdowns aren’t a public health policy. They signify a failure of public health policy,” he states. Instead, the country needs, very quickly, not to be surprised by new variants and not to respond each one in an ad hoc fashion. “We should agree a sliding scale of interventions and trigger points for implementing them. With omicron it all feels a bit chaotic. We need better planning and preparation for when the next variant arrives, as it surely will.”After years of delay, and massive cost over-runs, the James Webb space telescope (the JWST) was launched on Christmas Day. It will need to perform complex automated operations now it’s in space. The first and most challenging is happening this week: unfurling a heat shield the size of a tennis court. After this, its 6.5-metre mirror must be assembled from 18 pieces packed within the launching rocket’s nose-cone. There’s much that can go wrong and astronomers will remain anxious for the several months that will elapse before all necessary manoevres and tests are completed. After the Hubble Space Telescope was launched more than 30 years ago, its mirror turned out to be poorly aligned. But astronauts undertook a “rescue” mission to make adjustments and later made further visits to upgrade the instruments. The stakes are higher for the JWST: it’s vastly more elaborate, but there is no prospect of a repair mission. The Hubble telescope was in a low (and accessible) orbit: in contrast, the JWST’s orbit will be several times further away than the moon – far beyond the reach of astronauts. Some might argue that we therefore need to instigate more ambitious plans for human spaceflight: to enable human assembly of large structures in deep space, to return to the moon, and eventually to reach Mars. But I don’t share this view. Indeed as robotics and miniaturisation improve, the practical and scientific case for human spaceflight weakens. Its prime motive now is simply as an adventure – an ultra-expensive sport that should be left to billionaires and private sponsorship. Space technology has burgeoned – for communication, environmental monitoring, satnav and so forth. We depend on it every day. Unmanned probes to other planets have beamed back pictures of varied and distinctive worlds. And telescopes in space have revolutionised our knowledge of the cosmos. During this century, the whole solar system will be explored by flotillas of miniaturised probes, far more advanced than, for instance, Nasa’s wonderful Cassini probe, which spent 13 years exploring Saturn and its moons. This was launched 20 years ago and based on 1990s technology. Think how much better we could do today. Robotic fabricators will assemble vast lightweight structures in space (huge, gossamer-thin mirrors or solar energy collectors, for instance), maybe using raw materials mined from the moon or asteroids. And they could repair spacecraft in orbit far beyond the moon. Robotic and AI techniques are evolving fast. For instance, the Curiosity vehicle sent to Mars a decade ago trundled slowly across a Martian crater; if it encountered a rock, it needed instructions from Earth about how to divert its path. In contrast, Perseverance, which landed on Mars last February, has sufficient intelligence to find its way around obstacles. In another decade, such a probe will have AI sufficient to identify and explore interesting sites and geological formations. Nasa’s programme for human spaceflight, ever since Apollo, has been impeded by public and political pressure into being exceedingly risk-averse. The space shuttle failed twice in 135 launches. Thrill-seekers would willingly accept this 2% level of risk. But the shuttle had, unwisely, been promoted as “safe”. So each failure caused a national trauma and was followed by a hiatus while costly efforts were made (with very limited effect) to reduce the risk. Because of this safety culture, Nasa will confront political obstacles in achieving any grand goal within a feasible budget. But private enterprise ventures – SpaceX, Blue Origin and the rest – bringing a Silicon Valley culture into a domain long dominated by Nasa and a few aerospace conglomerates, can cut costs and tolerate higher risks than a western government could impose on publicly funded civilian astronauts. So it’s these ventures, with private funds and sponsorship, which should front manned missions. The phrase “space tourism” should be avoided. It lulls people into believing such ventures are routine and low risk. And if that’s the perception, the inevitable accidents will be as traumatic as those of the space shuttle. These exploits must be sold as dangerous sports or intrepid exploration. Don’t ever expect mass emigration from Earth. And here I disagree strongly with Elon Musk and with my late colleague Stephen Hawking. It’s a dangerous delusion to think that space offers an escape from its problems. We’ve got to solve them here. Coping with climate change is a doddle compared to terraforming Mars. Nowhere in our solar system offers an environment even as clement as the Antarctic or the top of Everest. There’s no “Planet B” for ordinary, risk-averse people. Nonetheless, this century courageous thrill-seekers may establish bases independent from the Earth. Musk himself says he wants to die on Mars – but not on impact. Although we may not want to join these space adventurers we should cheer them on. This is why. They’ll be ill-adapted to Martian conditions, so they’ll have a compelling incentive to redesign themselves. They’ll harness the super-powerful genetic and cyborg technologies that will be developed. These techniques will, one hopes, be restrained on Earth, on prudential and ethical grounds, but settlers on Mars will be beyond the clutches of the regulators. We should wish them good luck in modifying their progeny to adapt to alien environments. This might be the first step towards divergence into a new species. So it’s these spacefaring adventurers, not those of us comfortably adapted to life on Earth, who will spearhead the post-human era, evolving within a few centuries into a new species. (This evolution, proceeding on the timescale of technological advance, is potentially thousands of times faster than Darwinian selection.) Moreover, if they make the transition from flesh and blood to fully inorganic intelligences, they won’t need an atmosphere. And they may prefer zero-g, especially for constructing massive artifacts. So it’s in deep space – not on Earth, nor even on Mars – that non-biological “brains” may develop powers that humans can’t even imagine. The sun will survive 6bn more years before its fuel runs out. And the expanding universe will continue far longer, perhaps for ever. So even if intelligent life had originated only on the Earth, it need not remain a trivial feature of the cosmos: it could jump-start a diaspora whereby ever more complex intelligence spreads through the whole galaxy, via self-reproducing machines, transmitting DNA, instructions for 3D printers or suchlike. Interstellar voyages would hold no terrors for near-immortals. There’s plenty of time ahead. Martin Rees is astronomer royalIt’s a new year and many of us are looking for a fresh start after a very difficult 2021. We’ve asked a group of experts for their advice on how to tackle some of the most common personal finance dilemmas. I want to spend less money this year, what should I do? Damien Fahy, founder of personal finance site Money to the Masses The key to spending less is having a budget – if you can quantify it, you can control it. Luckily, there are lots of resources to help work out a monthly budget, including budgeting and banking apps. I’d recommend Money Dashboard and Emma. Try using the “three-day rule” to curb frivolous spending – if you want something, wait three days before buying it to see if you genuinely want or need it, rather than it being a momentary impulse. You can also introduce zero-spend days into your week, aiming to have 24 hours without additional spending, over and above essentials, such as food and bills. How can I clear my overdraft? Sara Williams, founder of the Debt Camel advice blog Overdrafts are a hard type of debt to clear, as your balance keeps changing through the month. But they are also very expensive, so are a priority to tackle. You can be very disciplined, and aim to cut your overdraft usage each month. Many people find it is more practical to change to a new current account with no overdraft and move all of their banking over. That way you can pay off the old overdraft by setting up a standing order from your new account. If you have been continuously in your overdraft for a long while, never getting back into the black, you should also look at making a claim for unaffordable lending. This would be based on whether the bank “completed reasonable and proportionate checks” that you could repay in a sustainable way. Details at the Financial Ombudsman Service website. I need a decent pension. How do I begin? Steve Webb, partner at LCP and former pensions minister If you earn more than £10,000, your employer should put you in a workplace pension and make a contribution, so simply not opting out is a great start. Next, review your pension contribution each time you get a pay increase, as it’s less painful to commit a bit more before you’ve got used to the extra income. Also, find out if your employer will do more, if you do more. Many bigger firms will match the money you put in (up to a limit). Make the most of this “free money”. Finally, it’s never too late to start. You get good tax breaks for saving in a pension, plus money from your employer, so even building up a small pot is worthwhile. How can I drive an electric car without breaking the bank? Melanie Shufflebotham, co-founder of Zap-Map, which gives information on charging and electric vehicles One of the best routes to getting a good value electric vehicle (EV) is via a salary sacrifice scheme. Another flexible option is to subscribe to a short-term, all-inclusive service such as Onto, which includes insurance, charging and tax, among other expenses. There are also more secondhand EVs available to buy – try out one of the specialist companies, such as Weareev or Drive Green. Once you have secured your electric vehicle, your next step is to get a charge point installed at your home and sign up to an EV energy tariff with discounts for off-peak charging when available, given current energy tariff issues. With this, costs can be as low as 2-3p/mile – even less if you can link it to solar panels. Alternatively, you can check out community charging via Co-Charger, or take a look at the close to 30,000 public charge points on Zap-Map, about 5,000 of which are still free to use. Energy bills are killing me, how do I save money? Laura McGadie, group head of energy, Energy Saving Trust There are a series of simple and straightforward things you can do that will save you money without compromising your health or lifestyle. Firstly, turn off devices that are on standby and turn off lights when you leave the room. Be sure to draught-proof around windows, doors, floorboards and skirting boards and insulate hot water cylinders with an 80mm British Standard jacket. In the kitchen, fit an aerator to the tap – it reduces the amount of water flowing – and only boil water you need in the kettle. Reduce the number of washing machine loads you run by one a week, and ensure they are always full. Wash clothes at 30 degrees. Avoid using a tumble dryer – dry clothes outside where possible, or inside with ventilation. Limit shower times to four minutes and swap a weekly bath for a shower. Take all of these steps and you could save up to £248 a year. How can I prepare for my child starting university this year? Laura Brown, editor, Save the Student It’s worth familiarising yourself with the student finance system and, if possible, saving up some money to help them get by. Research has found that, on average, students receive £120.56 a month from parents. But one in eight feels their parents don’t give enough financial support. As maintenance loans are generally calculated on household income, you might find the government actually expects you to contribute, offering a smaller loan as a result. We have a parental contributions calculator that helps you work out how much this could be. Saving to financially support your child, as well as sharing your best money-management tips, could make a huge difference. I want to eat more sustainably – what should I do? Sian Conway-Wood, author of Buy Better, Consume Less The first thing is to not do something – and that is waste food. Households account for 70% of food waste in the UK, and the majority of food thrown away would have been edible. The cost of that adds up to £284 a person each year. Plan ahead, buy what you need and take steps to avoid waste. All of these steps are the first moves towards sustainable eating and can save you money as a result. Potatoes, bread and fresh fruit and vegetables are some of the most wasted foods. We’re often encouraged to buy in bulk, but they can be purchased in smaller quantities. Pay attention to how much you actually use and reduce the amount you buy. I am scared of being scammed. What steps should I take to protect myself? Jason Costain, head of fraud prevention at NatWest When buying goods, only use sellers or shops that accept card payments. Be suspicious when answering calls, texts and emails. There will always be the latest ingenious scam, so any time you give someone your address, email, or date of birth, stop and think. Do I trust them and what do they need it for? A lot of victims are the target of sophisticated scammers days after they’ve innocently given away basic information. I want a pay rise, how do I go about it? Charles Cotton, senior policy adviser at the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development Do your homework by checking what the going rate is for similar jobs, such as through a salary comparison website like Glassdoor. If you’re already being paid the average salary, or higher, it could prove harder to justify an increase, so you may want to go for a promotion, instead. If you’re not, make sure you make this point when putting forward your case. Strengthen it further by giving examples of why you deserve a pay rise – perhaps you met all your annual objectives, or you’ve excelled on a particular project. While it makes sense to talk to your manager first, they will most likely not be able to authorise a pay rise. Make their job easier by writing down your reasons, which they can share with their colleagues.In one of Mary Gaitskill’s best short stories, The Agonized Face, a female journalist watches a “feminist author” read at a literary festival. The author begins by complaining about her biographical note in the festival brochure, which, she feels, has played up her past experiences with prostitution and psychiatric wards to make her seem like “a kooky person off somewhere doing unimaginable stuff”. But just after she has persuaded the audience of the unfairness of such a portrayal, the author reads a funny story aloud from her book, which leaves the journalist unimpressed. The story – about an encounter between a man and an older woman – is flimsy and provocative, where the complaint had been tender and serious. “She sprouted three heads,” the journalist writes, “and asked that we accept them all!” The feminist had evaded something important, according to the journalist, by changing gears so abruptly: “the story she read made what had seemed like dignity look silly and obscene.” Gaitskill’s characters are often unjustly perceived as kooky people doing unimaginable stuff, but her stories are neither silly nor obscene. In Secretary – later made into a treacly film starring Maggie Gyllenhaal and James Spader – you can never quite tell how Debby feels about being abused and spanked by her male boss. Unlike in the movie, there is no blossoming relationship between boss and secretary, but might Debby be looking for dignity in the routine humiliation? In Oppositions, a new collection of Gaitskill’s essays, she asserts that the tragedy of the story is not so much that Debby is a victim, but that a “hunger for contact underlies her perversity and to some extent drives it”. It is a wordless yearning that contemporary feminist discourse now and again skips over in its quest to invert the male gaze and normalise female desire. And yet, as the journalist in The Agonized Face suggests, “sometimes you wish it could be that easy”. Gaitskill skips over nothing on the page. Her sentences are leavened by a novelist’s spirited discontent with mere facts, a distrust of transparent surfaces. Recounting an incident when she was sexually assaulted at 16, she wonders why she had described it for a while as “rape”. She’d lied “not for revenge but in service of… the metaphorical truth – although what that truth was is not at all clear to me”. In a piece on Lolita, where she is withering about the “haters” who conflate art and life, Gaitskill is moved by Nabokov’s bizarre claim that he was inspired by a newspaper article about a chimpanzee in a zoo that drew with charcoal the bars of its cage. “For those of us for whom metaphors are a natural way of seeing,” Gaitskill writes, “it makes instant, terrible sense.” The remaining essays – on music, films, the Bible, American sex scandals – together make up a shadow autobiography. We learn, from a piece on the Book of Revelation, that Gaitskill ran away from home in her teens, and that at 21 she was briefly a born-again Christian. A trip to Russia becomes an occasion to recall the time she worked at a strip joint in Canada. Listening to Talking Heads, she realises how their music was always playing somewhere in the background, and in her head, when she was starting to write in her 20s. A song by B-Movie conjures up memories of a thwarted romance from the 80s. About music, Gaitskill declares at one point that “she is not a fan by nature”, but her longueurs on bands and songs have a certain underhand charm. Fans of her fiction will relish the impossibly cool image of a younger Gaitskill typing out her early stories with the headphones on every morning. With Gaitskill, you scarcely get or sometimes even expect popular opinions, regardless of whether she is riffing on Chekhov or the Clintons. She is seldom persuaded by groupthink, be it the “psychological uniformity of experience” that she decries in both “rape-crisis” American feminists and their critics in the mid-90s, or years later, the “hive-mind” that she feels is at work in the bestselling novel Gone Girl: “There is nothing here but ‘that guy’ or ‘that girl’, and that means nothing, period.” She defends John Updike’s right to be narcissistic, Norman Mailer’s impulse to be a “kook”. I can’t imagine another writer today, in this age of lucrative film rights and airtight confidentiality agreements, even mildly disapproving of a movie based on one of their stories. Gaitskill is gloriously trenchant, but never gimmicky, in these unsparing essays. Oppositions: Selected Essays by Mary Gaitskill is published by Profile (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyWelcome to 2022. This week I bring you a collection to really sharpen your tastebuds and a bar to snuggle up and eat whilst reading a good book. Here, can I recommend Lady in Waiting by Anne Glenconner, which I find deeply comforting before bed as it talks about nothing whatsoever to do with my world. Firetree, which regular readers will know makes the only 100% I rate, has launched a new Innovations Collection, either available as single bars, £7/65g each, or as a five-bar gift box, £33. Firetree chocolate always makes me think about the cocoa bean because there isn’t very much else to distract you, although this time the already highly flavoured Vanuatu cocoa from Malekula Island has cocoa nibs in it and marks Firetree’s first inclusion bar. There are three 72% versions of different origins, a 100% bar and also an oat milk version. This is ideal if really good, simple and largely dark chocolate is your thing. I’ve mentioned in passing Solkiki’s Elvis bar, £8.50, so named because it’s based on Elvis Presley’s love of banana and peanut butter sandwiches, but I want to, here, stress how terrifically good it is. I’m not a fan of banana-flavoured things, but this and Ottolenghi’s banana jam – which you get when you go to his cafés if you order toasted things and is so so good – convinced me otherwise. The bar contains vegan milk chocolate, roasted peanuts and chunks of banana. The kind of craziness we all need to see in a new year. Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaBUnderneath the shadow of the snow-topped Austrian Alps, in front of a forest of thick green trees and behind a pure azure lake, sits a sprawling chalet that has seen everyone from Kate Moss to Michael Gove pass through its wide glass doors. The VivaMayr health resort in Altaussee, Austria, has long been the picturesque home of celebrity detoxes – strict bans on caffeine and alcohol, combined with stricter rules about the number of times you need to chew your food (40, naturally) have helped numerous celebrity clientele lose weight. The detoxing might sound harsh, but tranquillity oozes through the resort’s Instagram page, where enchanting mists tickle thick evergreen trees and women pose with mugs in sleek, pine interiors. It’s not the image that comes to mind when you think “long-Covid clinic”, but it is one. For £2,700 a week (excluding accommodation), sufferers can attend VivaMayr’s post-Covid medical programme, which promises a “better quality of life”. There is currently no cure for long Covid – the condition in which individuals continue to suffer Covid-19 symptoms for months after first being infected – but there are plenty of treatments. There is an entire network of specialist NHS long-Covid clinics across the United Kingdom – here, patients can undergo rehabilitative programmes to help them improve their stamina, breathing and cognitive functions (for many, long Covid is characterised by fatigue, breathlessness, and concentration problems). Yet in September, the Office for National Statistics estimated that 1.1 million people in the UK currently suffer with long Covid, while between July and August, only 5,737 people were referred to specialist NHS clinics. With the Omicron variant threatening more lives, there’s a gap in the market for long-Covid care, and plenty of private practitioners are happy to fill it – for a price. Gwyneth Paltrow was one of the first. In February 2021, the actor and businesswoman wrote a blogpost on her lifestyle website, Goop, detailing her post-Covid regime, which included fasting and “doing an infrared sauna as often as I can”. Paltrow’s post helpfully listed the numerous products she’d used to get a handle on her “long-tail fatigue and brain fog”: £112 Goopbrand vitamin C serum, a nearly-£400 sauna blanket, and a single £105 drinking glass (purchasable from the Goop site) via which long-Covid sufferers can sip non-alcoholic gin (also helpfully linked). The National Medical Director of NHS England, Stephen Powis, warned against Paltrow’s advice, saying, “Some of the solutions she’s recommending are really not the solutions we’d recommend in the NHS. We need to take long Covid seriously and apply serious science.” But Paltrow is far from the only person who can be accused of commercialising and commodifying long-Covid treatments. Over the course of the past year, numerous long-Covid wellness retreats have sprung up across the globe, offering treatments for breath-taking prices. In ascending order of eye watering, there’s: the Park Igls Fit After Covid “therapeutic module” in Austria for £3,000 a week; the RAKxa long Covid programme in Thailand at £2,893 for three nights; and the Arrigo Long Covid Healing Programme in Somerset, £2,500 a day (minimum seven-day stay). Then there’s VivaMayr, where patients can exercise in the Alpine air, jump into the icy lake and have frequent massages to help them relieve their symptoms. All four of the above programmes involve qualified medical professionals, diagnostic tests and tailored diets alongside wellness practices, such as yoga, mud baths, “aquagymnastics” and acupuncture. Although there are some unorthodox treatments on offer – Park Igls promises patients “three liver compresses with beeswax”, while RAKxa patients undergo Ya-Pao therapy, in which a paste is applied to their chest and set on fire – these complement traditional medicine. Brendan Delaney is a professor of medicine at Imperial College London who, alongside 30 other doctors, spent six months putting together a set of recommendations for recognising and managing long Covid; it was published in the British Journal of General Practice in November. Delaney personally isn’t too concerned about the types of treatments on offer to patients at long-Covid retreats. “They’re getting the medical input and then they’re getting the rehab type input via some form of wellness activity,” Delaney says. “If they happen to be able to afford to have that in a trip to the Austrian Alps, well that’s a wonderful place to have your rehab.” The problem, of course, is that the vast majority of long-Covid sufferers can’t afford it. “The idea that long Covid patients are the Knightsbridge worried-well that can ship off and do these kind of wellness things is completely erroneous. The biggest groups [of sufferers] are healthcare workers and teachers, followed by care home staff, because they’ve had the biggest exposure to Covid early on, and possibly quite large viral loads,” says Delaney, who himself has had long Covid for almost two years. Although most sufferers can’t afford bespoke multi-thousand pound retreats, Delaney says that many do seek private help, be it “packages of online wellness treatment for a few hundred pounds” or hyperbaric oxygen therapy, a treatment where patients breathe pure oxygen at high pressures to help oxygenate their tissues and promote healing. “If you’re in a situation where you are unable to work, you feel awful, and you can’t carry out your family and your social obligations, then you’re going to try and find any way you can to try and improve the situation you’re in,” Delaney says, noting that it’s “not unusual” for NHS long-Covid clinics to have up to “10-month” waiting lists. According to the most recent NHS England data, more than a third of people referred to post-Covid assessment centres in England have to wait “15+ weeks” to be seen, while in the southwest of England specifically, 49% of patients have to wait this long. In this environment, increasingly desperate patients are willing to spend a fortune on private tests and treatments, as well as vitamins, supplements, IV drips, herbs and alternative medicines that they hope will provide relief. The issue is exacerbated because many patients can’t even get referred to NHS long-Covid clinics in the first place – often their symptoms are dismissed as anxiety. “The problem that a lot of patients have is not being taken seriously,” Delaney says, “Because the largest group of patients are women… and there’s a long history in medicine of not taking women’s problems seriously.” (A March 2021 paper in the BMJ found that middle-aged women in particular face a “greater risk of debilitating long-term symptoms” after hospital treatment for Covid-19.) Delaney works one day a week as a GP and has seen this problem first hand. One of his patients was referred to an NHS long-Covid clinic and dismissed as anxious. Delaney brought the patient in and did his own tests, and found that she had tachycardia (a heart rate that was too fast). Delaney was able to prescribe medicine to the woman thanks to his long-Covid expertise, but he knows that many health workers would simply have dismissed her. Patients who can afford elaborate wellness retreats, then, aren’t just getting treatment for their money – they’re also getting access to someone who takes them seriously. A wealth divide exists in long-Covid treatment, which is exacerbated by the fact that being sick in itself is already expensive, with many left unable to work. In the autumn, a small survey of 252 sufferers conducted by campaign group Long Covid Support found that 45% had been unable to return to work, while 5% had been directly dismissed by their employers because of their condition. “People with conditions such as chronic fatigue and possibly long-Covid experience substantial disruption to their lives and support from family and friends is often required,” says Paul McCrone, a professor of health economics at the University of Greenwich who has authored papers on the hidden costs of chronic fatigue. While McCrone says there will always be a demand for private medicine, he adds that one-size-fits-all treatments have historically left many chronic fatigue sufferers seeking paid-for alternatives outside of the NHS. “Effective individualised treatments are needed and this does require large amounts of funding,” McCrone says. “It is essentially a political choice as to how much we spend on healthcare. The line frequently given is that resources are scarce, but that is a relative concept – how scarce are they? We currently spend less than 10% of GDP on health and so there is scope for increases.” In July, the National Institute for Health Research set aside £19.6m for 15 studies on diagnosing and treating long Covid. Yet while there continues to be no consensus on the best treatments, let alone a cure, retreats will continue to attract customers. Although most of the treatments on offer here are unlikely to be damaging, it is entirely possible that someone could spend £10,000 hoping to be cured and come out the other end feeling no better. Writing in the Telegraph in October, journalist and long-Covid sufferer Helen Kirwan-Taylor argued that, “Cynicism goes out of the window when you’re desperate.” She described feeling “radiant” after one retreat, but overdoing it the next day and being “drained” by the time night fell. “Residential clinics speed up the healing process, but unless you maintain the benefits with the right diet and regular treatments at home, the symptoms come flooding back,” she concluded. Dr Peter Gartner is the head physician at the Park Igls retreat in Austria. He says its Fit After Covid programme was developed in autumn 2020, by adding “a few treatments and a few diagnostic tools” to the resort’s standard Mayr medicine package, which emphasises the gut’s role in wellbeing. Gartner says Park Igls patients undergo a “chewing bootcamp” where they learn to chew thoroughly and are also treated with detoxes, including the beeswax compress. He adds that Park Iglis’s experts kept up to date with long-Covid research in order to offer the best diagnostic tools as part of the new package, including a spirometry test to measure lung function. He says the retreat sees “a few” long-Covid patients per week. “There are no side-effects and this is a programme everybody can do,” Gartner says when asked if he’s concerned that because so little is known about long Covid, the treatments on offer could potentially make people feel worse. Gartner says sufferers with “severe problems” should undergo intensive rehab with 24-hour monitoring and see specialists and virologists – he says these specialist medical houses are common in Austria. “Our offer is just: what can we do afterwards?” Gartner says, “It’s just a missing link between the rehabs and normal life.” Fiona Arrigo, founder of wellness retreat company the Arrigo Programme, says her Somerset-based long-Covid retreat was “created in response to the strong demand of those struggling with the insidious after-effects of Covid-19” – she says staff receive “daily enquiries” from potential patients. Arrigo says the programme gives sufferers time to process the “shock, trauma, exhaustion, depletion” of long Covid and the bespoke treatment plan helps people recuperate. This, she says, is also why the retreat is expensive: “It is this price because of the exceptionally high level of expertise, the access our clients get to the different specialists and the in-depth testing it requires and also because the programme is completely bespoke to the individual.” Kirwan-Taylor described staying at a “charming cottage” filled with “mounds of fresh strawberries” and “personalised bathrooms”, with her own little river outside. “On the first night I had acupuncture on a heated bed covered in flower petals, then a bath with magnesium flakes.” Arrigo says the retreat’s long-Covid patients have built confidence, developed deeper breathing patterns, improved their energy levels, and found “deeper understanding and self-compassion on this often challenging and difficult journey.” Still, results aren’t guaranteed and she says staff “talk very clearly to everyone” to “ensure clients coming know what we can realistically offer and what they need.” If Arrigo staff feel they can’t help, they recommend other possible clinics that clients can attend. According to management consulting firm McKinsey, the global wellness market is now worth $1.5tn and it’s constantly growing. Yet while mindfulness and meditation has been shown to help with the stress and anxiety of long Covid, wellness solutions should not replace properly funded medical care. “There is a neoliberal ideology that expects us to take full individual responsibility for our health and well-being – allowing governments to withdraw and defund public services,” says Ronald Purser, a professor of management at San Francisco State University and author of McMindfulness: How Mindfulness Became the New Capitalist Spirituality. “Like any other hot commodity, mindfulness has been refashioned to accommodate the needs of the market, obfuscating critical reflection on the systemic causes of our collective malaise and institutional stress.” Purser argues: “Fundamental health inequities must be addressed at a government policy level.” Most of those able to afford luxury long-Covid retreats will see some benefit – rest, relaxation and tailored treatment plans can never be a bad thing. “But none of these things are getting to the root cause of the problem, which is still what we’re trying to find out,” GP Delaney notes, “Is it blood vessel inflammation? Is it an immune problem? Is it a persistent virus? Is it blood clots?” Each new variant, including Omicron, behaves slightly differently and brings new questions. If nothing else, long Covid is the great equaliser – even the richest among us can’t pay their way to the answers.DeMar DeRozan hit a three-pointer at the buzzer for the second straight game to give the Chicago Bulls a 120-119 win over the Washington Wizards on Saturday night. Kyle Kuzma’s three-pointer with 3.3 seconds to play gave Washington a 119-117 lead, until DeRozan beat the Wizards in the same way he beat Indiana on Friday night. DeRozan finished with 28 points and Zach LaVine had 35 points to help the Bulls to their seventh straight win, which is their longest streak since 18-29 December 2014. According to BasketballReference.com, DeRozan became the first player in NBA history to hit buzzer-beaters on consecutive days. “It’s amazing, especially doing it on the road,” DeRozan said. “I don’t know if I’m dreaming or if it’s real right now. “You work your butt off and you understand that if you’re in those positions, try to capitalize on them the best way you can because you’re going to have games where you miss some.” The Wizards led nearly the whole game, outscoring Chicago 72-30 in points in the paint. “He just made a heck of a play. He was defended pretty well,” Washington coach Wes Unseld Jr said. “It’s just tough. It’s tough to lose a game like that.” Kuzma scored 29 points and had 12 rebounds, while Bradley Beal had 27 points and a career-high 16 assists in his first start at point guard. Beal also passed the 14,000 point mark. Midway through the second quarter, the Wizards were called for a technical full for too many players. Alize Johnson, one of five players on 10-day contracts, was the sixth player on the court. DeRozan said he concentrated on the fundamentals before he shot the game-winner. “I wanted to make sure my feet were behind the line,” he said. “I wanted to give it a chance to go in. “My shots all night were short. It’s tough to play on back-to-backs. I kind of felt it throughout the game.” LaVine shook his head when asked to describe DeRozan. “The dude’s incredible,” LaVine said. “You can’t say much more than that…Thank God we’ve got DeMar DeRozan on our team.” Throughout Beal’s NBA career, he has marveled at DeRozan. “That’s what he does,” Beal said. “He takes tough shots and he makes tough shots.” Beal believes the short-handed Wizards simply came up short against a marvelous opponent. “We did everything we possibly could to win, but DeRo just made a crazy shot at the end of the game,” he said. “In a way, the shot is demoralizing and takes the energy out of you, but to know that we competed and played hard, we set ourselves up to win, and you feel great about that.”A man gets a call from a police officer. He is told that, while he has done nothing criminal, his social media posts have offended someone, so the police have recorded them as a non-crime hate incident that may show up on criminal record checks. The officer warns that if he continues to “escalate” matters, the police may take criminal action against him, a message later reinforced by his superiors. It may sound like something out of a police state. But this happened in Britain in 2019, in a case that led the high court judge who later ruled the actions of Humberside police force unlawful to warn them, “in this country we have never had a Cheka, a Gestapo or a Stasi”. Despite there being no evidence that Harry Miller, the man in question, might ever stray into unlawful speech, the police took action that reasonably led him to believe that he was being warned not to exercise his right to freedom of expression on pain of potential criminal prosecution; they also opined to the press that Miller’s tweets were “transphobic”. And just before Christmas, in a landmark judgment that has attracted surprisingly little commentary from human rights lawyers given its profound implications, the court of appeal went further in ruling that the College of Policing’s guidance that the police should record all non-crime hate incidents, as perceived by those taking offence at them, is an unlawful incursion on citizens’ freedom of expression. How did we get to the position where an individual had to risk financial ruin to legally defend his right to free expression in the face of unlawful police actions? The well-intentioned roots of police recording non-crime hate incidents stem from the 1999 Macpherson report into Stephen Lawrence’s murder in 1993, which found institutional racism in the Metropolitan police. Macpherson recommended that the police adopt the definition of a racist incident as any “perceived to be racist by the victim or any other person” and that non-crime incidents should be reported, recorded and investigated with equal commitment to crimes. The aim was to help the police overcome their institutional racism and to build confidence within ethnic minority communities. This has today evolved into a system of recording non-crime hate incidents that cover five of the nine protected characteristics in the Equality Act, including transgender identity (but not, bizarrely, sex). In a world where the police do not have the resources to investigate non-crime incidents, partly because of the volume of reports generated by social media, the College of Policing tells police officers to record as hate incidents all those perceived by the person reporting them as motivated by hostility, including unfriendliness or dislike. This has become open to manipulation, with sinister consequences for freedom of expression. Anyone can complain to the police if they don’t like something someone says. It will get recorded as a hate incident, in a way that could significantly damage careers and reputations but with none of the due process of a criminal charge. And it is impossible to overstate the chilling impact of getting a call from a police officer warning you off exercising your democratic rights. Miller is chair of the Reclaim party, led by Laurence Fox; hardly a political ally of this newspaper. The judge noted his tweets were “for the most part, either opaque, profane or unsophisticated”. But that does not justify impeding his right to contribute to a live and contentious political debate on the relative importance of biological sex and self-declared gender identity in determining how society constitutes things such as single-sex spaces and sports. It is a far from settled matter with legitimate competing perspectives. Yet people (often women) of the “gender critical” view – that biological sex cannot be wholly replaced by gender identity in law and society – have been vulnerable to incursions on their free expression, because opponents have sought to misrepresent their position as so hateful that it is beyond the limits of legitimate discussion. (The absurdity of this mischaracterisation is shown up in the confirmation by the courts last year that the scientific understanding that biological sex is immutable is a protected belief under equalities law.) There are several other cases where the police have acted inappropriately against people lawfully expressing this position. Some forces even have a track record of misstating the law to the public: last February, Merseyside police wrongly claimed “being offensive is an offence”, while the West Yorkshire police in 2018 threatened to prosecute anyone posting “insulting” messages on its Facebook page. The police need to be politically impartial – they must not police people differently because of their political opinions. Yet there are numerous examples of police forces actively taking political sides in the sex and gender debate. Paul Giannasi, the national policing adviser for hate crime, has praised Lancashire police for expressing disappointment at lawful expressions of gender critical belief, congratulating them for their “initiative and empathy” in doing so. Several police forces pay the LGBT charity Stonewall for advice and training, despite Stonewall’s promotion of a contested political stance on gender identity. The police officer who unlawfully warned off Miller told him, Miller said, that a foetus could have a female brain but grow male body parts, later confirming he learned this unscientific belief on a training course. Greater Manchester police social media accounts have used and defended the derogatory and misogynistic term “terf”, associated with rape and death threats against women expressing gender-critical beliefs. Several dreadful murder cases from the last year have served as a reminder that many police forces remain tarnished by institutional misogyny, racism and homophobia. But there are no shortcuts to the cultural change essential for the non-discriminatory policing all citizens have the right to expect. Telling the police to record all non-criminal hate incidents or to believe all victims despite their role as investigators are inappropriately blunt approaches that undermine fair and impartial policing. The court of appeal judgment’s implications for free expression go way beyond policing: it observes “how quickly some involved in the transgender debate are prepared to accuse others with whom they disagree of showing hatred, or as being transphobic when they are not”. We see this everywhere: from Harry Potter actors condemning JK Rowling for her “hateful” views, to broadcasters saying interviewees should be “cancelled” for saying biological sex is immutable, to academics such as Kathleen Stock abused for wrongthink. There is no democracy without freedom of expression. That the police have unlawfully acted to shut down legitimate political debate in 21st-century Britain should remind us that, even in mature democracies, the most basic human rights should never be taken for granted. • This article was amended on 4 January 2022. An earlier version said: “it is impossible to understate the chilling impact of a call from a police officer warning you off exercising your democratic rights”. The intended word was overstate. • Sonia Sodha is an Observer columnistRos Atkins, 47, grew up in Cornwall and the Caribbean before reading history at Cambridge. His BBC career began on Radio 5 Live shortly after 9/11. He now presents Outside Source on the BBC News Channel and recently went viral for his “explainer” videos, broadcast on BBC Breakfast and posted online. He lives in south London with his wife and two daughters. How are you finding newfound fame? Well, I’ve neither been mobbed nor chased down the street, but it’s always pleasant if people pay attention to what you do. You’ve been called “the Facts Man” and “2021’s explainer-in-chief”. Happy with those descriptions? I’ve been called a lot worse, so I’ll take either of those more flattering monikers. How did you hit upon the explainer format? I’ve long been passionate about explanation as a form of news journalism. I launched Outside Source in 2014, so it’s a culmination of seven years of honing how we use language and images to explain stories as clearly as possible. I’ve definitely ended up using a different tone to a classic news bulletin. Three years ago, I noticed that the format was very successful on TV but not getting traction digitally. It wasn’t working for audiences who consume news online. I started to study different types of storytelling – how friends do it in the pub, how comedians, podcasters and documentary-makers do it. That took me to a different place in terms of how I offer up information. It’s been called “assertive impartiality”. Is that what you were aiming for? In some ways, what we’re doing is new. In others, it’s as old as the BBC itself. The BBC’s journalism has always been rooted in facts, fairness, objectivity and providing context. These videos reimagine how we do that. Partly because of how politics has evolved, our approach to impartiality was struggling to cope. There was an appetite from audiences to be more robust in our assessments of what’s true. Let’s properly dissect what people are saying. If it’s not true, let’s say so – in no uncertain terms. You don’t bring opinion or emotion into it. It’s simply about using language that’s sparse and direct to help viewers understand. “Assertive impartiality” isn’t my phrase, but it’s not a bad description. The videos get shared by people from both ends of the political spectrum. Is that a sign that they strike the right balance? The number of views has been a lovely surprise, but I’d put that on a par with the fact that they’ve been well received across the spectrum. It’s thrilling that influential people, from a whole range of political backgrounds, think the videos are helpful. Your video about Downing Street Christmas parties was watched 6m times on Twitter. What’s it like going viral? I’m normally sitting on the train home when the videos go live. For a news clip to get a million views on Twitter is very unusual. Six times that is extraordinary. Your messages suddenly light up. It also goes through stages. You might get an initial flurry of activity, then it’ll pause. You assume it’s run its course, but then someone like Prof Brian Cox or Gary Lineker might share it and it’ll gather momentum again. I do a bit of body-boarding and posting videos is a bit like catching a wave. Do you have trouble keeping a straight face during belief-beggaring reports? No, it’s the news and what we’re covering is serious. There may be elements within a story that people find humorous, but for me, the facts take centre-stage. I could’ve sworn I saw the hint of a smile when you said: “Drinks, nibbles, games”… Never! You have a very consistent look. How many blue shirts and jackets do you own? An awful lot. A stylist called Jane Field said navy blue suited me, so we went shopping in Oxford Street and bought loads. It means the videos all look the same – same shot, similar clothes – so people recognise them when they pop up in their feed. You’ve broadcast from home a lot over the past two years. How’s that been? Quite convenient, actually. I set up my study as a home studio. I used three spare mattresses for soundproofing. I got a pallet from a skip down the street and put my chair on it, so it was at camera level. My younger daughter, who’s 10, operated my autocue and became very proficient. We made signs saying “No entry, live on-air”. The doorbell rang occasionally, but there’s not much you can do about that. Do your daughters find it strange that you’re on social media more than them? There’s certainly a pretty direct correlation between the popularity of these videos and my family’s frustration about how much time I’m on Twitter. They often say: “Dad, put your phone down.” I always say: “But it’s a big story” and they say: “It’s always a big story.” You were once a drum’n’bass DJ. Do you still hit the decks on occasion? No, but I might come back to it when the kids are older. My last gig was in the mid 00s at a festival in Regent’s Park. Our first daughter was born a few days later. You’re the founder of The 50:50 Project, to increase representation of women in media content. What inspired that? I started it in 2016, primarily aimed at my own programme. We all felt that gender balance in our journalism was important, but weren’t managing to achieve it. On a trip to California, I visited lots of academics, corporate people and newsroom leaders, which rearranged my brain. We started systematically generating data on everything we produce. This self-monitoring system worked, other BBC teams joined in and it snowballed. Now it’s in more than 100 organisations in 25 countries. We’re all incredibly proud of it. Most importantly, it’s delivered significant shifts in the diversity of what we make. What makes you happy when you’re not working? I love squash but got a nasty knee injury, so I’m waiting to have surgery before I can play again. I’ve got quite into running instead. I started cooking in lockdown. I used to be terrible but my wife, Sara, got me a book called Persiana by Sabrina Ghayour, which changed my entire view of the kitchen. Otherwise, I just love pottering about with football on the radio. I follow Dulwich Hamlet and Plymouth Argyle. How do you see politics panning out in 2022 and how will your explainers fit in? I’ve given up all predictions since 2016. The pandemic is obviously ongoing. So is the Brexit process. It’s hard to imagine these huge stories won’t continue to dominate the news. There’s so much information coming at all of us and people want a hand with that. Someone said that watching my videos is like having 10 podcasts and five long reads crammed into your head within a few minutes. They’re a shortcut. There was a groundswell of opinion last year that you should do an explainer for Line of Duty too… I saw that. There are limits to what the team can do. Perhaps the Line of Duty finale is beyond us.‘They grow up fast’ is a thing people say to parents of toddlers and we generally nod in agreement because, I mean, I guess – but do they, really? Sure, we have to buy him new clothes more frequently than we do ourselves, but it’s not exactly blink and you’ll miss it stuff. They grow up fast? Compared to what? Whales? Trees? Kids certainly grow slower than cats or dogs or cows or any other animal I can think of. I think elephants and whales take a while, but I’m not willing to look it up because I’m too busy cleaning tomato soup from every surface of the kitchen for the fifth time this week – something I’m fairly sure a three-and-a-half-year-old porpoise or badger would have grown out of by now. In the hopes of getting a sense of my son’s development over the past year, let’s take a clear-eyed survey of how much has actually changed. Speech is one of the areas of his development where time really does seem to have flown. When we watch videos of him from this time last year, helooks broadly the same, albeit a bit more squished and pudgy, but is still communicating in semi-garbled baby speech, whereas nowadays he’s one of the finest conversationalists I know. I am willing to admit that his propensity for chat is genuinely impressive, and the difference 12 months has made seems to stretch the bounds of reason. He has also gained the ability to learn any song you care to teach him, which has entered critical mass during the Christmas period. In terms of growing up fast, I’d have to give this a 9 out of 10, losing points only since he has miraculously not yet memorised any of the swear words he’s occasionally copied from us. In terms of hygiene, he’s come on in leaps and bounds and this could be another high scoring quadrant for this year end review, – certainly when it comes to issues such as wanting to eat soil and/or drink toilet water. That being said, the ups and downs of toilet training have occasionally left us having to dispose of human waste in plastic bags while in public places. In conclusion, a mixed bag, and one occasionally filled with human waste. Arguably the most impressive change has been in coordination, since there’s no doubt the boy has progressed rapidly in this regard. He can now climb surfaces, manipulate objects and navigate his way around the wider world with an aplomb that would have seemed like science fiction 12 months ago. But, as his mobility and ambition have increased so, too, have his opportunities to enfilthen himself, and at higher places in our home. This time last year, for example, he would not have been able to open a jar of jam, nor climb into our bed. Now he can, and will, do both at the same time; allowing us to gently wake to the sensation of being stuck to our own sheets in a sugary, syrupy mess. At such moments, my wife and I rejoice in our sticky, strawberry morning, and are likely to marvel at his development anew. ‘If this is him growing up so fast,’ we say with calm delight, ‘then, frankly, it’s taking ages.’ Did Ye Hear Mammy Died? by Séamas O’Reilly is out now (Little, Brown, £16.99). Buy a copy from guardianbookshop at £14.78 Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeatsA Very British Scandal (BBC One) | iPlayer The Tourist (BBC One) | iPlayer Around The World in 80 Days (BBC One) | iPlayer Stay Close (Netflix) | netflix.com Four very different dramas got us through that zone between Christmas and new year that can feel as though your soul is a half-masticated blini hurtling into the void. BBC One’s three-part A Very British Scandal, written by Sarah Phelps and directed by Anne Sewitsky, told the real-life story of unrepentant “scarlet woman” Margaret Campbell, Duchess of Argyll (Claire Foy), whose vicious 1963 divorce from the Duke of Argyll (Paul Bettany) featured a notorious photograph of her fellating a mysterious (headless) lover. Here, then, is another high-end soapy serving of sexed-up British history (2018’s A Very English Scandal dealt with the Jeremy Thorpe affair), with Foy as an intriguing duchess. The appeal of her Elizabeth in The Crown was as a young housewife-queen: flustered, blushing, eager to please. Margaret is just as porcelain-skinned, but also glacial, sexual, a pouting wolf. The decadence is there when she and her future husband flirt up a storm on a train. Less so when she attends the sex party of her aristo-friend Maureen (a viperish Julia Davis), where debauchery is represented by a somewhat tragic clockwork penis trundling across a table top (toff-swinging, it seems, wasn’t all it was cracked up to be). Later, Margaret rounds on Maureen for mocking her sexual appetite, snapping: “I do like it. I like it very much. And I’m extremely good at it.” A Very British Scandal isn’t really about sex; it’s about the hypocrisy surrounding sex. It’s also about cut-glass savagery. The duke, acidly played by Bettany, is vile, druggy, violent and after Margaret’s money. Margaret stammers helplessly in front of her scathing mother (Phoebe Nicholls, chilly and superb). After the duke steals the photographs, and the divorce turns even more rancid, Margaret is expelled from elite circles: “We will close ranks.” There are no innocents here: Margaret, the third wife, forges letters to try to get his sons disinherited. Though she was an early victim of media-shaming, she’s too haughty and entitled to break your heart. Wisely, Foy doesn’t focus on making Margaret sympathetic; instead she makes her human – complex, messy, bold. You’re rooting for her as she sticks out her chin in court and admits to being the woman in the photograph. Within a few short years, the 60s would be swinging; sure, predominantly for men, but free spirits like Margaret may have benefited. She may not be a perfect fit for feminist or heroine, but she was a woman born cruelly out of time. Harry and Jack Williams (The Missing, Liar) wrote The Tourist, an Australian-set, six-part thriller starring Jamie Dornan (The Fall) and directed by Chris Sweeney and Daniel Nettheim. It starts out like a homage to Steven Spielberg’s 1971 film Duel. Dornan is driving alone in the sweaty, hazy outback when he’s menaced by a dusty truck with an unseen driver – all we see is a boot pressing on a pedal. After being rammed off the road, Dornan wakes up in hospital, with amnesia, as the Man. When he goes to a meeting in a diner he has written on a scrap of paper, he narrowly avoids being blown up. From there, The Tourist is a blur of mysteries: who is the Man? Does he genuinely have amnesia? Who’s the other guy we see buried alive in the desert? Other characters drift through: Danielle Macdonald (Dumplin’, Unbelievable) as a self-effacing, underestimated cop you could imagine ambling about in Fargo; Shalom Brune-Franklin (Line of Duty) as a waitress who seems more involved than she’s letting on. Dornan convinces as the good guy who could be a bad guy, and there’s a rough, homemade feel to the proceedings that at times turns nightmarish, hallucinatory. The outback scenes burn through the screen, grimy and desperate. Tension builds as the Man manoeuvres his wheelchair down a dark hospital corridor. I have only seen the opener, but already The Tourist feels taut, jagged and distinctive, the best Williams offering since The Missing. Sadly, watching the opening two episodes of Around the World in 80 Days (BBC One) felt like it took 80 days. Set in 1872, this eight-part version of the Jules Verne story about the gentleman-adventurer, dramatised by Ashley Pharoah and Caleb Ranson, stars David Tennant: a good actor (so scary in Des), but his Phileas Fogg is so underpowered, navel-gazing, feeble, it’s a surprise he can cross the road unaided, never mind take on wagers to circumnavigate the globe. The onus is on Fogg’s companions – Ibrahim Koma as roguish valet Passepartout; Leonie Benesch as an intrepid journalist – to provide the vim: first amid Paris riots, then on board an Italian train as, with Fogg’s ingenuity, they cross a wrecked bridge to save a child’s life. I rather enjoyed the brazen anachronisms: “I need a man like a fish needs a penny farthing!” However, the excitement of the hot-air balloon – the first sighting, the maiden voyage – is dampened by soggy Fogg’s lachrymose yearning to prove himself: “No man in the world knows more about lost opportunity than me.” Less hot air from Fogg and more into the balloon, and this series might yet take off. Over on Netflix, Stay Close, adapted by Harlan Coben from his novel, is an eight-part thriller about hunting a serial killer from the same team, including writer Danny Brocklehurst, that made Coben’s The Stranger for Netflix in 2020. The ever-brilliant Cush Jumbo (The Good Fight) plays a woman who has fled her past but finds it catching up with her. James Nesbitt (The Missing) is a morose cop who falls for Sarah Parish’s earthy bar manager. Richard Armitage, who was also in The Stranger, turns up as a dishevelled photographer, and Eddie Izzard is a lawyer with a social conscience. Stay Close is slick, bullishly fast-paced and – spoiler alert – features antiheroes, played by Hyoie O’Grady and Poppy Gilbert, who make Killing Eve’s Villanelle seem eminently reasonable. I guessed the killer early on, but that didn’t stop me enjoying it. Coben knows how to make plots bounce, swerve and tantalise until the finish. What else I’m watching Death to 2021 (Netflix) This annual roundup, co-executive-produced by Charlie Brooker, is getting heat for jokes about the “Duke of Deadinburgh”. With pops at Trump, anti-vaxxers and Jeff Bezos, and contributors including Hugh Grant and Diane Morgan, it’s better (sharper) than last year. Attenborough and the Mammoth Graveyard (BBC One) David Attenborough takes a break from living things to explore fossils, mammoths, stone axes and everything else prehistoric with palaeontologists, archaeologists and evolutionary biologists. Did ancient humans wipe out mammoths? Quite possibly. Sondheim at the BBC (BBC Four) A documentary featuring as part of a special BBC Four evening devoted to celebrating the life and art of the composer Stephen Sondheim, who died in November, aged 91. Archive BBC footage includes performances from Sammy Davis Jr and Liza Minnelli.Alexis Gauthier used to sell 20kg of foie gras a week. Now the chef, whose London-based restaurant became entirely vegan in 2021, only sells a plant-based version. Since becoming vegan, he admits, Gauthier Soho has “lost a lot of customers, sadly”. But he says he has gained even more new diners, all looking for something different and sustainable and prepared to pay the price. Gauthier is not the only chef to abandon the animal produce traditionally associated with fine dining. While the number of meat-free menus has been burgeoning for some time in lower- and mid-priced restaurants, now a growing number of the world’s top chefs are starting to put plants centre stage. Chef Daniel Humm has created headlines on both sides of the Atlantic twice in recent months. First when he announced that his three Michelin-starred New York restaurant, Eleven Madison Park, would be reopening after a pandemic hiatus in June minus meat or seafood on its $335 menu (but not completely free of animal products. “The current food system is simply not sustainable,” he said). Then, in November, it was announced that he had parted ways with five-star hotel Claridge’s after it rejected his “bold new vision” of a fully plant-based menu for its restaurant, Davies and Brook, which serves, amongst other things, foie gras and caviar. The hotel said it was “not the path we wish to follow”. And in January, Geranium in Copenhagen, ranked number two by the World’s 50 Best Restaurants, will unveil a new meat-free menu of vegetarian, plant-based and seafood dishes. Announcing the move, chef Rasmus Kofoed said that he hadn’t eaten meat for the last five years at home, “so to no longer use meat on the new menu was a logical decision and a natural progression for Geranium”. Even the Michelin Guide, which rarely used to award stars to vegetarian and vegan restaurants, appears to be moving in a plant-based direction. Last year, Claire Vallée’s restaurant ONA (which stands for origine non-animale) in Arès, near Bordeaux, became the first vegan restaurant in France to be awarded a star. They have also introduced green stars, a new award to recognise sustainability. Gauthier – whose plant-based menu is 50% vegan versions of classic French dishes like soufflé or foie gras and the other half is more experimental – said many chefs, particularly French chefs, fear losing Michelin stars and remain bound by the “tyranny of classical French gastronomy”. The ongoing influence of Auguste Escoffier, author of the 1903 Le Guide Culinaire and former director of kitchens at the Savoy, is, he said, a “massive problem for French gastronomy to move forward”. By contrast, Gauthier sees plant-based food as an opportunity to be truly creative. “We can write recipes that are totally out of the ordinary and nobody can come and say ‘well actually, it should not be done like that’ because it’s all new. That’s the beauty of it.” While animals are off the menu, he said everything else remains the same. “It’s remaining 100% French, the flavours, all the tralala you think about when you go to a French restaurant.” So far, he said, the move to veganism has been “a commercial success”. As chef patron of one of the few high-end vegan restaurants in London, Gauthier hopes more chefs will follow suit. “Not a lot of chefs are brave enough to embrace a fully vegan restaurant, but a lot are looking into it and testing the water,” he said. French chef Dominique Crenn, stopped serving meat at her three Michelin-starred San Francisco restaurant Atelier Crenn in 2018. Speaking from her farm in Sonoma, where she grows produce for her three restaurants, she said it is vital that restaurants and consumers know where their products come from and do not support factory farming. But, unlike some, she is not averse to experimenting with lab-grown meat. She has partnered with Upside Foods to develop recipes for cultured chicken that, once it gets regulatory approval, she plans to serve at her restaurant. She said that when she first heard about the concept in 2015, “I thought that was genius because the bottom line is we’re not going to have the world eating just vegetables. There’s going to be people that are always going to want to eat meat or fish and all that, so I think it’s about finding ways of rebalancing this world.” She is also looking at cutting cow’s milk from her establishments, which she hopes to do in 2022 and, when it comes to seafood, she works with small-scale fishers and mostly serves molluscs. “I’m just looking at what I can do and keep working on to become better and become more conscious.” In the UK, younger people are leading the charge when it comes to switching to a vegan diet, while the availability of documentaries such as Cowspiracy, Seaspiracy and The Game Changers on Netflix has opened up conversations around the subject. But, in many ways, UK institutions have been slow to catch up. The latest series of BBC One show MasterChef: The Professionals drew criticism after it featured just 10 vegetarian savoury dishes out of 100 and only two for vegans. Channel 4’s The Great British Bake Off also attracted ire after its first vegan contestant, Freya Cox, was required to use animal products in one of the rounds. And while recent years have seen a proliferation of lower-budget or “grab and go” vegan eating-out options, top-end establishments have proven more reluctant. Peter Harden, co-founder of Harden’s restaurant guides, said Claridge’s “missed a trick” by not taking up Humm’s plant-based menu, but that perhaps it indicates that the market is not yet big enough. “They obviously did it because they thought it would be commercial suicide. And I think that highlights the problem, especially for top chefs, is that when people are eating out and spending a lot of money then a very large proportion of them do expect to be able to eat meat.”A female conductor will take the helm at an Italian opera house for the first time in January. The Ukrainian conductor Oksana Lyniv said she was surprised to learn she was making history after receiving the offer from the Teatro Comunale opera house in Bologna. The 43-year-old begins the three-year posting as musical director this month. “I didn’t realise, when I received the letter from the Teatro Comunale, that I would be the first female conductor of an Italian opera house,” she said. “I am very honoured and happy to be part of this historical turning point.” It is not the first time Lyniv, who was previously principal conductor of Austria’s Graz Opera, has broken new ground. In July, she became the first female conductor to open Germany’s Bayreuth opera festival in its 145-year-history. She conducted Richard Wagner’s Flying Dutchman to a rapturous audience that included the former German chancellor Angela Merkel. Born in Brody, western Ukraine, to musician parents, Lyniv conducted her first orchestra at the age of 16 before going on to study at the Lysenko music school in Lviv. She said it was difficult for female musicians to get on at the time as the majority of conductors and teachers were male. “There was no live example of a woman who we could learn or get advice from,” Lyniv added. “But it is less of a struggle now – in orchestras today you see many more women. The conditions are much better now as society is thinking more about equal rights – so young female conductors should not hold back, they should grab the opportunities and go for it.” Lyniv said Italy was “a very important place for the arts and opera” and that “it’s important that this change is happening now”. Her first opera production will be Andrea Chénier by Umberto Giordano and she will also conduct the music of some of her favourite composers, including Wagner, Tchaikovsky, Bruckner, Richard Strauss and the Ukrainian composer Boris Lyatoshinsky. Bologna’s Teatro Comunale opened its doors in 1763 with a performance of Christoph Willibald Gluck’s Il trionfo di Clelia (The Triumph of Cloelia), and went on to host Wagner as well as some of Italy’s greatest composers, including Verdi, Rossini and Bellini. Lyniv said that one of her goals during her tenure would be to get more young people interested in the opera.Individual experiences and suffering are, of course, at the heart of the pandemic. But one way to understand what has happened is through putting those experiences together – and statistics are those personal stories writ large. And this pandemic has brought unprecedented demand to explain all the numbers that have been flying around. This has not been without its problems and we’ve had to learn some hard lessons, such as the journalistic skill of brevity. Since January 2021, we’ve been writing a weekly column in this paper about Covid numbers, covering everything from infections to deaths, vaccines to mental health, masks to lockdowns. It can be frustrating not being able to show all the graphs, but the same holds for radio and TV interviews and More or Less on Radio 4 has shown how much can be done to explain statistics without visual aids. Mathematical formulae and technical jargon need to be avoided, but we have also had to be sparing with numbers, which is harder when they are so precious to us. We had to agree our purpose, as a particular challenge is to fend off the voracious media appetite for blame, speculation and controversy, naturally fed by the broad spectrum of opinion among experts. One camp has supported viral suppression and even elimination, while others have expressed scepticism about the measures taken; it’s become a cliche that their extreme followers can be identified by the phrase “I’ve done my own research”. In the theatre of political combat, numbers are often weapons to beat opponents, but they should really be used to raise the quality of the debate. So we see ourselves as part of a group who have attempted to keep away from policy disputes and some of our most trusted sources are skilled individuals doing analyses in their spare time, who then share their insights on Twitter – to inform rather than persuade. Unfortunately, this pandemic has been rife with false claims and misinformation, particularly about vaccines. One approach for dealing with this, supported by empirical evidence, is the idea of “inoculation” – pre-empting misinformation and telling people about the incorrect interpretation before they catch it in the wild. We tried this strategy back in June 2021 when Public Health England first published data showing that, among older people who had recently died with Covid-19, most had been vaccinated. We wrote an article pointing out that this did not mean the vaccine was ineffective – just that it was imperfect – and that the great majority of people had been vaccinated: in essence, a small proportion of a large number can be bigger than a larger proportion of a small number. Another useful analogy is with seatbelts: most people who die in car accidents are wearing seatbelts, but this does not mean that seatbelts are not effective – it’s just that nearly everyone wears one and they are not perfect. The response to our “pre-bunking” was not encouraging. The Twitter link to our article included only its title, Why most people who now die with Covid in England have had a vaccination, and not the subhead, Don’t think of this as a bad sign, it’s exactly what’s expected from an effective but imperfect jab. As such, it was mistakenly interpreted as an anti-vaccination article (or worse) and circulated online. This, in turn, led to critical comments suggesting that we had encouraged vaccine scepticism and even an extraordinary tweet saying we (and the paper’s editors) were “genocidal” and should be “hunted down and destroyed”. We made light of this, saying this seemed a bit harsh, but we had had worse referees’ reports. That account was subsequently removed from Twitter. Among the repeatable insults, DS has been called an “idiot”, a “shameless liar” and “Nazi collaborator”. Of course, this is mild compared to what others have received (although “fossil” did hurt). It got more complicated in September 2021 when ITV’s political editor, Robert Peston, tweeted (and later deleted) “Infections higher among double vaxxed for those 40 to 79 than for non-vaxxed”. Surprisingly, he was not referring to the absolute case numbers, which could be explained using the reasoning above. Instead, this referred to the case rates per 100,000 people reported by Public Health England. That seems strange, but can be explained by PHE’s use of National Immunisation Management System (NIMS) for population figures, which uses GP lists and so tends to overcount due to many and defunct registrations. Using Office for National Statistics (ONS) population estimates, themselves uncertain, leads to the expected lower case-rates in vaccinated than unvaccinated groups. This UK data, apparently showing higher case rates in the vaccinated than the unvaccinated, was later used by Brazil’s President Bolsonaro to support his bizarre claim that vaccines cause Aids. Complaints by the watchdog Office for Statistics Regulation have had little impact and PHE’s successor, the UK Health Security Agency, stubbornly refuses to change its publication (even though unvaccinated rates are in a lighter font), so that these misleading numbers continue to feed vaccine misinformation. These stories might give a poor impression of how the media has handled Covid-19 numbers. But, on balance, our impression is that a valiant attempt has been made by most outlets to explain their complexities. All, of course, impossible without the extraordinary behind-the-scenes work of those who produce the Covid dashboard, the ONS Infection Survey, and the other sources that it is too easy to take for granted. We started working together through the Royal Statistical Society, since statisticians care deeply about the use of numerical evidence in public debate. Data does not speak for itself – it needs people to speak honestly and carefully on its behalf. A misunderstood statistic could have terrible consequences – in health, wealth and justice. By contrast, better statistics should lead to better debate and, we hope, better decisions. • David Spiegelhalter is chair of the Winton Centre for Risk and Evidence Communication at Cambridge. Anthony Masters is statistical ambassador for the Royal Statistical Society. Their book, Covid by Numbers: Making Sense of the Pandemic With Data, is published by PenguinOf the handful of historic working farms in the UK, Acton Scott Farm is perhaps the best known. The Shropshire farm was the setting for the BBC series Victorian Farm, and generations of schoolchildren have visited the rolling Shropshire hills to see the shire horses plough the fields and the dairymaid milk the cows. Yet the future of the farm is in serious doubt. Shropshire council, which runs the farm, shut it down in June after an outbreak of E coli and there are no plans to reopen it. In the coming weeks, the council will launch a consultation inviting the public to come up with ideas about how to fund Acton Scott Farm, which it says loses £168,000 a year. But campaigners are desperate to ensure the survival of England’s first historic working farm, where workers in period costume demonstrate traditional skills and use horse-drawn ploughs to work the land and manage the rare breed livestock. Already there are concerns among the villagers in Church Stretton that the decision has in effect been taken. Shropshire council’s cabinet had been due to consider an “options appraisal” in November, but the decision was delayed by the byelection caused by Owen Paterson’s resignation as the MP for North Shropshire. This month’s consultation was announced only after a local campaign had begun. Some of the farm animals have already been sold. The flock of six pygmy goats is gone. Of the five Gloucester Old Spot pigs, only two are left. The Shropshire sheep, the Dairy Shorthorn cattle and the pair of magnificent shire horses remain, as do the ducks, geese and chickens, although they are in lockdown to avoid becoming infected with bird flu. Shropshire council said that animals are sold regularly as part of the farm’s stock management programme and the majority of the rare breed animals have remained. The campaign to save the farm was started by Alice Walker, a barmaid in Church Stretton who has been a regular visitor since she was a child. “It’s a really special place,” she said. “You can see them tacking up the horses and ploughing the ground, then drilling it with old drills. We have visitors from all over – Australia, America – there’s a big Canadian following.” The farm was founded in 1975 by Tom Acton, whose family has owned the farm estate for more than 900 years. His ancestor, Richard Acton, built the family’s Elizabethan manor house in 1580. Acton, who died last year aged 95, had been keen to retain traditional farm methods and had built a collection of Victorian seed drills and ploughs. It was picked by the BBC for Victorian Farm, a series charting a year when the historian Ruth Goodman and archaeologists Alex Langlands and Peter Ginn lived on the farm reliving the experience of Victorian farmers. The farm also offers training and qualifications in traditional rural crafts and trades, from stone masonry to wheelwrighting, and Walker did an NVQ there when she was young. “We started to hear whispers,” Walker said. “We had the Covid closures, and then the E coli outbreak. I thought it was slipping off the radar and it might have closed without anybody realising it was even an option. So I started a group. “I thought it would be me and my mum shouting in a room, but we had 1,000 Facebook members in less than a month.” The group has had all sorts of support – from a woman whose mother donated her old English game chickens to the farm when it opened to people whose grandfather was educated in the schoolhouse. The Rare Breed Survival Trust has also offered its support, and the chief executive, Christopher Price, wrote to the council last month, urging it to “ensure that the farm remains safeguarded for the future”. The E coli outbreak in June involved two visits and a council health and safety report recommended “essential works” costing £130,000 were required. Shropshire council said that visitor numbers peaked at around 45,000 a year in 2009, when Victorian Farm first aired. However, since then, numbers have fallen to an average of 20,000 a year since 2014, the council said. A spokesperson said: “Shropshire council, like many other local authorities, is facing an extremely challenging financial future and it is in this climate that an options appraisal has been undertaken to determine whether an alternative commercially viable model is achievable.” Cecilia Motley, Shropshire council’s cabinet member for communities, culture, leisure and tourism, and transport, said: “Shropshire council recognises the value Acton Scott holds for many people and is committed to supporting the landowners and the local community over the coming months and we look forward to hearing thoughts and suggestions when we open discussion in the new year.” Francis Acton, for the Acton Scott Estate, said: “It is clear that there is a large community who have a great affection for the historic working farm. The Acton family will support the consultation and work with Shropshire council to explore future options.”“The poor are always with us. So speaks the man who has not learned to use a whip correctly!” And also thus spake the unsung genius comedian Simon Munnery, in character in his 90s parody of impotent bedsit fascism, The League Against Tedium. The act seems arguably less satirical today as its best lines have become actual government thinking. What is Priti Patel’s proposed Channel migrant policy if not, however it is dressed up in the sterile language of info-deterrence and reasonable force and common sense and re-seized sovereignty and taking back control, merely cudgelling children back into the cold sea to die, the Kindertransport in satanic reverse? But what are we to do with the poor, who have the temerity to seem especially visible over the festive season, the smelly bastards? A week before Christmas, I waited in the small hours at a bus stop outside Dalston’s Rio cinema, having spoken at the Covid-decimated London premiere of a film I wrote, King Rocker (“the new gold standard for rockumentaries” – the Scotsman). A babbling woman in a bobble hat approached me for money and, it being Christmas, I fished in my pocket. After all, it was highly likely the exuberant lich was in fact a manifestation of Christ himself, come to test my generosity, something that I am convinced has happened to me on several previous occasions. I would not banish this Dalston Christ to the lowly stable. I would welcome her at my Christmas Inn of Spare Change. For I am a good man. Sadly, the only cash I had on me was a sizable Scottish £10 note, having just got back from Glasgow, which I was reluctant to part with. Even the disguised Christ would probably consider such ostentatious generosity over the top, the work of a whited sepulchre. I’m not made of money, especially after two years of no live gigs and the cost of the resultant need to drink heavily in order to compensate for the withdrawal of the massed nightly adoration of strangers. Nonetheless, I didn’t see any way out of the increasingly awkward situation except to hand the money over, as I was wary of being judged as ungenerous by the other two people at the bus stop, who might also have been further manifestations of the Christ. Perhaps they were appearing together as the holy trinity: the father, the son and the babbling woman in the bobble hat? “What the fuck is this?” said my beggar Christ, angrily, on receiving the money, divine but nonetheless a Cockney, and thus culturally baffled by unfamiliar sterling, and also excellent at swearing. “It’s a Scottish £10 note,” I said, before adding: “If you can’t use it I’ll have it back,” sensing a way of getting my money returned while nonetheless having made the kind of generous offer that would secure me a decent placing in St Peter’s judgmental ledger. “No, no, you’re all right,” said Christ, scuttling off into the Dalston dark with my Scotch dosh. But the dilemmas didn’t end there. “I’ll have a tenner if you’re giving them away,” shouted a tall man at the other end of the bus stop, angrily. “I didn’t mean to give her £10, it was all I had,” I said, defensively, realising it was possible to interpret my unintended generosity as offensively profligate. But then, realising the man may also be yet another Christ, attempting to provoke me into revoking the moral worth of my charity, I quickly added: “But it is Christmas, so if you can’t give a beggar £10 at Christmas when can you?” But the angry Christ continued. “They just spend it on crack. That’s where she’s gone now, to a crack den. You’re a fucking idiot.” Then an old woman Christ, who until now had been sitting quietly on the artfully angled bus sheltered seat, “defensively designed” to be just too thin and too slippery to enable a homeless person to sleep on it, piped up: “It’s fucking Christmas, let him give his fucking money to whoever he wants.” This, of course, would be exactly what Christ would say, albeit in less-colourful language. Could both my Dalston bus-stop debaters be Christ? Yes, if you subscribe to the Manichaean doctrine of dualism, made manifest here tonight, an inexplicable theological survival, in this east London street. The angry man and the kind woman continued to argue with each other as my bus arrived and I slipped away unnoticed, leaving behind me a scatological street-level reimagining of Radio 4’s bloodless Moral Maze, passionate debate replacing masturbatory self-congratulation, educated arrogance and Baroness Fox. But what is to be done? Will it be the be-jumpered LadBaby, loyally singing about inoffensive sausage rolls at No 1 for the Trussell Trust food banks every Christmas for all eternity now, without addressing the roots of the poverty their offal-inclusive songs seek temporarily to alleviate? Or will the novelty-single-loving British public join the dots and condemn the policies that create the need for both food banks, and the meat and pastry music of LadBaby, and vote out those responsible, who explicitly see wealth as a reward for virtue and poverty as punishment for laziness? On its website, the Trussell Trust’s own “strategic plan” is cautious to avoid direct political comment, anxious, I expect, to avoid being made into a culture war pawn by the usual unscrupulous bad faith operators on the right. Shadows take my hand and mist is on the land. Do we just wait until Christ comes back, with his baked-bean hampers and his top-down plan to end poverty? Until then, we live in a crumbling city built not on rock, but on sausage rolls. Rescheduled national 2022 dates of Stewart’s 2020 tour, Snowflake Tornado, are on sale now; the autumn 2022 London dates of his 2023 tour, Basic Lee, are also on sale; the King Rocker soundtrack album can be ordered here; Stewart Lee winter hats are available hereA charity founded by Denise Coates, the billionaire boss of online gambling firm Bet365, has reduced its donations to good causes from £9m to £6m, despite its reserves swelling by almost 50% to £568m. Accounts filed at Companies House detail the charitable activity of the foundation set up by Coates, Britain’s best-paid woman, whose £421m pay-and-dividend package for 2020 took her earnings beyond £1bn in four years. Divisions of her Stoke-based Bet365 empire donated £100m to the Denise Coates Foundation in the year to 28 March 2021, the accounts show, while investments held by the charity grew in value by £86.5m. The twin windfalls meant that the reserves of the charity, founded in 2014, soared from £385.3m to £568.4m, a rise of 48%. The volume of charitable donations declined, however, falling from £9m in 2020 to £6.2m. The accounts state that donations were “constrained” because the organisations the charity funds have been restricted in their activities. The volume of grants was expected to “bounce back” in future years, the foundation said. While the reserves of the Denise Coates Foundation increased by £183m, according to the accounts, the charities regulator does not have strict policies on how much should be held relative to donations. Charity Commission guidance published in 2016 stresses there is “no single level, or even a range of, reserves that is right for all charities”. According to the guidance, organisations with bigger reserves than necessary could re-examine spending and “trustees must consider whether the purposes of the charity should be amended to enable the charity to operate more effectively”. The Denise Coates Foundation does address the volume of reserves it holds in comments attached to its accounts. It states that the charity’s policy is to use the donations it receives from the Coates family business empire to build up its reserves of cash and investments, which rose from £385.3m to £568.3m. Any income and gains on investments is then distributed over the course of one to five years. “This policy should allow the foundation to operate on an enduring basis without being dependent on donations from any one source,” the accounts state. During the year, the charity increased the amount of “unrestricted” funds available for donations by £15.5m to £20.2m. Donations made in 2021 included £1.9m to University Hospitals of North Midlands, the NHS trust in Stoke-on-Trent, the home of the Coates family, who own Stoke City football club and have based Bet365 there. In April last year, Denise Coates, who is worth more than £8bn together with her family, announced a £10m donation to the trust, to support staff battling the coronavirus pandemic. Overall, the foundation made 17 donations to 12 institutions, including a £500,000 grant to the Chronic Disease Research Foundation to research Covid-19. Other recipients include the Douglas Macmillan Hospice, which received £300,000 to help fund care for 137 patients. The charity also gave £200,000 towards a Covid-19 appeal launched by Catholic overseas development organisation Cafod and £300,000 towards Kick4Life, a project building a sports stadium in Lesotho to promote social change. The charity did not make any donations to charities tackling gambling-related harm, either this year or last. Like other gambling companies, Bet365 donates to gambling-related charities via a voluntary industry-wide levy, which campaigners have said should be mandatory, in order to address the lack of treatment options for gambling addicts in the UK. The company’s roots are in the network of bookmaking operations started by Peter Coates in Stoke-on-Trent. His daughter Denise is credited with spotting the opportunities offered by taking bets online, building Bet365 into a pioneering and hugely profitable betting firm with global reach. Bet365 reported an 8% fall in revenue to £2.81bn last year, partly due to the cancellation of sporting events due to the Covid pandemic. Operating profit fell by 74% to £194.7m, down from £758.3m in 2019. The Guardian has approached a representative of Bet365 for comment.Cringletie House Hotel, Peeblesshire It’s said that soldiers returning from the Crimea brought back Cringletie’s first snowdrops. Thanks to a 30-year restoration programme of the garden, the grounds of this 28-acre estate in the Scottish borders are generously filled with them, and the nature trail is free for everyone. Other highlights include a walled garden dating from the 16th century, and 19th-century Cringletie House has 16 delightful rooms, afternoon tea and warming fires. Doubles from £250 B&amp;B, cringletie.com Walsingham Abbey, Norfolk Mixed in with the ruins of a 13th-century ruined monastery, this is one of East Anglia’s best places to surround yourself with snowdrops. Spread over 18 acres, including by an ancient packhorse bridge, woods and under the Dell Gate, millions of snowdrops have divided and thrived over the centuries. The neighbouring village of Little Walsingham also embraces snowdrops in its gardens and greens, and the Black Lion is a poshed-up pub with rooms (doubles from £125 B&amp;B). Adult £6, walsinghamabbey.com Easton Walled Gardens, Lincolnshire On a sunny day, areas of Easton are sheltered enough for a snowdrop’s delicate honeyed scent to emerge. A snowdrop sanctuary for more than 500 years, Easton’s gardens open again on 11 February 2022, with cafés and shops in addition to 12 acres of bulb-filled grounds. For those who want to linger, cabins with views across the snowdrops are available for the day for up to six people, with chairs and blankets. Linger longer in Easton’s coach house, converted into three open-plan apartments (from £80 a night), or its gate house (from £92; sawdays.co.uk) for access to the gardens after the day visitors have left. Adult £8.25, visiteaston.co.uk Painswick Rococo Garden, Gloucestershire First laid out in the 18th century, defiantly asymmetrical and filled with pastel-coloured gothic follies, Painswick is Britain’s only surviving rococo garden. In the middle of a valley with paths, streams and beech trees, over five million snowdrops emerge each year, providing an austere but wonderfully unified colour scheme. Walking distance from the gardens, the Falcon Inn (doubles from £139 B&amp;B; thefalconpainswick.com) has a full complement of Cotswold honeyed stone charm to augment a visit. Adult £9.60, rococogarden.org.uk Anglesey Abbey, Cambridgeshire Possibly introduced by the Romans, beloved by medieval monks and seized on by Victorians, winter-flowering snowdrops (Galanthus) are the first heralds of coming spring. This National Trust estate, with the remains of a 13th-century priory, Jacobean mansion, water mill and gardens, has one of Britain’s best collections – more than 2,000 varieties of the delicately drooping white flower. Of particular note is the rare Galanthus lagodechianus, discovered by former head gardener Richard Ayres on the site of the garden’s Victorian rubbish heap, which can now be seen in all its snowy glory. Adult from £10, nationaltrust.org.uk Castle Bromwich Hall Gardens, West Midlands Brum’s best snowdrops can be found in the gardens of this Jacobean mansion; their flowering marks the arrival of spring and is celebrated by family days at the weekend. But these gardens, rediscovered and rescued by locals in the 1980s, – open Wednesdays to Sundays – are a joy to visit at any time of year, with volunteer-led tours, evening candlelight walks and a courtyard cafe serving warm drinks and snacks. Adult £4, castlebromwichhallgardens.org.uk Wrest Park, Bedfordshire Snowdrops spread naturally – as long as they have trees to cluster around – and this English Heritage property provides perfect incubation conditions. They have plenty of winter company here, too; frost-tolerant companions include crab apples, scarlet berries and balls of mistletoe, while in the greenhouses, the early camellias are beginning to flower. In the grounds, Wrest Park has the well-named Gardener’s House which allows you to explore the grounds after hours (sleeps six, three nights from £625). Adult from £12.60, english-heritage.org.uk Tregoose, Cornwall Thanks to the warming effects of the Gulf Stream, Cornwall’s snowdrops generally flower before anywhere else in Britain. Head to the Roseland peninsula and you’ll start to see them in mid-January. In Tregoose, a garden built over 30 years by Alison O’Connor, they mingle with daffodils, including the early-flowering Cedric Morris. Alison and her husband, Anthony, have B&amp;B rooms in their Regency home and it’s close to other renowned gardens. Doubles from £120, B&amp;B, tregoose.co.uk Shaftesbury, Dorset A series of walks has been created to celebrate this famously hilly Dorset town’s love affair with snowdrops, ranging from a short stroll around the abbey gardens to an appetite-sharpening three-mile yomp. As in previous years, the town hopes to round off the snowdrop season with a festival that mixes snowdrop-shaped lanterns, made from willow and paper, specialist talks and bulb sales. Close to the abbey, the Grosvenor Arms makes a good base (from £95, B&amp;B). shaftesburysnowdrops.org Welford Park, Berkshire This seven-acre estate, the site of a hunting lodge for Henry VIII, has had summer renown as a previous base for The Great British Bake Off. However, late winter sees its woodland and riverbanks filled with snowdrops, the earliest thought to have been planted by monks in the Norman age and more recent additions by owner Deborah Puxley. There are more than 150 different varieties for galanthophiles to discover during snowdrop season (2 February to 6 March) when the grounds are also open to the public and feature plant stalls, including specialist nurseries on some days. Adult £10, welfordpark.co.ukReal heroes don’t wear capes, but they do bring duvets. Such as Bex Wilson and her dad, Mark, who spent the night before Christmas bringing beds and duvets to children who would otherwise have been sleeping on the floor or in a bathtub. “It surprises people how many kids in Leeds don’t have beds. It surprised me,” said Wilson. On Christmas Eve alone, the pair delivered beds to 17 children across Leeds. It would have been 21 beds but one family had a bug infestation so bad it was better to wait before delivering new ones. The week before Christmas, the charity Wilson founded with friends delivered 50 beds. Since 2018 the organisation, Zarach, has given more than 1,400 beds, mattresses, duvets and sheets to families and children who had little prospect of getting them any other way. A teacher at a primary school in Burmantofts, Leeds, Wilson was stunned to find that children in her classes were living in such desperate circumstances. “There was a little boy who was normally fine, and he was having a bad morning, being moody and short with his classmates. So I said to him at the end of the lesson, are you OK? Are you tired? And he just said: ‘I’m always tired, Miss, I don’t have a bed.’ That’s exactly how he said it. “I couldn’t believe it and said, what do you mean you don’t have a bed? And he pulled up his jumper and showed me infected sores on his stomach that were bed bug bites, from him and his brother and his sister sharing an infested sofa cushion on the floor in his house.” Not able to believe the lack of support, even in a city such as Leeds with all its resources, Wilson decided to act. Her father had a van and a connection to a bed factory, so after consulting her headteacher and the pupil’s mother, she set off. “I honestly thought then that I’d go into this house and there would be a space in each bedroom where the beds should go, and that I’d feel like a super teacher for delivering these beds,” she said. “But when we went in the house to deliver the beds, the only thing in the house was one white plastic garden chair. There was no other furniture. I thought, they must have just moved in. But the mum explained that they had been there for months. “It was quite late when we got there. The mum got up on the white plastic chair and took the lightbulb out of the socket in the downstairs living room, and she went upstairs and put it in there because she only had one working light bulb.” The mother, a single parent, had been the victim of fraud and moved to an unfurnished house to save money. Wilson found there was no food in the house other than some milk. “I left absolutely shell-shocked, that a child I’d been teaching for weeks and known for a long time, that this was what he was living through. It changed the rest of my life.” A few weeks later the mother appeared at the school gates and pressed some cash into Wilson’s hand. “I said I don’t want paying back, and she said: ‘No, I’m giving you this so that you can buy them for some other families like mine.’” Wilson said she resisted the idea of starting a charity to provide beds. “I thought: there can’t be that many kids without beds, it’s 21st-century Britain. How bad can it be?” But previous research by the Buttle UK trust ranked Leeds as one of the worst areas for “bed poverty” in the UK, with more than 5,000 children in the city living without beds. A nagging feeling that something needed to be done led Wilson and some friends to set up Zarach, but they found themselves having to make difficult decisions: “There were many times when we were weighing up, well this child is sleeping in the bathtub or this child is sleeping on a beanbag, but we’d only got money to buy a bed for one.” While Wilson remains a committed full-time teacher and deputy head, support for Zarach has grown so that it can afford to pay a small number of staff and has expanded to offer food clubs, emergency gas and electricity supplies, a school uniform exchange and holiday projects. The Covid pandemic has led to an increase in demand, in particular from the number of families fleeing domestic abuse, according to Wilson. “I went to a house last week, there was no carpet, no furniture, no curtains on any windows, just nothing, a couple of bin liners of clothes, and that was it. But the parent was so happy – she said: ‘I feel like I’ve won the lottery, I’ve been living in a hotel for six months with three children in one room, because I fled domestic abuse, and I’ve just been given this house by the council in time for Christmas.’” While local authorities do their best, Wilson says they are overwhelmed by the demands they face. Zarach has now expanded outside Leeds, to Dewsbury in West Yorkshire and Romford in east London, where it hopes to apply the lessons Wilson and her colleagues have learned. Zarach, Wilson explains, is the Hebrew word for rising light, from a verse in the book of Isaiah that helping the hungry and oppressed rises a light in the darkness. The inspiration came from the first mother, who needed to move her only lightbulb for the bed delivery. “She said: ‘You were the light in my darkest day, and I’ll never forget that.’ And that’s what I wanted everything that Zarach did to try and be, to bring hope in desperate situations.”Axel Tuanzebe, the Manchester United defender, is set to join Napoli on loan, putting to an end his spell at Aston Villa. Tuanzebe, 24, was due to spend the season at Villa in his third loan spell at the club but he has been redirected to Serie A, where Napoli will pay a €500,000 fee to loan him until the end of the 2021-22 season. The former England U21 player spent last season at his parent club, making 18 appearances, but returned last summer to the club for whom he played during two separate spells in the 2017-18 and 2018-19 seasons. He has played just six times this season, and Dean Smith, the manager who brought him back to Villa, has since been replaced by Steven Gerrard. The Napoli loan, with paperwork completed, does not include an option to buy the player. Tuanzebe is set to undergo a medical.A hundred-plus years before cat memes became ubiquitous, the work of the artist Louis Wain was the advance guard in a feline charm offensive. His playful, anthropomorphised illustrations of grinning kittens took Victorian society by storm. This suitably eccentric biopic from director Will Sharpe (written by Simon Stephenson and Sharpe), with Benedict Cumberbatch in the title role, takes Wain’s art as an initial visual key, but goes further, using everything from a heightened palette to woozy Dutch camera angles to shimmering auras to convey Wain’s unsteady mental state. The artist was, not to put too fine a point on it, delusional. As the film tells it, he believed that cats were evolving to communicate with humans, and that they would ultimately turn blue; he was obsessed with the idea of electricity, but believed it to be a free-floating entity that drifted around the ether. But in all the churning chaos in Wain’s mind, there was a place of calm reserved for his wife, Emily (Claire Foy). Through her, and their all-too-brief marriage, he was able to tune out the noise and into the beauty of the world around him. Like Wain’s art, the film is superficially twee – characters are referred to as “nosy poseys” at one point – but under the kitsch is something more rewarding: an affecting portrait of a creative but troubled man. • This article was amended on 6 January 2022 because an earlier version referred to Will Sharpe as “co-writer” of the film but did not credit the writer Simon Stephenson.A whistleblower in the Canadian province of New Brunswick has warned that a progressive neurological illness that has baffled experts for more than two years appears to be affecting a growing number of young people and causing swift cognitive decline among some of the afflicted. Speaking to the Guardian, an employee with Vitalité Health Network, one of the province’s two health authorities, said that suspected cases are growing in number and that young adults with no prior health triggers are developing a catalog of troubling symptoms, including rapid weight loss, insomnia, hallucinations, difficulty thinking and limited mobility. The official number of cases under investigation, 48, remains unchanged since it was first announced in early spring 2021. But multiple sources say the cluster could now be as many as 150 people, with a backlog of cases involving young people still requiring further assessment. “I’m truly concerned about these cases because they seem to evolve so fast,” said the source. “I’m worried for them and we owe them some kind of explanation.” At the same time, at least nine cases have been recorded in which two people in close contact – but without genetic links – have developed symptoms, suggesting that environmental factors may be involved. One suspected case involved a man who was developing symptoms of dementia and ataxia. His wife, who was his caregiver, suddenly began losing sleep and experiencing muscle wasting, dementia and hallucinations. Now her condition is worse than his. A woman in her 30s was described as non-verbal, is feeding with a tube and drools excessively. Her caregiver, a nursing student in her 20s, also recently started showing symptoms of neurological decline. In another case, a young mother quickly lost nearly 60 pounds, developed insomnia and began hallucinating. Brain imaging showed advanced signs of atrophy. The Vitalité employee, who asked not to be named because they were unauthorized to speak publicly and feared repercussions for speaking out, said they decided to come forward because of growing concerns over the speed with which young people have deteriorated. “This is not a New Brunswick disease,” said the employee. “We’re probably the area that is raising the flag because we’re mostly rural and in an area where people might have more exposure to environmental factors.” But in January, the province of New Brunswick is widely expected to announce that the cluster of cases, first made public last year after a memo was leaked to the media, is the result of misdiagnoses, which have mistakenly grouped unrelated illnesses together. The Special Neurodegenerative Disorder Clinic, also called the Mind Clinic, in the city of Moncton is the clearing house for cases referred from within the region as well as neighbouring provinces. Prospective cases have typically stumped doctors and resisted a battery of standardized neurological tests used to rule out certain conditions. Using a case description guideline developed by a team of neurologists and epidemiologists, the clinic decides if the patients warrant further investigation or if they may have a known illness or disease. Determining who becomes part of the cluster is subjective, largely because the brain is notoriously difficult to study. Certainty is often only obtained after the patient dies and the cerebral tissue can be fully tested. Despite the striking details surrounding the newer cases, the province has worked to tamp down fears. In October, officials suggested that the eight fatal cases were the result of misdiagnosis, arguing that instead of suffering from a shared neurological illness, the victims had died of known and unrelated pathologies. But experts familiar with the cluster are alarmed, largely because of the age of the patients. Neurological illnesses are rare in young people. “The fact that we have a younger spectrum of patients here argues very strongly against what appears to be the preferred position of the government of New Brunswick – that the cases in this cluster are being mistakenly lumped together,” said a scientist at the Canada’s public health agency, who specializes in neurodegenerative illnesses but was unauthorized to speak. In October the province also said an epidemiological report suggested there was no significant evidence of any known food, behaviour or environmental exposure that could explain the illness. Tim Beatty’s father Laurie, a retired hardware employee, died in 2019 after the onset of mental confusion around Christmas marked the beginning of his rapid deterioration. Beatty says the family was “gobsmacked” when he learned his father was one of eight people a pathologist controversially declared was improperly diagnosed and had instead died of Alzheimer’s. Beatty and his sister have pleaded to have their father’s remains tested for neurotoxins, including β-Methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA), which some have suggested could be the culprit behind the illness. In one study, high concentrations of BMAA were found in lobster, an industry that drives the economies of many of New Brunswick’s coastal communities. The province’s apparent resistance to testing for suspected environmental factors has led to speculation among families that the efforts to rule out the existence of a cluster could be motivated by political decision making. “If a group of people wanted to breed conspiracy theorists, then our government has done a wonderful job at promoting it,” said Beatty. “Are they just trying to create a narrative for the public that they hope we’ll absorb and walk away from? I just don’t understand it.” Documents obtained through freedom of information requests and seen by the Guardian showed scientists at the country’s public health agency were considering BMAA as a possible cause, but needed the province to order the testing. “I don’t know why the province wouldn’t just simply do the science and look. They have my dad’s remains. We’ve given them full permission to do toxicology and do what needs to be done,” said Beatty. “Yet, nothing has been looked at.” But experts nonetheless warn that testing itself is also more difficult than the public realizes. While some medical tests can provide quick and definite results other types of investigation require far more work. “What people are talking about really amounts to a full research investigation, because then we know what we’re looking for precisely,” said the federal scientist who was familiar with both the cluster and the testing process. “Right now we don’t have a way to interpret simple data that you might get when testing a person’s brain tissue for a particular toxin. For example, how much are ‘elevated’ levels of a neurotoxin compared to the rest of the public? And when does that become a cause for concern?” The scientist said teams are ready to begin the research, but “New Brunswick has specifically told us not to go forward with that work”. Those familiar with the cluster are bracing for a January report, written by the province’s oversight committee, which will determine if the 48 cases are genuinely suffering from a neurological illness or the result of misdiagnosis by neurologists. Amid mounting tension between specialists and the provincial government, a source familiar with the Mind Clinic say the postings for several jobs at the clinic – a social worker, an administrator and a neuropsychologist – were recently made temporary, the budget would no longer be recurrent and the clinic would be converted into a Alzheimer’s and geriatric clinic. Health minister Dorothy Shephard told reporters on 1 December that speculation the clinic would be shut down was untrue. “We keep telling the patients that the country is behind them, and that the tests will be done so that we can figure this out. We tell them we will get to the bottom of this so that we can help them,” said the Vitalité employee. “And so far, that hasn’t happened. But they need us.”In the weeks after my grandfather died in 2019, I spent a melancholy few days sorting through the “Gramps” section of my filing cupboard, mainly the many letters he’d sent to me over the years. It was a way, I suppose, of continuing the 40-year conversation we’d had about books, of keeping his voice loud in my mind. One letter struck me with particular force, though – a page and a half in response to a short story I’d sent him aged 10. It was typical of his letters about my writing: warm yet forthright in its criticism, even at this early stage showing something that I came to recognise as a gift – the fact that he took me seriously as an author, that this was feedback from one writer to another. It’s one of the central messages in Cathy Rentzenbrink’s wise and generous book about the writer’s life, Write it All Down; this idea that one of the hardest things for a writer to do is to take themselves and their work seriously. There is, as she acknowledges early on here, an awful lot of snake oil sold in the creative writing industry: “Books that are too focused on structure make me want to cry,” she says. “Their authors seem to enjoy discussing the classical three-act structure, protagonists and antagonists and all that, but it is just too cold a way to go about things for me, and I know it would never lead to anything good.” Write it All Down is not a book that gives you structure; rather it helps the aspirant writer fashion a vessel into which they might safely pour the contents of their heart. In a series of short, chatty chapters, Rentzenbrink doles out advice that conveys one central message: that in writing, we become writers. This is not a book whose intended audience has had the privilege of a creative writing MA (or a sternly encouraging grandfather); it’s for anyone who picks up a pen, or sits before the ominously blank computer screen, and wonders if they have it in them to write. Rentzenbrink’s own background is salutary: her father was a miner who couldn’t read or write for most of his life. Her youth was marked with tragedy, as recorded in her devastating memoir The Last Act of Love. She is now a furiously productive author – since that memoir in 2015 she has written four other books, including a brilliantly caustic first novel, Everyone Is Still Alive. Rentzenbrink teaches classes on life writing for Arvon, and at Kestle Barton in Cornwall, and reading Write it All Down feels like a decent second best to being in the classroom with her. She is disarmingly frank about both the limitations of creative writing as an academic discipline – “I don’t have all the answers and don’t believe that anyone does” – and on the challenges of entering an industry that is perhaps the most competitive and least well remunerated of any. Not to mention the physical and mental challenges of getting anything down on paper at all – “almost all writers exist in a continual vortex of despair and doubt”. What Write it All Down does more than anything, though, is to make the reader – the writer! – feel part of a community. Rentzenbrink peppers her work with thoughtful answers to the questions that get in the way of writing: “Should I work if I am ill? What about when depressed? How do I know if I’m doing it right? I keep getting stuck… I’m so confused!” At the end there are messages of solidarity and inspiration from a host of other writers, from Lucy Mangan to Matt Haig to Maggie O’Farrell. They underline the collaborative, confidence-building ethos of the book, which provides an arm around the shoulder as we struggle with that most difficult of things: the “tricky, slippery business” of writing. Write it All Down: How to Put Your Life on the Page by Cathy Rentzenbrink is published by Pan Macmillan (£14.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyA new tax rule will impact millions of small businesses in 2022. You can thank one small change buried in the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021. Let’s suppose you’re a small business owner or freelancer, and you get paid from a digital payment service like PayPal, Venmo, Zelle, Cash App or any third-party settlement provider that’s accepting credit cards on your behalf and putting money into your bank account. If those payments were for goods and services that you sold to customers, it was previously up to you to make sure you were reporting that income on your tax return. But now, beginning in 2022, if you receive more than $600 in total during the course of the year – regardless of how many customers are paying – your payment service is required to report that amount to the IRS. Let’s be clear: you should be reporting those amounts as income anyway. But the reality is there are 30 million small businesses, freelancers, solo-preneurs and independent contractors in the US and – if my client base is any indication – many of them who receive a number of small payments from many customers throughout the year may, well, forget. Particularly if – as is often the case – there are many small transactions or their record keeping is sub-par. But no worries! The IRS will now be able to find out what you earned anyway. This means that whether you’re selling products or services on Amazon, Etsy , eBay or at craft shows or just face-to-face, you can now expect to receive a 1099-K form – after 31 January 2023 – from the payment services that you’re using of the revenue they reported on your behalf to the IRS for the purchases of goods and services made in 2022. How do these services know that the purchases were made for goods and services and not just a payment from a friend or family member? Most of them are adding an extra form during the payment process for the payer to identify the nature of the payment. You can also expect more questions this year from your payment service provider. “You may notice that in the coming months we will ask you for your tax information, like a social security number or tax ID, if you haven’t provided it to us already, in order to continue using your account to accept payments for the sale of goods and services transactions and to ensure there aren’t any issues when these changes take effect in 2022,” PayPal warns in a blogpost. This helps us meet our obligations to the IRS and ensures that you will be able to continue using your account and access PayPal and Venmo features and services.” There will be some overlap. For example, if you’re an independent contractor working for a company and you receive more than $600 via a payment service then you’ll likely get both a 1099-MISC from that company and a 1099-K from the payment service. In this situation you’d use the amount on the 1099-MISC and, assuming there are no other amounts from the payment service, you’d disregard the 1099-K. Got it? So what will the government do with this information? Nothing bad, I’m sure. They just want to know more about you and your business, that’s all! According to the IRS the data collected will only be used for “taxpayer education and outreach products and services” as well as “new examination and collection approaches”. Translation: if you’re not reporting the right amount we’re gonna get ya! “For the 2022 tax year, you should consider the amounts shown on your 1099-K when calculating gross receipts for your income tax return,” PayPal warns. “The IRS will be able to cross-reference both our report and yours.” Happy new year, everyone!Hang on, wait there a minute, I want to show you something,” says Gabriela Hearst, hopping up from her chair in her airy Manhattan office and reaching for something on the shelves in the background of her Zoom frame. “These are my journals from when I was 16 or 17 – let me check the date, um 1993, yes I was 17 and look!” She flattens a page full of colourful teenage drawings and holds it up to the camera: “I designed a whole freaking shoe collection!” That these journals remain within reaching distance of the fashion designer’s desk in her Chelsea studio is testament to the fact that despite the success she has achieved, Hearst never forgets where she came from. As creative director of her award-winning brand, founded in 2015, and a year into the same prestigious role at the fashion house Chloé, it would be an understatement to say that Hearst is hot property in the fashion world right now. Not only can she count the likes of Angelina Jolie, Gillian Anderson, Greta Thunberg and Jill Biden as fans of her brand (she dressed the latter in the embroidered white coat for the evening of the 2020 inauguration), but she is making all the right kind of fashion headlines for her determination to demonstrate to an industry famed for its unsustainable practices that sustainable innovation can make good business sense, too. It’s also a serious asset that her husband, John Augustine Hearst – a senior member of the Hearst Corporation and an heir to one of the wealthiest families in America – is involved in the self-financed company. Since day one of her eponymous brand, which is famed for its luxe-craft aesthetic, she has raised the bar for how to run a luxury fashion house sustainably. She has set a goal to use 80% deadstock fabric within three years and no virgin materials by 2022. Her first fashion-week catwalk in 2016 – where she brought chairs from her house and donated the metal floorboards from the show when it was over – laid the foundations for the first-ever carbon-neutral fashion show in September 2019. Earlier that same year her brand declared itself plastic-free, “front and back of house”, using recycled cardboard hangers and bio-based TIPA packaging that is fully compostable. And she has re-romanticised the idea of waiting lists, making her handbags more or less to order to avoid any waste. It’s a passion which comes from the bucolic childhood that Hearst likes to keep as close to heart as she does to hand. Born into a sixth generation of ranchers in remote Uruguay in November 1976, she spent her childhood living pretty much off the grid, herding cattle from a young age at her parents’ 17,000-acre ranch in Paysandú. “It is extremely remote,” she emphasises. “When I was a kid and it would rain, you wouldn’t get out because the rivers would flood. We would have to plan a whole year of what we would eat because you couldn’t just pop to the supermarket or deli.” In the absence of a TV, the radio provided entertainment, while for the designer, “My toy was my imagination,” she says. “A lot of the creativity I have today is from using my imagination [back then]. Imagination is all problem solving, right? On a ranch you have to use it a lot; you can’t just bring in an expert if something doesn’t work. That time taught me that essentially quality comes from a utilitarian perspective… and even in a humble environment there is high quality, because everything is made to last a lifetime.” This rationale – and the rhythms of following nature in her early developmental years – is what Hearst credits her appreciation of the earth and its resources to. She also has an innate understanding of how to use common sense: “Resetting your mind on what needs to be done in order to function? Ways to prioritise was ingrained in my upbringing!” she says. Such formative years would go on to create a force to be reckoned with later down the line. In 2017, she won the prestigious womenswear International Woolmark Prize; in May 2018, she won Pratt’s Fashion Visionary Award for her commitment to sustainability; in April 2019, LVMH Luxury Ventures took a minority stake in the business; she was named the Fashion Council of America’s Womenswear Designer of the Year in 2020 (the fashion equivalent to the Oscars); and last month she was named a Leader of Change at the British Fashion Awards. “This recognition humbly gives us more drive for the road ahead,” she told her followers on Instagram (where, by the way, you can find her high-kicking her way into buying meetings, demonstrating how to wear her designs, and sharing inspirational images of her mother herding criollos horses). Hearst’s own road to success, it transpires, has been as dynamic as she is. Turning the page in her journal, she proudly holds up a sketch that reads: ‘I am going to Australia!’ “When you live in Uruguay, you are really far away from everything and [when I was 17] I wanted to go to Australia like nothing else in the world. I told everyone I was going there and they said I was crazy,” she explains. “Then one day a friend told me about a scholarship that would take me there. There was one place, I applied with this whole presentation and I got it.” After returning to Uruguay, Hearst convinced her mother to let her get a paid job to save money to go and see a friend in New York who she had met during her scholarship. “I arrived [in New York] in 1994 when I was 18 and within hours I said, I am going to live here,” she says matter-of-factly. Six years later, she made the move a permanent one, enrolling at the Neighbourhood Playhouse School of the Theatre to study performing arts. After persuading her father to pay for her fees – “convincing my father who was a Gaucho to pay for acting school in New York was my best performance ever” – she worked around her studies to cover her living costs. While a career on stage proved not to be her calling, she took an important lesson from her time there. “We studied Meisner technique, which I got,” she says. “It’s the technique of being truthful – of dealing with the truth [it takes] to perform and performing from a place of truth. It was a remarkable experience and without it I wouldn’t be able to do interviews like this or be so present [today].” None of her friends or family are surprised that Hearst ended up as a fashion designer, she says, although she admits to falling into it by coincidence. Before Gabriela Hearst and long before Chloé, came Candela, the womenswear brand she started with two partners and $750 each. “At that point, if it didn’t work out, I would have needed to go back to selling cattle with my dad – so I gave it my all!” she laughs. “I don’t recommend it, but at the time it was like 0% APR and so we maxed out credit cards [to get it started]. Luckily the business went from zero to a million dollars in no time so we were able to pay it off.” It was Candela that taught Hearst the nitty gritty of supply chains and logistics, for which she is grateful, but ultimately led to disillusion. “We were making [clothes] for the contemporary market at cheap prices and low quality and there was a total disconnect for me.” In 2011, her father died and she inherited his ranch (that she still runs remotely to this day). Finding herself back in Paysandú “working with tradition, organising animals, [watching] the circle of life” she knew something had to change. “I thought about it and I said, ‘If I am going to put something new out there, it needs to be better made and with a lower environmental impact to anything else.” Four years later, and after much research and planning, her brand was born in partnership with her husband, with whom she has three children, Jack, six, and Olivia and Mia, both 13. It was with his encouragement that Hearst pursued the top job at Chloé, which came about in characteristic go-getting style. “I had one of these crazy Gabi moments when I told my future boss, ‘Look, my name is Gabi, just like the founder Gaby [Aghion] so this is it’!” she laughs. “Then of course I did a 92-page presentation and justified my thought process, but it was really meant to be because it’s a language I love.” To achieve a work-life balance while heading up two of the most successful fashion brands in the world is “very challenging”, she says. “But I have a very supportive family. My husband’s responsibilities changed and adapted so there’s definitely sacrifice.” Living a “moderated” life that includes bed by 9.30pm to get at least eight hours’ sleep a night, exercise and a healthy diet – “I mean, I’ll derail in certain pressure times and eat too many freaking gummy bears and drink too many coffees, sure” – she believes in keeping a clear head so she can “access information from the subconscious” and she picks what takes her away from home carefully. In November, Hearst spent her birthday in Glasgow on a panel at Cop26 talking about achieving climate success through low-impact business models. “To spend your birthday away from your kids is painful and so if I’m going to do it, I really wanted it to be worth it, and it was.” Her work as trustee of Save the Children since 2018 has also turned her attention to Ghana, Kenya and most recently Afghanistan. Not for the first time, she leveraged the exclusivity of her waiting lists and limited-edition designs this December and donated 100% of net proceeds across all items in her flagship stores in London and New York as well as her website to the charity’s Afghanistan Crisis Children’s Relief Fund. “I don’t like it when brands bombard me with gifting lists and things like that,” she says. “The period of the holidays is about giving and consciousness of others, so I’m not comfortable with just selling a product to make more money. Can’t we think of other people? Afghanistan is one of the places that is hell on earth right now and why do those children have to suffer? It may not be on the news now, but that doesn’t mean the problem has been eradicated.” This year, she quietly launched the Gabriela Hearst Youth Program in the States, too, to create a space for teenagers to be able to channel anxieties through teaching them about fabrics and the future of fashion design. One of her proudest accomplishments of the year, it says a lot about Hearst’s motivation for doing everything she does. Two of her main takeaways from the Cop26 summit this year were: “Anyone who fights the youth will lose” and that when it comes to the environment, we’re all supposed to leave our kids better off than when we started. “The mission is all worth it,” she says. “I can honestly say to my kids that I tried, I freaking tried.”Women today are experiencing the “inherited trauma” of the persecution and execution of their forebears who were branded as witches, according to the curator of a new exhibition on the period known as “the burning times”. Thousands of women were accused of witchcraft in the UK and Ireland between 1450 and 1750. Many were tortured until they identified relatives and neighbours as witches; those deemed guilty were hanged and, in the case of Scotland, their bodies then burned. “The burning times affected everyone within a community – men, women and children alike, not just those branded as witches,” said Cali White, the exhibition’s lead curator. “Our whole nation was traumatised and divided by what became a mass hysteria, passed down over generations. The legacy of this has left a collective wound which affects us all in some way, and which we are now being called to understand and heal.” The exhibition seeks to dispel myths of “black pointy hats, devil-worshipping and warty-nosed old women”, instead educating people in the “untold history lesson” of what happened over three centuries. “Witch-hunts affected everybody, not just the witches. It affected whole communities,” said White. It became a way to rid a community of anyone viewed as a problem. “People who questioned the authority of the church or state could easily become a target. Women learned it was safer to stay quiet than to speak up or stand out.” Women were forced to betray each other under torture. “There was fear of betrayal, fear of persecution, fear of ostracisation. And then when the hanging or the burning took place, the whole town was expected to go and watch. Can you imagine watching somebody you know being put to death in such a brutal way?” Witch-hunts “divided our communities, taught us to play small in order to survive and broke our trust in the people closest to us. The scars we still carry show up in many ways: 25 generations on, we are left feeling powerless, isolated, stuck, divided, unsafe and unsupported,” said White. In 2020, a campaign was launched in Scotland to pardon about 2,500 women who were executed, often after prolonged torture, and for a national memorial to be created. The number of accusations of witchcraft was four times higher in Scotland than elsewhere, according to Claire Mitchell QC, the campaign’s founder. According to White, there are 36 countries in the world where witch-hunts still take place, resulting in thousands of people being tortured and killed every year. Half the profits from the exhibition will be donated to charities working to stop modern-day witch-hunts. But the notion of witches was also being reclaimed as a “positive force”, said White. “There’s a younger generation that has grown up with the likes of Harry Potter, for whom being a witch has become a positive identity.” Witch groups have large followings on social media, and for some it is a “pathway to spirituality”. The centrepiece of the exhibition is a memorial comprising 4,000 hand-printed and stitched pieces of fabric, each bearing the name of a woman found in records of witch trials in the UK and Ireland. More than 1,000 women across the world were involved in making the memorial, which White described as “beautiful, very feminine and very tactile”. The exhibition, created by the Silver Spoons Collective, also includes interactive installations, painting, film, music and storytelling. “We offer a powerful opportunity for reflection and reconnection, and the chance to be part of a growing movement for social change and healing,” said White. I Am Witch is at the Storey Institute in Lancaster, 5-28 January • This article was amended on 2 January 2022, to reflect a change made to the exhibition dates. It now begins on 5 January, not 4 January as an earlier version said.Government policy towards Covid-19 has come full circle. For now, at least, England has returned to the Swedish way of dealing with the pandemic. Tough, officially imposed lockdowns are out. Trusting the people to do the sensible thing is back in. Whether this approach will survive the expected surge in hospitalisations from Christmas and New Year revelries remains to be seen. Boris Johnson is the master of the screeching U-turn and with the number of infections hitting new records pressure on Downing Street to act is growing. We have been here before. Back in the early days of the pandemic the prime minister was minded to copy Sweden, a country that imposed few restrictions and decided early on that it needed to learn to live with the virus. The prime minister’s flirtation with the “Swedish experiment” was brief, and at the end of March 2020 a draconian lockdown was imposed. Ministers knew this would have a dire impact on the economy but felt the risk of the NHS being overwhelmed left them no choice. A paper published in the online journal Scientific Reports last year examined what would have happened had Britain followed the Swedish approach. Even assuming the public here would have been as willing to adhere to non-mandatory recommendations as the Swedes (a pretty big assumption) the UK death rate would have at least doubled. This time, the decision is a lot less clearcut, not least because vaccines are providing protection from the virus. The news from South Africa, one of the countries where Omicron first surfaced, has also been encouraging. While more transmissible, the new variant has resulted in fewer hospitalisations and deaths. Case numbers, after rising rapidly, have started to decline. A degree of caution is needed when comparing the two countries, because South Africa has a much younger population than Britain, and it is summer rather than the middle of winter there. Even so, it is clear the government has set a high bar for imposing further restrictions. The prime minister’s weakened political position is one reason the government has gone Swedish. The risk of causing serious damage to the economy when it is looking particularly vulnerable is another, because this is going to be a tough year for the British public. Inflation is rising, interest rates are going up, and energy bills are expected to rocket in the spring just as Rishi Sunak’s increase in national insurance contributions comes into force. The cumulative effect is a whopping cut to living standards. According to the Resolution Foundation thinktank the average household is going to be £1,000 a year worse off. Those on the lowest incomes will be especially hard hit by soaring gas and electricity bills. In the circumstances, it is easy to see why the government is reluctant to add to the economic pain by imposing tougher restrictions to slow the spread of the Omicron variant. Fresh curbs mean slower growth and a hit to the public finances. They would also test the resilience of the labour market. The Swedes came in for a lot of criticism for their go-it-alone approach. While death rates were much lower than the initial pessimistic forecasts, they were still higher than in neighbouring Scandinavian countries, where tough restrictions were imposed. Moreover, the initial hit to the economy was as severe in liberal Sweden as it was in locked-down Denmark. That said, as the second anniversary of Covid’s arrival looms, governments are beginning to see merits in the Swedish approach. In part, that’s because Sweden now has a lower death rate than countries that went down the full lockdown route, including the UK, France, Spain and Italy. It is in the bottom half of the EU league table for deaths once the size of population is taken into account. Economic recovery has been pretty brisk. The UK is still struggling to get back to pre-Covid levels of output: Sweden had managed that by the middle of 2021. But there are other factors, too. Sweden has avoided the problem of lockdown fatigue and has not caused damage to the life chances of its children because schools were kept open for under-16s throughout the pandemic. All of which suggests the Scientific Reports paper will not be the last word on the Swedish experiment. There have been precious few upsides to the pandemic but one of them is that it has thrown up rich country-by-country data for academics from all disciplines – epidemiologists, economists, educationalists, sociologists – to examine and argue about. Even within countries different approaches have been tried. The four constituent nations of the UK have exercised their own powers, so it should soon be possible to assess the impact of closing nightclubs in Scotland and Wales, but not in England, for New Year’s Eve. EU countries have varied in their approach, while the US provides 50 states to study. What is clear is that no one country got everything right and all made mistakes, unsurprisingly enough given they weren’t expecting a global pandemic. It is also obvious, as time passes, that governments – be they in London, Edinburgh, Rome or Paris – are only tightening restrictions with reluctance. In a way, that’s a backhanded compliment to the Swedes for perhaps being on to something right from the start. • This article was amended on 4 January 2022. While Sweden kept schools open for under-16s throughout the pandemic, upper secondary schools for older students underwent periods of closure. Text has been changed to clarify this.Amid rocketing Covid infection rates, rising hospitalisation numbers and test shortages, the opening weeks of 2022 are going to be defined by the UK’s vaccine gap. According to the latest official figures, 91% of people aged over 18 in the UK have had at least one Covid jab, 88% have received two and 64% have had their third. But the 9% who have yet to be vaccinated at all accounts for about five million people, whose preponderance among those now being hospitalised is clearly a huge problem. Precise figures are a matter of debate: some senior NHS staff put the share of unvaccinated people on their wards at up to 90%, although the most recent estimates show the share of people needing critical care who are unvaccinated running at just over 60%. What cannot be doubted is that if more people were vaccinated, the latest phase of the Covid crisis would be much more manageable, and the people in charge might not be faced with such a difficult set of options. If the NHS is soon overwhelmed, tightening across-the-board restrictions might become inevitable, but it would highlight the unfairness of disrupting the lives of the vaccinated majority to protect those who are still unjabbed. Coercing people into getting vaccinated using stringent Covid passports – let alone introducing compulsory inoculation – would infuriate the Tory backbenches, make Boris Johnson’s future all but impossible, and even to many of us outside Conservative circles mark a worrying extension to the state’s reach, not least under a government as illiberal as this one. There are, in fact, no clear and easy choices, beyond retaining a vague hope that the sudden urgency of the pandemic’s latest phase might convince more people to pitch up at a vaccination centre, and keeping faith in the grassroots organisations currently doing their best to change minds. To some people, though, the issues are completely straightforward. Ten days before he was made a Knight Companion of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, Tony Blair issued a characteristically sweeping verdict: “If you’re not vaccinated and you’re eligible … you’re not just irresponsible, you’re an idiot”. He later expressed regret about his choice of words, but by then it was rather too late: he had already triggered a wave of judgment on social media, suggesting that most unvaccinated people were either reckless fools, or the unhinged disciples of those online cults that put the past two years of human history down to a quest to tighten the grip of the secret world government. Inevitably, the facts of the vaccine gap are immeasurably more complicated, as no end of statistics prove. According to the latest numbers published by the UK Health Security Agency, 30% of eligible people in Liverpool are yet to receive their first jab. In Birmingham, the figure is 33%; in the London boroughs of Newham and Tower Hamlets, about 38% and 34% respectively. Conspiracy theory and misinformation are sizeable and worrying features of the Covid era, and our politicians still say surprisingly little about them. But particularly in cities, beyond high levels of mobility and transience, figures showing large numbers of unvaccinated people reflect much deeper questions of age, class, ethnicity, faith and language – and what poverty, insecurity and institutionalised prejudice do to people’s relationship with the state. In that sense, the limits of the vaccination drive remind us of one of the most simple truths of power and politics: that if governments continually ignore fundamental issues of trust and basic empathy, any big social rupture will instantly reveal the consequences. Earlier this week, I spoke to Manisha Kumar, an inner-city GP in Manchester and the medical director of the city’s health and care commissioning partnership, which is steering a grassroots vaccination drive that involves an array of local organisations centred on the city council. The main figures she and her colleagues work with are based on people registered with a medical practice. Some come with caveats, but they show the proportion of eligible Mancunian adults who have not received even a single vaccine dose currently standing at about 30%. In more affluent areas of the city, less than 20% of eligible people have not been jabbed, but in some poorer neighbourhoods, the figures tend to hover at about 50%. In aggregate, white people who identify as English, Scottish, Welsh or British register vaccine uptake levels of more than 80%, whereas the current number for people from a Caribbean background is 52%; among those classified as Gypsy or Traveller, the figure is 28%. Such numbers, she said, only tell you so much: what is important is to get to the complex combinations of factors that make people either hesitant about vaccination, or downright hostile. “People come to this with their beliefs, their experiences of Covid, their perception of risk – there isn’t just one sort of person who hasn’t come forward,” she said. In some parts of the country, she went on, “you can just open your doors, send out a text, and people will come.” Her patch, by contrast, requires much more delicate and detailed work. “The majority of the city is hugely deprived, and lives in very small communities defined by culture, identity and geography. Knowledge of those communities is really important.” What is lacking from a lot of people’s understanding of the vaccine gap, she told me, is any real sense of the sheer weight millions of people have borne over the past two years, and how precarious their lives often are. “The pace of change, the amount of information coming out – for some people it’s just been overwhelming. They’ve gone: ‘I can’t do this – it’s too much. I’ve lost my job, I’ve got issues with domestic abuse, my children are out of school.’” She also talked about huge issues around access to the internet, made worse by vaccines being introduced during lockdown. “People didn’t have phone credit or data roaming, or wifi in their houses. So when you sent out a link saying ‘Book on the national booking service’, they couldn’t do it.” By way of getting to the heart of it all, a PowerPoint presentation she sent me made mention of “historic lack of trust in public institutions including health services within some groups and communities”. In some black communities, she said, people’s relationships with authority are so poor that that some have chosen to be vaccinated well away from where they live and work, “because they’re almost embarrassed to be vaccinated, thinking their community isn’t behind them.” She paused. “There’s no easy fix. We just keep on talking.” In a lot of what she said, there were echoes of the kind of government actions that have only furthered people’s distance from the state, from the creation of a cruel and punitive benefits system, to the hostile environment doctrine that quickly led to the Windrush scandal. Cutting spending on English tuition was always going to keep people confined to the social margins; the innumerable other ways that austerity has hacked back even the most basic everyday help has made things even worse. If you are white, middle class and confident enough to play the kind of games large institutions always demand, the state might look benign and dependably helpful. But if it usually treats you with a mixture of hostility and indifference you will tend to keep your distance, even when it says it has your best interests at heart. In the UK and elsewhere, what all that means for any attempt to make all of us move in lockstep is simple enough. The vaccine gap shows us how far we are from being a society that understands itself collectively, and how easily we still break into “us” and “them”. It demands not judgment, but a level of understanding we have yet to get near. John Harris is a Guardian columnistI had an uncle who, intermittently and not necessarily simultaneously, wore a kilt and played the violin. Each to me was exotic – twin roads to freedom from the dullness of a prosaic, southern English childhood. For a short time I took up highland dancing, with real swords and modest skill. I was seven when I begged to be allowed to join the new string class at school. Above all, I wanted the “equipment”: an eighth-sized violin and silk scarf to wrap it in, bow, spare strings, heavy wooden case with green felt lining (just as I’d wanted the kilt, jacket, sporran, jabot and special laced shoes for dancing). The other children soon dropped out, bored by playing long, slow notes on open strings. It was deadly indeed and sounded awful. There’s no quick path to becoming even a modestly accomplished violinist. Left on my own, things progressed. The nice teacher complimented me on my “good ear” as I sawed through Will Ye No Come Back Again. I won a place at the junior department of a London conservatoire, going by myself, aged 11 until I left school, every Saturday morning: negotiating public transport, having breakfast in cafes and spending the afternoon wandering up and down Charing Cross Road, wondering at the mysterious rubber “health” objects (health meaning sex) hidden at the back of seedier secondhand bookshops. It was an education. It was, too, a wonder I escaped unscathed. A few creepy flashers aside, I was left alone. The only abuse I got, looking back, was from the bullying violin teacher I was assigned. The experience of being confined in a tiny practice room with an emotionally and psychologically threatening adult is, alas, not rare for children learning musical instruments. The necessary intimacy of one-to-one lessons can be a joy or a peril, the risks only very recently brought into the open, and monitored. The same could not happen now. In my case, the problem was not sexual. This teacher, I’ll call her Mme Lorgnette – you must picture her, squeezed into the unlikely attire of gold lamé smoking jacket and matching skirt, and muddied brogues – arrived late every week, puffing and blaspheming, pulled by her charmless dog. While I struggled to play dull technical exercises, madame blew smoke rings from her cigarillos and read her newspaper, occasionally screaming “Shut up!” at the dog (or it may have been at me) as it yowled in open contest. Both dog and owner were acridly malodorous, the windowless room a fug. Every minute was torment. At the end of each session, I had to take the dog outside (“make sure it does its business”), making me late for my next lesson elsewhere in the large building. But I had a scholarship. I was lucky to be there. My parents were proud. How did one complain, by oneself, at that age? No one ever asked how I was getting on, or inspected a lesson, or wondered why my progress was so pitifully slow and lacklustre. Fortunately, I had no intention of becoming a professional violinist, for reasons of aptitude, application and self-consciousness at performing. I can’t entirely blame that teacher, but the experience closed off options. I learned less than I might have done. Yet those Saturdays were part of my identity and, in a combative way, the passport to wider horizons I so wanted. Though my playing had stalled, I loved the other lessons: the theory and orchestra and music history. Without realising, I was equipping myself for the job I would eventually have: writing about music. After I’d stopped lessons and the drudge of exams, everything changed – too late, yet just in time. I went on exciting music courses and spent every spare moment playing in student ensembles. No one shouted at me. There was, even, laughter. Music came alive, it became life. I began to play in string quartets (that is, usually, two violins, viola and cello) with friends and sometimes strangers. There’s an unrivalled pleasure in playing chamber music: a joint venture in which merely getting through can be harder, and more rewarding, than you’d ever think. New worlds opened. To forge the link between myself and the violin – by now in my first job as a journalist – I commissioned a new instrument, not a common procedure, for amateurs or professionals. I was introduced to a violin-maker, Juliet Barker, who was just establishing an important English violin-making school in Cambridge. I saved my meagre earnings each month to pay for it, and watched as, over two or more years, seasoned white wood turned to varnished gold and became an instrument. No one else has ever played that violin. It’s far superior to any I could otherwise have afforded, old Italian instruments being preeminent. It remains my prized possession. The brakes went on when children arrived. I was a violinist but one who was resting. The children grew up. I started playing again, as far as a busy schedule would allow, and reunited with the same friends. They’d gone on playing in the intervening years and opened the circle to let me back in. Then, not long ago, I smashed my left arm, the one that creates the notes. Surgery and metal worked miracles but left it stiff. A Schubert string quartet can last 40 minutes. Straightening the arm afterwards takes a bit of teeth gritting. For a professional player, that everyday accident would have ended their career. As so often in life – read Marcel Proust, read Anthony Powell – the music of time has danced its onward dance. New lodgers, models of the species, moved in, one a master luthier, or maker of stringed instruments. The quiet plucking of lute or oud sometimes wafts up through the floorboards (a rare boast in Peckham, south-east London). Could he put a little love back into my violin, neglected in lockdown? He took it off to his workshop, discovered its maker – now a revered pioneer and veteran in her 90s – and admired her craft. He renewed the glue and adjusted parts that had cracked or shifted, restoring the instrument’s tone and vitality. I can’t call playing the violin a hobby. It’s part of me, silent or not. Like everyone, I’ll make various improbable resolutions for the new year. If I can get together with friends in one room to play quartets or trios or duos, I’ll be OK. Just don’t expect me to go it alone. How to do it The rise of online lessons means that an army of tutors awaits the chance to discover your dormant virtuoso. Websites such as Music Teachers or Private Music Lessons are good places to look. Arts Council England-supported music hubs can also help you access lessons or groups in England. Many centres of musical excellence – such as Sage Gateshead and the Royal Academy of Music – offer lessons and community programmes for beginners and enthusiasts. The British Council has a list of national initiatives which might inspire you. If you’re a lapsed musician and want to find other people to play with, look at Making Music or Contemporary Music for All. Both sites let you search for groups in your area from choral societies to samba bands. Someone local will be singing your tune.According to Brazil’s 2010 census, 43% of citizens identify as mixed-race, while 30% of those who consider themselves white have black ancestors. Brazil has always wrestled with issues surrounding colourism and racial classification. Even affirmative action policies – such as race-based quotas at universities – have proved contentious. Paulo Scott explores these tensions in his latest novel, seamlessly translated by Daniel Hahn. Lourenço and Federico are from the same Porto Alegre family – their father is black, their mother white. Lourenço is dark-skinned, while Federico’s pale skin means he passes for white. Uncomfortable with the privilege this brings him, Federico works with disadvantaged black youth and dedicates his life to fighting racism. But guilt taints his close relationships and fuels his quick temper. Eventually he moves away, while his brother, a basketball coach, remains a popular figure in their neighbourhood. Phenotypes opens in 2016, at the height of the quotas controversy. Some students have used their black ancestry to abuse the scheme, while other eligible students are deemed “insufficiently brown”. Federico has been asked to sit on a government commission in Brasília charged with limiting race fraud. Meanwhile, anti-government protests are spreading across the country and a family emergency calls him back to Porto Alegre. This is an artfully plotted tale about race, privilege and guilt. Scott circles around the inflammatory event that occurred decades before – a racist comment that provoked a violent fight among teenagers – and demonstrates how quickly prejudice spreads, often with lifelong repercussions. Years later, this incident is linked to the detention of Federico’s niece for the illegal possession of a firearm. Scott’s characterisation is superb. Federico’s complexities are revealed through his interactions with others, their different views of him, his public image and inner angst. His conflicted protagonist is flawed but hugely sympathetic. The stream-of-consciousness narrative, long sentences, paragraphs that run over pages and lack of speech tags are challenging, but careful reading proves richly rewarding. Phenotypes educates and entertains in equal measure. Phenotypes by Paulo Scott (translated by Daniel Hahn) is published by And Other Stories (£10). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyIn 1989, when I was 16, I moved into a pub with my parents and my younger brother, Matty. It was highly exciting. I took to barwork as I liked the chat, and also enjoyed the opportunities offered for eavesdropping. I was curious about the adult world and up until then had learned most of what I knew from books. Now I had all these real lives to study. I should write some of this down, I thought, and would scribble into my diary before bed. We couldn’t believe how busy it was that first Christmas, culminating on New Year’s Eve, when everyone piled out into the main street at midnight and exchanged drunken embraces and warm wishes for 1990. After the pub had emptied and the mammoth job of clearing up was done, we gathered with our staff for a few drinks and the chat turned to resolutions. All the women wanted to lose weight. A couple of people wanted to stop smoking. I announced very firmly that I wanted to write a novel. I wish I could tell you what Matty said, but I can’t remember. Perhaps he pledged to strive for good GCSE results. If he did, he succeeded, as he got the best grades in school. But by the time the results came, that summer, he had been knocked over by a car and was in a coma after emergency brain surgery. I was by his bedside in intensive care, chattering away to him because everyone from the ambulance drivers onwards had suggested this might help keep him with us and then bring him around. I even tried to pray in the hospital chapel: “Please God, please. Please don’t let him die. He’s too young. He’s too good. I love him too much. Please help him.” When I wasn’t with Matty, I was at home. I could put on a brave face behind the bar, but when I was alone I gave in to my desolation. I couldn’t believe the enormity of what had happened. I had no words. I knew that unless Matty woke up I could never write anything again. The very sight of my diary made me feel sick. I flicked through the pages, hating my younger, innocent self. I bundled them all up and threw them into the skip at the back of the pub, poking them down beneath the flattened boxes and bin liners full of crisp packets and cigarette ends. Matty didn’t die, but nor did he regain consciousness. He lived on for eight years in a persistent vegetative state until my parents and I went to the family court and were granted permission to withdraw nutrition and hydration so that he could die and we could, finally, eight years after we suffered the loss of him, have a funeral. I was bereft. Over the next decade my words drifted back and I tried to make sense of what happened to Matty and how it felt to be the witness at his bedside. But it was always too hard. Surely if I was talented enough to be a writer, then it would be easier and I’d have fewer doubts. Anyway, what was the point? No one would ever want to read such a gloomy story. I tried to write novels instead, but sooner or later Matty would arrive on the page wanting to be heard. I was stuck. Every so often I’d have another go and then give up. I felt like I was destined to fail at this, as I did at everything else, that the car that knocked Matty over had taken me out, too, that I was alive, but only just, and that I couldn’t ask for too much. I’d put my notebooks away in a drawer and try to care about other things. And then, after the birth of my son, I was filled with a renewed determination. I didn’t want to keep finding myself back at the drawer and realised that the only way I could free myself from this cycle of trying and failing, was to get it all down. I made a new resolution. I just had to do it. It didn’t have to be any good, or even in the right order. And I wouldn’t show it to anyone, so I didn’t have to worry about what other people would think. I read a novel where a priest said that it is our secrets that make us sick. That’s it, I thought. I need to cleanse myself, confess everything on to the page. Only then will I feel better. It was hard. Often I felt like I was wrestling an octopus as I struggled to tame all the different tentacles of the story. I would feel tired and dispirited, but this time I could carry on, and word by word I excavated myself on to the pages, which eventually became The Last Act of Love. It was a long haul. I was 17 when Matty was knocked over, 25 when he died, and 42 when I managed to finish my book about him. And I did and do feel better. There is an astonishing sense of achievement up for grabs if we can be brave enough to make a commitment and then have the stamina to hold steady through all the ups and downs. I am still in awe at the process of writing. The first steps are so simple. We find some paper or turn on a computer. Then we put down some words and fiddle about with them and something magical starts to happen. Writing is the nearest I get to touching the divine and I do feel a little evangelical about encouraging others, so please allow me to suggest it to you as a New Year’s resolution. Much better for us in the long run than any goals around eating less or being less. Don’t resolve to shrink your body! Consider instead the benefits on offer if you are bold enough to mine the self, to disinter your secrets, to finally try to tell that story you’ve been carrying around, perhaps for as long as I did. Or, if that feels a bit much, just write down your life; make a personal record of these interesting times we are living in. What you see on your way to work, perhaps, or what you dreamed, or how you feel just before going to sleep. Three things to be grateful for, four blue things you saw that day, how you nourished yourself or notes from your exercise. Would it not be satisfying this time next year if you had written down a few lines about each day? Or grumble. I love to have a good old moan into my notebooks. There is a release to be had in having a private space to let off steam. In this world of hyper communication where anyone with a social media account can feel under pressure to issue press release style comment on every issue and event, there is a glorious privacy to be found in taking up a pen and scribbling down our own thoughts with no aim other than making sense of things for ourselves. The best piece of advice I have for you is that you need to accept that you will have to put in some effort. Unhelpfully, our culture over-focuses on talent. We think writers are special and imagine that those anointed ones simply sit at their magnificent desks in a book-lined room and allow beautiful prose to flow from their pens, all in the right order. From my own practice, and observing other writers, we get along much better when we escape that idealised image and concentrate instead on effort. Most worthwhile activities do involve preparation and graft. We accept that if we want to run a marathon or climb a mountain, we’ll need to work hard. My writing life has become less anguished since I have stopped being cross with myself that I don’t find it easy. Another cultural misunderstanding I’d like us to jettison is that writing should lead to publication and profit. We can do it purely for pleasure and our personal development, in the way that we might go on a watercolour course, or learn to play the ukulele, or get into running or swimming. Not every pursuit in life needs to have a commercial purpose. Writing offers us stimulation, meaning and purpose and a way to keep our eyes on the stars. Let that be enough in the early stages. Don’t put any pressure on those tender shoots. Though, who knows what might happen? Writing is very much an acorn activity. The important thing is to start and then we may be amazed at what we end up cultivating. And my resolution this year? Well, I do fancy dabbling in watercolour and ukulele and I also want to finish a book, of course. Recently, when I visited the pub, one of my old friends there said: “You were always going on about writing. And now you’ve done loads.” I hope that more than three decades after I made my first resolution, 2022 will see me finish my sixth book. I know there will be ups and downs, but I’ve learned that it is so worth sticking with it. Write it all Down: How to Put Your Life on the Page by Cathy Rentzebrink is published by Bluebird on 6 January. Buy it for £13.04 at guardianbookshop.comThomas Tuchel will punish Romelu Lukaku for his explosive interview by dropping the striker for Chelsea’s home game against Liverpool on Sunday afternoon. Lukaku angered Tuchel by going public with his frustrations with life at Chelsea and saying he would like to return to Internazionale one day. It is understood that the Belgianwill be left out of the matchday squad entirely against Liverpool. Tuchel has not hidden his displeasure with Lukaku’s comments, which were aired in an unauthorised interview with Sky Italia on Thursday night, and it is understood he remains “livid” with Chelsea’s record signing. The German has held talks with Lukaku, who left Inter for £97.5m last summer, but he could yet decide to take disciplinary action. Chelsea were caught unawares when Lukaku’s remarks about his difficulties adapting to Tuchel’s system were published. The interview is understood to have taken place three weeks ago and was intended to help Lukaku build bridges with Inter fans, but it ended up causing unrest at Stamford Bridge. The club are likely to back Tuchel if he punishes Lukaku, though the manager could settle on fining the forward rather than in effect giving him a one-game ban. It is a huge gamble for Tuchel to drop Lukaku. Chelsea are 11 points behind Manchester City and need to beat Liverpool to stay in the title race. Kai Havertz is a contender to start up front in place of Lukaku. In a press conference for Sunday’s game Tuchel said that were it not for injuries and Covid‑19, Chelsea would be much closer to Manchester City in the Premier League title race and said they “will not stop trying” to hunt down Pep Guardiola’s side between now and the end of the season. Chelsea have won one of their past four league games, with the latest setback being Wednesday’s 1-1 draw with Brighton, when Danny Welbeck rescued a point for the visitors at Stamford Bridge with an injury-time header. On the same evening, City made it 10 league victories in a row with a 1-0 triumph at Brentford, extending that run with a 2-1 win against Arsenal on New Year’s Day. Tuchel says competing with rivals who have turned themselves into a “winning machine” in recent years is proving difficult. Nonetheless, he is adamant Chelsea have what it takes and are only being hampered by a lack of personnel. Ben Chilwell, Thiago Silva, N’Golo Kanté, Jorginho and Ruben Loftus‑Cheek have been out with injury in recent weeks while Timo Werner, Kai Havertz and Mateo Kovacic have been unavailable for selection having tested positive for Covid. There were more setbacks against Brighton when Reece James sustained a suspected torn hamstring that rules him out of Sunday’s encounter with Liverpool, while Andreas Christensen suffered a back strain that makes him a doubt for the same game. “When you look at 2021 [overall], we are 20 points behind and you have to be careful that you’re not over-ambitious and don’t get frustrated by not catching them,” said Tuchel of City. “They know what it takes to produce high-point seasons over and over again. It’s quality all over the club. It’s a machine, a winning machine. “Maybe it’s a longer race than one season to catch Man City because they will not stop improving. But the huge difference at this moment is with injuries and Covid. I am absolutely convinced that if we are in the same place without having key players out for weeks we [would have] more points and be in the back of them [City]. “That’s why there’s no need to get negative, no need to lose faith. The opposite – we will stay hungry. We will not stop trying.” Tuchel said this period of his tenure as Chelsea manager – the first anniversary of which is this month – has been challenging but, overall, he remains in good spirits, seen most clearly when he was asked who he thinks most people in Germany will want to win when he and Jurgen Klopp go head-to-head. “If you have a full stadium and put Jürgen in it, he could arrive without a team and it would still be full with people laughing for two hours,” Tuchel said with a smile. “That’s his gift, that’s what makes him special. I cannot do it. I will never try.”One in three Americans believe violence against the government is sometimes justified, according to a new Washington Post poll. The survey, with the University of Maryland, was released on New Year’s Day – five days short of a year since rioters attacked the US Capitol in an attempt to overturn Donald Trump’s election defeat by Joe Biden. According to the authors of The Steal, a new book on Republican attempts to fulfill Trump’s aim through legal action in key states, the rioters of 6 January 2021 “had no more chance of overthrowing the US government than hippies in 1967 had trying to levitate the Pentagon”. But it was still by far the most serious attack on the seat of federal government since the British burned Washington in 1814 and the Post poll comes amid a sea of warnings of growing domestic strife, even of a second civil war. The Post reported: “The percentage of Americans who say violent action against the government is justified at times stands at 34%, which is considerably higher than in past polls by the Post or other major news organisations dating back more than two decades. “The view is partisan: The new survey finds 40% of Republicans, 41% of independents and 23% of Democrats saying violence is sometimes justified.” Other polls have found that more than half of Republicans believe Trump’s lie that Biden won the White House thanks to electoral fraud, and do not trust elections. As pointed out by Mark Bowden and Matthew Teague, authors of new book The Steal: The Attempt to Overturn the 2020 Election and People Who Stopped It, Trump was ultimately stopped by “the integrity of hundreds of obscure Americans from every walk of life, state and local officials, judges and election workers. Many of them … Republicans, some … Trump supporters”. Nonetheless, at a rally near the White House on 6 January, Trump told such supporters to “fight like hell” in his cause. “And if you don’t fight like hell,” he said, “you’re not going to have a country anymore”. Five people died, including a rioter shot by law enforcement and a police officer. The Post poll found that 60% of Americans said Trump bore a “great deal” or a “good amount” of responsibility for the Capitol attack. However, 72% of Republicans and 83% of Trump voters said he bore “just some” responsibility or “none at all”. The Post reported: “A majority continue to say that violence against the government is never justified – but the 62% who hold that view is a new low point, and a stark difference from the 1990s, when as many as 90% said violence was never justified.” The paper interviewed some respondents. Phil Spampinato, 73, from Dover, Delaware, and a political independent, said he first “contemplated the question of whether violence against the government might be justified” as a way of “defending your way of life” after he saw Republicans changing state laws to restrict voting by Democrats and to make it easier to overturn results. “Not too many years ago,” Spampinato said, “I would have said that those conditions are not possible, and that no such violence is really ever appropriate.” Anthea Ward, a Republican 32-year-old mother of two from Michigan, said: “The world we live in now is scary. I don’t want to sound like a conspiracy theorist but sometimes it feels like a movie. It’s no longer a war against Democrats and Republicans. It’s a war between good and evil.” Ward said she did not approve of the Capitol attack. She also said she would not participate in violence over Covid-19 vaccine mandates – another social flashpoint. But, the Post reported, Ward did say other people could be justified in choosing to “express their second amendment right” if the government “infringe[d] their freedom of choice” over vaccines, “and nonviolent action such as protests were unsuccessful”.Boris Johnson has been urged by Conservative MPs and peers to address what they say will be a “cost of living crisis for many” in 2022. In a letter on Sunday, the 20 parliamentarians said rising energy prices would pose more of a problem for consumers in the UK than in other comparable countries and that the government should cut VAT on fuel bills, and remove environmental levies on energy, to ease the burden on families. The letter was published as a poll of voters in the “red wall” seats that the Tories gained in the 2019 election showed support for Johnson and his party plummeting amid concern that family finances are going to get worse over the coming year. With energy bills rising, tax increases due to take effect in April and inflation on the rise, the cost of living is set to be one of the dominant political issues of 2022. Last week the Resolution Foundation thinktank said costs for average households could rise by £1,200. In their letter to the Sunday Telegraph, organised by Craig Mackinlay, who chairs the Conservative Net Zero Scrutiny group, the MPs and peers say that when the energy price cap is reassessed in April “the likelihood is that domestic tariffs will increase hugely, feeding directly into a cost of living crisis for many and pushing them into what is bluntly called ‘fuel poverty’”. They say that, although energy prices are rising internationally, UK government policies have exacerbated the problem for consumers. “We have almost uniquely caused our energy prices, through taxation and environmental levies, to increase faster than those of any other competitive country,” they write. The signatories, who include Steve Baker and David Jones, both former Brexit ministers, Esther McVey, the former work and pensions secretary, and Lord Lilley, a cabinet minister in the 1990s, say removing VAT on fuel bills would be a “step in the right direction” and that getting rid of environmental levies on energy would cut fuel bills by 23%. In an article for the Mail on Sunday, the Conservative MP Lee Anderson, who won Ashfield from Labour at the last election, says his voters care about rising energy bills far more than they do about “platitudes spouted about the ‘green agenda’”. Anderson’s article was published alongside the results of a Deltapoll survey of people living in the 57 seats gained by the Conservatives at the last election, suggesting that Labour is now on 49% in these constituencies and the Tories on just 33%. The same poll suggests that, across Britain as a whole, Labour is on 40% and the Conservatives 35%. Deltapoll said if these results were replicated at a general election Johnson would lose more than 100 seats. The survey asked more detailed questions of voters living in the “red wall” seats gained by Johnson in 2019, suggesting that 40% of them think their household finances are in a worse state since the Tories came to power, against only 12% who say they are better off. Over the coming year 41% expect to be worse off, and 16% better off. By a margin of two to one, voters in these seats do not think Johnson is doing well, the poll suggests, and only a quarter of them think he will still be prime minister this time next year. These voters also think the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, would be a better prime minister (38%) than Johnson (33%), the poll suggests. And, when asked for their preferred team, 40% opt for Starmer and Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, while just 33% choose Johnson and Rishi Sunak, the chancellor.A Test average of 10 in 2021, completed with two failures in Melbourne, might have dented the confidence of some players but Zak Crawley certainly talked a good game ahead of his second Ashes appearance. Crawley emerged as one of the brightest batting prospects in England after what appeared to be a breakthrough 267 against Pakistan in 2020 only for a struggle on the turning pitches of India earlier this year, and then issues outside off stump at home, to turn the 6ft 5in right hander’s flow of runs into a mere trickle. Returning for the Boxing Day Test was always a tall order, not least on a tour without state games and having been bizarrely left out of the England Lions versus Australia A fixture in early December. But though scores of 12 and five followed – the latter during a febrile second evening – Crawley fancies greater rewards lie ahead at the start of 2022. “Obviously I haven’t played my best cricket this last year but I feel in a good place,” he said. “Those stats are misleading sometimes. I have never experienced anything like playing in India, 10 over there felt like a good score at the time. I didn’t feel in great touch in the summer so all of a sudden you’re averaging 10. “I feel as good as I ever have though and so I don’t look into stats too much. I will certainly look to be a bit more confident and back myself because I know full well I can score a hundred here this week and that’s what I’m looking to do.” Asked about his approach to facing Pat Cummins and Mitchell Starc on their home ground in the upcoming fourth Test, Crawley added: “It’s just not fearing them. I feel a few of us on our first Ashes tour, we’re a bit wary of them but there’s no need to be. They’re great bowlers, some of the best in the world, but when you get in as Rooty and Mala [Joe Root and Dawid Malan] have shown, they’ve looked very comfortable at times. I don’t think it will be a tougher test [in Sydney]. “I think the wicket is going to be better, slightly flatter, and it’ll be a bit easier. Having watched the Ashes a fair bit, usually there seems to be a lot more runs here. I am looking forward to that and hopefully that is the case.”Ralf Rangnick has told Edinson Cavani that he “desperately” wants the striker to stay at Manchester United and will not allow him to leave in January despite reported interest from Barcelona. Cavani’s future is in doubt after Cristiano Ronaldo’s signing in the summer. The Portuguese is first-choice striker and United’s top scorer with 14 goals, his most recent coming in Thursday’s 3-1 win over Burnley. Cavani’s season has also been hampered by injury and having to quarantine for Covid. The 34-year-old has made 10 appearances, with the Uruguayan’s start against Burnley a first in the league since 30 October. Rangnick said: “We had a few conversations in the last couple of weeks – probably the player with whom I have spoken most. I told him from the first day that he is a highly important player. He is probably the only one who can play as a striker back to goal and face to goal. “His professionalism, his work ethic is amazing and I told him that I desperately want him to stay until the end of the season. He also knows how highly I rate him and respect him, and that was also the reason why I played him from the beginning together with Cristiano [against Burnley]. “He knows that I will definitely not let him go. I would rather have another Edi on top of that but for me it’s clear that Edi has to stay. With regard to the other players [leaving in the transfer window], yes, our squad is maybe a bit big with regards to numbers but we still have Covid, we have three competitions.” Rangnick wants Donny van de Beek to remain despite the Dutchman making only two league starts in 2021. “He’s got a top mentality, works hard in every training session,” the interim manager said. “A team player through and through and there will be games where he will get his chance. I also had a longer conversation with him about that and of course it’s difficult for him right now because he also wants to play for the national team. But I still believe that we should keep him, definitely until the end of this season.” United host Wolves on Monday night and Rangnick is confident Ronaldo can start a third game in eight days. “I didn’t see any reason why he shouldn’t be able to play another game,” he said.The voice of Kirat Assi, subject of the podcast Sweet Bobby, is so familiar I momentarily forget we had never spoken, let alone met. I am one of the million-plus listeners gripped by her story of being “catfished” – duped into a relationship by someone with a false identity. Assi, who lives in London, fell victim to a complex fraud that lasted eight years and involved up to 60 characters who only existed in the scammer’s warped imagination. At the centre was Bobby, a handsome cardiologist with whom Assi formed a close friendship that turned into romance despite never meeting in real life. Bobby was a real person whose identity had been stolen by the scammer, eventually exposed as Assi’s cousin Simran Bhogal. I ask how the scam, which ended in 2018, has affected her. She says that discovering the truth – that her partner, and all of the other characters created by Bhogal, did not exist – was devastating. “Imagine somebody really close to you had suddenly died, and it’s not one person, it’s all of them. I had lost everybody. Normally, even if you lose a boyfriend, your girlfriends come and look after you.” And then there is the fact that many from within Assi’s own community have chosen to not believe the story, or to ask how she could have “let it happen”. But the breathtaking extent of the con was exposed as a result of Assi’s angry determination. She remains the very opposite of the stereotype of a naive victim – she is razor sharp, witty and has an easy charm. “For me, victim shaming is a big thing in this, it’s what shuts people up,” she says. “Please focus on the perpetrator. Why did she do this?” The deception began in 2009 when Assi, a 29-year-old radio presenter on a Punjabi station, was contacted on Facebook by Bhogal’s ex-boyfriend, JJ, asking for help on how to win her back. They began to message each other, then when Assi was told JJ had died from an allergic reaction, Bhogal gave her the details for JJ’s brother, Bobby, so she could send condolences. He was someone Assi knew of from the west London Sikh community. As Assi was “getting to know” Bobby, Bhogal ingratiated herself into her life, and became her confidante as the relationship developed, and, later, went horribly wrong. After five years of messages over Messenger, Skype and WhatsApp, Assi fell in love with Bobby, and considered herself in a relationship, “after much pressure and emotional guilt tripping”, she tells me. But there were many obstacles from the outset. Bobby claimed he was in a witness protection programme having been shot in Kenya. He also apparently developed many life-threatening illnesses as a result, which meant he was stuck in hospital in New York. He was manipulative, and, despite her doubts and being told he would only live a matter of months, Assi became emotionally entrapped. “There was always an excuse why he couldn’t come to London,” says Assi. “When we tried to have a video call, he told me his phone was broken and came up with extraordinary excuses for why he couldn’t get a new one. I said, ‘I’m not turning my video on either’. That was me being angry. He would then say, ‘Just turn it on for a minute, just so I can see you,’ because he wanted to make sure I was sitting in my room.” Bobby began to exert more control over Assi, monitoring her movements and dictating her choices. “Bobby would be like, ‘Where are you? Why aren’t you at home? Why aren’t you in your room?’ I didn’t understand why I was sitting at home if he wasn’t here. It was not like me at all.” Assi tells me: “He used to test my reactions to things all the time, it was part of him torturing me. One day he asked, ‘If I joined Isis, would you come with me?’ What was I supposed to say? If I said ‘no’, he is going to pick a fight with me, but he might have a heart attack (remember his life-threatening medical condition). But saying ‘yes’ didn’t feel right either.” When Bobby was supposed to be in London, three years into their relationship, Assi became suspicious of the real reason why he still refused to see her. She discovered real Bobby’s last known address was actually in Brighton, and so confronted him there. After the horrendous events this confrontation unleashed, Assi turned to Bhogal telling her what had happened, and made the decision to report the deception to the police. “I told them, ‘I’m scared, I want something on record just in case something happens.’ [Bhogal] sat next to me and verified everything to the police.” The next day Bhogal confessed to the scam. “She said, it was me, I was Bobby, I was all of them.” But when Assi reported Bhogal to police they told her: “You’re not the victim, [the real Bobby] is.” Police have told Assi that what happened to her is not a crime, which she refuses to accept. Having won a substantial settlement in her civil case against Bhogal for harassment, misuse of private information and data protection breaches, Assi is continuing to challenge the police decision to not pursue her for coercive control, stalking and harassment. “It was a slow destruction of everything I had. Bobby targeted every part of my life – my career, my dreams, my hopes, my relationship with family, with friends, my studies,” says Assi. “I could have met someone real, had a baby during that time. But the other impact has been on my mental and physical health.” Assi is understandably upset that she is viewed as gullible by some who do not understand the lengths Bhogal went to in order to dupe her. “She could make up whatever she wanted as she was obviously stalking [the real Bobby] and his family and his wife’s family,” says Assi. There is no law against catfishing but Assi believes there should be. “Such a law would serve as a deterrent,” she says. “It’s shocking how common it is.” What does she think motivated Bhogal’s behaviour? “I think she enjoyed power; she enjoyed me being a challenge,” says Assi, who is slowly rebuilding her life. She is back on her old slot at the radio station, is working in freelance marketing, and hoping to be in a position to move out of the family home and in to her own place soon. I ask Assi how she would feel if she bumped into Bhogal. After all, they live only 20 minutes apart and share an extended family. “I don’t want to see or speak to her again for the sake of my health,” she says. “I just want her to be held accountable for her actions and to take responsibility. And if she needs help with her mental health, she should get that, too.” Sweet Bobby, a six-part podcast, is available now at Tortoise MediaGabon’s former Under-17 coach is facing charges of raping minors and sexual assault as authorities continue to investigate allegations of widespread sexual abuse in the country. Patrick Assoumou Eyi – known as “Capello” - faces up to 30 years in prison if found guilty of charges that could also include attempted rape on minors and endangering the life of another. Eyi was arrested on 21 December after accusations by alleged victims were reported by the Guardian. Two other coaches - Tout Puissant Akwembé’s Orphee Mickala and Triphel Mabicka from Libreville’s Moussavou FC - are also facing being charged. “Patrick Constant Assoumou Eyi alias Capello, Orphee Mickala and Triphel Mabicka alias coach Kolo have been referred to the prosecutor’s office, which has opened an inquiry before they are charged by the examining magistrate,” said prosecutor Andre Patrick Roponat. “The investigation continues and other arrests are underway.” Roponat also confirmed that taekwondo coach Martin Avera - known as Master Chacka - has also been arrested on suspicion of paedophilia and is also expected to be charged. “Gabonese sport has been shaken by the revelations made by English newspaper the Guardian,” he added. “Revelations alleging acts of paedophilia committed by coaches in several domains in Gabonese sports. These denunciations profoundly shocked Gabonese people and tarnished the image of our country and has led the justice to open an investigation in all the country and all sports.” Gabon’s president, Ali Bongo, has described the claims as “a very serious matter”.This year promises to be an important one for space exploration, with several major programmes reaching the launch pad over the next 12 months. The US is to return to the moon, undertaking a set of missions intended to establish a lunar colony there in a few years. China is expected to complete its Tiangong space station while Europe and Russia will attempt to land spacecraft on Mars, having failed at every previous attempt. India, South Korea and Japan are also scheduled to put a number of missions into space. Rockets Particular interest is going to focus on Nasa’s mighty new space launch system (SLS). This is the most powerful rocket it has ever designed and has been built to carry astronauts to the moon and beyond as part of the agency’s Artemis deep space exploration programme. With these missions, Nasa intends to reopen the solar system to investigation by humans – rather than robot probes – and regularly carry astronauts to the lunar surface. The programme’s first launch is scheduled for February when an SLS rocket – standing more than 300ft high – will carry an unmanned Orion capsule on a trajectory that will enter a highly elliptical orbit round the moon. At its closest, the spaceship will sweep within 62 miles of the lunar surface before soaring 40,000 miles above it, a distance that will take it further from Earth than any spacecraft built for humans has ever flown. Crucially, Orion – designed to carry between four and six astronauts when fully operational – will be fitted with a European service module that will provide the capsule’s power and propulsion for manoeuvring in orbit. This will give its manufacturer – the European Space Agency – the opportunity to become a key partner in future Artemis missions. If February’s mission succeeds, a crewed trip around the moon will take place in 2024 and this will be followed by a lunar landing in 2025 – a gap of 53 years since Apollo 17, the last crewed moon mission, touched down on the Taurus-Littrow valley in December 1972. This time the crew will include at least one woman and the mission will mark the beginning of a programme aimed at establishing a lunar colony where astronauts would work on months-long missions and develop technologies that could be used by future colonies on Mars. A prime target for the first lunar outpost is Shackleton crater, near the moon’s south pole, which is believed to hold reservoirs of ice. Water will not only provide precious sustenance for astronauts, it can be exploited as a source of hydrogen and oxygen – by electrolysis – that can be combined as rocket fuel. The moon As part of its preparations to establish a lunar colony, Nasa will also start a massive programme of robot missions through the agency’s $2.6bn commercial lunar payload services (CLPS) initiative. This will involve sending a flotilla of robot spacecraft to the moon, with the first missions beginning this year. Built by private companies with Nasa backing, these probes will attempt to map underground water deposits, study the moon’s deep interior and release robot rovers to investigate the lunar surface. Fledgling space company Astrobotic will send its newly designed Peregrine lander to Lacus Mortis – “the lake of death” – a plain of basaltic rock in the north-eastern part of the moon. It will carry 11 different payloads of instruments and will be followed by another US company, Intuitive Machines, which is sending a spacecraft carrying six payloads to Oceanus Procellarum, the Ocean of Storms. A further 12 CLPS missions are scheduled for the next three years, though head of Nasa science, Thomas Zurbuchen, has warned that these privately funded efforts each face a high risk of failure. As many as half could go wrong, he said recently. For good measure, Russia and India are both planning to launch their own lunar landers next year, while South Korea is scheduled to place a satellite in moon orbit to study its mineral composition. Mars The hunt for alien life will take a step further this year with the launch of the joint European-Russian ExoMars mission, which will land a robot rover on the Oxia Planum, a 125-mile-wide clay-bearing plain in the planet’s northern hemisphere. The rover – named after Rosalind Franklin, the British chemist and DNA pioneer – will be fitted with a drill capable of probing several feet below the Martian surface, where it is hoped primitive lifeforms may survive or at least the remnants of extinct organisms. The 660lb rover was built by Airbus Defence and Space, at the company’s UK facility in Stevenage. Launch is scheduled for 22 September and touchdown is expected on 10 June 2023. Hopes of success for the mission are guarded, however, as neither Russia nor Europe has had any luck in landing on Mars. Nineteen Russian and Soviet missions and two European bids to land on the red planet have all failed – including Europe’s Schiaparelli lander, which was intended to be a trial run for the current ExoMars mission but which crashed on the planet in 2016. Asteroids Easily the most spectacular mission to the asteroids will be Nasa’s bid to test an anti-asteroid defence system for Earth. Launched last year, the double asteroid redirection test (Dart) spacecraft will crash into the moonlet Dimorphos in September. Hurtling into its target at 15,000mph, the 1,340lb probe – the size of a small car – will try to change the orbit of Dimorphos, a lump of rock the size of a football stadium, around its parent asteroid, Didymos. If successful, Nasa and other space agencies will be encouraged to follow up the mission by developing craft that could deflect a larger asteroid heading towards Earth – and so avert an Armageddon-style impact, say astronomers. Should an asteroid the size of Dimorphos crash on Earth, it would trigger an explosion equivalent to 400-600 megatonnes of TNT. “A city like Manhattan would be completely obliterated,” Elena Adams, Dart’s systems engineer, told the journal Science. “This is to demonstrate a technique to save the world.” Nasa has plans for several other asteroid missions next year, including the launch of the probe Psyche. Scheduled for lift-off in August, the spacecraft will visit an asteroid called 16 Psyche that is thought to be the leftover core of a planet. This vast chunk of nickel and iron is the remains of a violent collision with another astronomical object that stripped off the planet’s outer layers and left its metallic innards exposed. Studying 16 Psyche will give scientists an unprecedented opportunity to examine a planetary core. It will also afford them a chance to explore a new type of world – one that is made of metal. Human spaceflight Boeing will attempt to get its Starliner crew capsule into orbit so that it can begin to ferry astronauts to and from the International Space Station (ISS). A 2019 flight failed to reach the station and another attempt last year was called off at the last minute when fuel valves failed to open. Boeing now plans to launch a crewless Starliner in early 2022, followed by a test flight with astronauts later in the year. The capsule will then be used – along with SpaceX’s Crew Dragon spaceship – on a rota to ferry astronauts to the ISS. For its part, China is expected to complete its space station Tiangong – Heavenly Palace – after launching the first of its three main modules, Tianhe, in April. Modules Mengtian and Wentian will be added this year. China has said it hopes to keep its space station – which is considerably smaller than the ISS – inhabited continuously by three astronauts for at least a decade. A key task for crewmen will be to service the Xuntian space telescope, which will be launched in 2024 and which will orbit in formation with the Tiangong station. Fitted with a mirror roughly the same size as the Hubble space telescope, Xuntian’s tasks will include investigations of dark matter and dark energy as well as galaxy formation and evolution. Space tourism Blue Origin (founded by Jeff Bezos) and Virgin Galactic (set up by Richard Branson) both succeeded in launching maiden sub-orbital flights last year and both say they expect to begin regular missions in 2022, offering groups of tourists a few minutes of weightlessness before returning to Earth.Although she will be best remembered for playing the naive Rose Nylund in the hit comedy The Golden Girls (1985-92), Betty White, who has died aged 99, was for seven decades one of the best-loved performers on US television, a consummate professional who won eight Emmy awards, the first and last separated by more than 60 years. She was also a pioneer, in the 1950s one of the first women producing television, and, 30 years later, the first female game show host, dubbed a “femcee”. All four lead actors on The Golden Girls won best actress Emmys, but White’s came first, in 1986. This may be because she played against type; Rose was the opposite of her role on the Mary Tyler Moore Show, as Sue Ann Nivens (1973-77), who hid her conniving nature beneath a sugary surface, while performing as the Happy Homemaker at the TV station where Mary worked. From 1983 to 1986 White and Rue McClanahan played together in Mama’s Family, a spinoff from the Carol Burnett Show; when they left to join The Golden Girls, McClanahan, who had been the naive foil to Bea Arthur on Maude, was cast as Rose, with White set to play the man-chasing Blanche. The director Jay Sandrich suggested the two should swap parts, and the chemistry was immediately successful. Born in Oak Park, Illinois, Betty moved with her parents, Horace White, an engineer, and Tess (nee Cachikis), to Los Angeles during the Depression, and graduated in 1939 from Beverly Hills high school; her colleagues in school theatre included the future film star Rhonda Fleming. She performed on an experimental Los Angeles television channel that year, but made her formal acting debut at the Bliss Hayden Little Theatre. During the second world war she served in the Women’s Voluntary Services, making her movie debut in Time to Kill (1945), a short produced to inform servicemen about military educational programmes; the cast included Jackie Cooper, George Reeves (later TV’s first Superman), DeForest Kelley (later Bones on Star Trek) and Barry Nelson. She also was married, briefly, to Dick Barker, an Air Corps pilot. After parts in radio shows such as Archie and the Great Gildersleeve, she got her own local programme, the first of four Betty White shows in which she would star. In 1947 she married the agent Lane Allen; they divorced in 1949. That year another local radio star, Al Jarvis, was presenting a variety show called Hollywood On Television, and hired White as his “girl Friday”, playing records and doing commercials and interviews. When Jarvis left the show in 1952, White took over as the host. She also joined the writer George Tibbles and producer Don Fedderson in a production company, trying to create shows from the sketches in which she acted on her programme. Life With Elizabeth debuted in 1952, and, syndicated around the country, became an immediate hit, winning White her first Emmy. As a co-producer, White followed Lucille Ball, but it could be argued she had more creative control over her product than Lucy did in Desilu. Life With Elizabeth ran until 1955; during 1954, White simultaneously presented her own variety show, her second Betty White show. She created another sitcom, Date With the Angels, in 1957; when her co-star Bill Williams left in 1958, it too became The Betty White Show before it was cancelled. White turned to game shows and late-night talk, particularly as a frequent guest on Jack Paar’s show, a forerunner of The Tonight Show, and a regular on Password, with whose host, Allen Ludden, she had acted in summer stock. Ludden also hosted the GE College Bowl, from which University Challenge took its format. White and Ludden were married from 1963 until his death in 1981. In 1962 she made her feature film debut, playing a senator in Advise and Consent, but although she turned in a solid performance, it would be 36 years before White returned to the big screen. In the meantime, her friendship with Password’s creator, Bob Stewart, and its producers, Mark Goodson and Bill Todman, kept her busy on their other shows, such as What’s My Line?, To Tell the Truth, and Password’s many successors. She remained in demand as a guest star, and in 1971 produced and hosted a syndicated show featuring interviews with celebrities and their pets, called The Pet Set. Her career was reborn in 1973 when she debuted as Sue Ann in the Mary Tyler Moore Show’s third season, hired because she and Ludden were friendly with the show’s producer Grant Tinker, who saw that the script called for Sue Ann to be played by “an icky-sweet Betty White type”. She won Emmys as best supporting actress in 1975 and 1976. When the show ended in 1977, she began her fourth Betty White show, a sitcom which co-starred John Hillerman, but lasted only one season. She acted in a number of TV movies before, in 1983 , becoming the first woman to host a game show with Just Men!, in which a panel of men helped women win cars. She picked up a daytime Emmy, her fourth overall. She had a recurring role on The Love Boat before making her mark again in Mama’s Family, which led to The Golden Girls. With the show’s success White published her first memoir, Betty White In Person (1987). When Bea Arthur left The Golden Girls in 1992, the other three leads continued in The Golden Palace for two seasons. White showed no signs of slowing down, as indicated by the title of her second book, Here I Go Again: My Life In Television (1995). She took a part in the Marie Osmond series Maybe This Time (1995-96) and was busier than ever as a guest, winning her sixth Emmy as best guest-star on The John LaRoquette Show (1996). In 1999 she began two seasons of playing mother to a single father (Alfred Molina) in Ladies Man. She appeared as Catherine Piper in David E Kelley’s series The Practice and its spin off, Boston Legal, and in 2006 made her soap opera debut on The Bold and the Beautiful, as the mother of the show’s matriarch. She proved so popular her role was extended for three seasons, until 2009. She began another TV sitcom, Hot in Cleveland, in 2010, at the age of 88, and it ran for five series. Meanwhile she returned to the big screen in Dennis the Menace Strikes Again (1998). Among the films that followed, her best roles were in Lake Placid (1999) and The Proposal (2009). In 2010, after a Facebook campaign, she became the oldest person to host Saturday Night Live, quipping that at her age she contacted old friends not with Facebook but with a ouija board. She won a Primetime Emmy for this appearance and in 2015 an Emmy lifetime achievement award. Outside the entertainment industry, she was active in animal charities and the Los Angeles Zoo - Betty and Friends: My Life at the Zoo, was published in 2011. She told the Chicago Sun-Times that, as well as for her acting, “I also want to be remembered as a lady who helped the animals”. • Betty Marion White, actor and producer, born 17 January 1922; died 31 December 2021 • This article was amended on 9 January 2022. Betty White married Allen Ludden in 1963 rather than 1961.Once again we start a new year with the country in the grip of Covid-19. But as 2022 dawns, the UK should have been better prepared for the disruption of a new variant. In March 2020, the TUC and unions pressed the chancellor to adopt our detailed proposals for a furlough scheme – an emergency response to the first wave of the pandemic. It was a huge success – protecting millions of jobs, keeping businesses open, making the reopening smoother and quicker and making sure families all over the UK could pay their bills. Now, as we face Omicron, we’re having the same old argument about whether government should step in and protect working people’s livelihoods in a crisis. It’s been clear for months that the UK needs a permanent short-time working scheme, learning from the success of furlough, to protect jobs during periods of economic turbulence. Such schemes are common across Europe and help keep businesses afloat when there is a sudden temporary collapse in demand. But ministers have chosen not to listen. After cutting off furlough prematurely in the autumn, the government watched as Omicron hammered our arts, hospitality and aviation sectors in the run-up to Christmas. While the chancellor’s 11th-hour rescue package for pubs, restaurants and theatres will help some, serious damage has already been done to pay packets and to livelihoods. We need to end this stop-start approach to managing our economy. Businesses and working families shouldn’t be put through an emotional rollercoaster every time the pandemic flares up. They need financial certainty and stability so that when better times return our economy can bounce back fast. Having a permanent short-time working scheme in place, conditional on upskilling and retraining, will ensure that if new restrictions have to be imposed again there is support ready to go. But we can’t stop there. We need to build an economy that can help working families face the future with confidence. There are huge challenges on the horizon. Alongside Covid, climate change is already causing global chaos and threatening jobs in energy-intensive industries such as steel and manufacturing. The longer we put off getting to net zero, the more jobs will be put at risk. And let’s not forget the looming cost-of-living storm. The last 11 years have been the worst period for real wage growth since the Napoleonic wars. And this has come at a huge cost to people’s living standards. Over half of families in poverty today are working families. And many of our key workers – keeping hospitals and public services running – are still earning less in real terms than in 2010. It’s a national disgrace. Without action, the pressure on UK household budgets will only get worse in 2022. This spring, working families face a triple whammy of skyrocketing bills, cuts to universal credit and a hike in national insurance contributions. We urgently need a long-term economic plan for getting wages rising. And the best way to start is by getting more workers covered by collective agreements, sector-by-sector – so they can negotiate a fair pay rise with employers. Giving trade unions greater access to workplaces is the key to boosting pay and employment standards across the country. And it’s not just me saying this. The OECD and governments across the world, from America to New Zealand, have recognised the key role collective bargaining can play in reducing inequality and giving people security at work. Committing to industry-wide fair pay agreements would transform the lives of millions by setting minimum standards – on pay, training, health and safety – and prevent good employers from being undercut by the bad. And fair pay agreements would help ease staffing shortages in under-pressure sectors such as logistics, food production and social care, by making those industries better places to work in. Whether they can boost living standards and working conditions is the acid test of the government’s levelling up agenda. Alongside campaigning for a pay rise for working people, we are still waiting for the employment bill Boris Johnson promised more than two years ago. Tackling insecure work, outlawing fire and rehire and banning zero-hours contracts – all are long overdue. As too is fixing our broken sick pay system. It beggars belief that we are heading into another wave of the pandemic with millions unable to afford to self-isolate. This year is a crossroads. Beset by pandemics and climate chaos, we can keep reeling from crisis to crisis, unleashing rampant insecurity and inequality anew. Or we can harness the power of active government – in partnership with unions and employers – to create a fairer and more resilient economy. In this age of anxiety, working people are crying out for security. That is my wish for 2022. • Frances O’Grady is general secretary of the Trades Union CongressAt the cafe that doubles-up as a newsagent in Galliano di Mugello, a medieval hamlet in Tuscany, there are no pings from mobile phones, people aimlessly browsing the internet or uploading pictures of their cappuccino to Instagram. Instead, customers read the newspaper – their main source of information on the outside world – or talk to each other. Surrounded by Tuscany’s postcard perfect cypress trees and rolling hills, Galliano di Mugello, would be a haven for those wanting a digital detox. But the absence of mobile phone coverage is a much less endearing quirk for the 1,300 or so inhabitants, who are starting to rise up against not being able to make a call, send a text or search for something on Google on their handsets. “Look at this,” said Daniela Suggelli as she pointed to the signal strength icon on her screen. “There are no bars. It is an absolute nuisance.” Galliano di Mugello became a symbol of Italy’s digital divide after a report from the ministry of innovation and AGCOM, the communications watchdog, placed it high among the 204 areas in Italy classified in the report as a “very white zone” because of its nonexistent mobile phone coverage and patchy internet service. Although people can access the internet at home via ADSL or through the more recent arrival of fibre broadband, connection is often disrupted, especially when the weather is bad. Almost everyone has a mobile phone too, but they cannot use it when they are out and about in the hamlet. It even captured the attention of Netflix, which earlier this year used the hamlet in a trailer for the Italy promotion of The Mitchells vs the Machines, an animated comedy film about a wacky family fending off a robot apocalypse as technology takes over the world. “In Galliano di Mugello, robots will never rebel,” was the slogan for the Mitchells vs the Machines trailer, which stars some of its residents and goes on to describe the hamlet as a place unburdened by “noise, traffic, long queues … or technological problems”. While the promotion of the scenery and charms of Galliano di Mugello, which falls under the municipality of Barberino di Mugello, was embraced, the publicity generated by the trailer also presented the ideal opportunity for the mayor, Giampiero Mongatti, to revive his battle to get the hamlet online. Bridging the digital divide is a top priority for prime minister Mario Draghi’s government, with a significant proportion of the more than €200bn (£170bn) that Italy is receiving from the EU’s post-coronavirus pandemic recovery fund set to be spent on digitalisation. “Mobile phone companies don’t invest in Galliano because they don’t think it’s worth the cost,” said Mongatti. “But with the EU recovery fund money, the government should now pay them to invest. It is true that there is a strong sense of community in Galliano and you never see people in the street staring at their phones. All of this is very nice, but at the same time citizens want to be connected and shouldn’t be treated as second-class.” Mongatti, whose office is based with the rest of the town hall in the better-connected Barberino, argued that mobile phone coverage was now a basic necessity, especially in an emergency situation. In December 2019, when the area was struck by a strong earthquake, he was unable to communicate safety procedures to people in Galliano. “We sent out a series of messages on social media, but the thing was that everyone was out on the streets and so couldn’t read the messages,” he said. “I had to send police patrols to tell people what to do.” Marika Batisti, who runs an agritourism farm, was left in a frightening situation in January after a couple of burglars entered the premises during the night. She was unable to go downstairs to use the landline to call the police, as that’s where the burglars were. So she ventured out on to the terrace, and after waving her mobile phone around for some time, managed to get enough signal to make the call. “It was a nightmare, not even the internet was working,” she said. “It’s essential now for security – how are we supposed to call the police or an ambulance if something happens?” The bad internet connection also proved to be an issue when students had to follow online lessons at home during coronavirus lockdowns, with some being forced to take their handsets to the car park of a restaurant perched on a nearby hill, from where a signal can sometimes be found. “We need the internet for everything nowadays, even to book our Covid-19 vaccines,” said Suggelli. “Although I’m a pensioner, and so the problems don’t affect me so much … but what about people who need it for work or study?” Suggelli tried to put the Guardian in touch with a young female inhabitant to interview, and popped into the butchers, owned by Andrea Guasti, to ask to borrow his landline. “I can’t get through,” said Suggelli. “She probably has no reception – you see the issues it causes?” Guasti, one of the stars of the Netflix trailer, is used to people asking to borrow his phone. “I have a landline here and at home, as well as a mobile phone, which makes everything very costly,” he said. Mongatti said the thing that makes Galliano stand out from other towns or villages with no or precarious internet access is its sizeable population. Neither is it remote – Galliano lies close to the Apennine mountains and is just an hour away from Florence. The area is popular with hikers and even featured in a video for the Madonna song, Turn Up the Radio. But Mongatti refuses to promote it as a holiday destination for those seeking to detox. “When I went to the beach for 15 days in the summer, I turned off my phone,” he said. “But the true liberty isn’t about not having a signal, but about being able to choose when to switch off. And we need to give the citizens of Galliano that choice.”A 46-year-old television journalist who spoke out about his cancer diagnosis has died, ITV has confirmed. Gary Burgess died peacefully in his sleep at a hospice in Jersey on New Year’s Day. Doctors had found tumours on his lungs and told him they were inoperable. He was first diagnosed with testicular cancer in 1999, and treated for further tumours in 2015 and 2016. Burgess used a popular blog to record his condition. In November 2020, he told followers that he had six to 12 months left to live and documented his cancer journey after receiving the terminal diagnosis. The Manchester-born broadcaster set the world record for the longest radio show at Blackpool’s Radio Wave, staying on air for 76 hours and raising money for charity. In a final message, written for ITV to release after his death, the journalist wrote: “I’ve had the best life. I’ve had the luckiest life. “I met my soulmate and the love of my life who went on to become my husband. I got to work with some of the most amazing people in newsrooms and studios doing the job I absolutely adore. “I’ve been able to share my own relatively short time on this planet surrounded by friends and loved ones who have enriched my life in ways they may never truly understand. “My greatest sadness is the prospect of leaving all of that and all of them behind. The thought of doing that to [my husband] Alan is unfathomable to process, but I also know the very people who’ve shown me love and support will now wrap up those feelings around him in the coming days. “It’s time for me to hand over my microphone and keyboard for others to do the talking about me, so let my final words simply be ‘thank you’. “Every person in my life has, in their own way, helped me live my best life. That’ll do.” Burgess began his career at Radio Wave in Blackpool in 1992, leaving nine years later. He began working as a reporter at ITV Channel TV in May 2011 in the Guernsey newsroom, before moving to Jersey in March 2012. Burgess, who married his husband, Alan, in 2018, was the first to convert his civil partnership to a marriage. Their marriage certificate is number one on the conversion register.Oxfam India has said its work in the country will be imperilled by the government’s refusal to renew a licence that permits it to receive funds from abroad. Oxfam is on a list of thousands of NGOs, according to local media reports, whose licence has not been renewed. Without the licence, these organisations can only use donations and contributions from within India. “Oxfam India will reach out to the Ministry of Home Affairs and urge them to lift the funding restrictions to ensure vulnerable communities keep receiving the support they need at this critical time of the pandemic,” said the Oxfam India chief executive, Amitabh Behar, in a statement. A few days ago, it emerged that Mother Teresa’s Missionaries of Charity, which works among people with leprosy, the dying, abandoned sick children, people with Aids and the destitute, has also been barred from receiving foreign funds. The home ministry said it had detected some “adverse inputs” in the audit of its accounts. The drying up of funds is expected to have a major impact on the work of both organisations, along with many others whose licences have also not been renewed. Some donations will continue to come in from Indian philanthropists and charitable organisations but it will not cover the gigantic shortfall. The ruling Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) has been waging a campaign against NGOs and social activists, particularly those working among the rural poor, forest dwellers, the low castes, and the marginalised and on issues of inequality. BJP leaders including the prime minister, Narendra Modi, have derided social activists as “anti-nationals” and “urban Naxalites” (a reference to revolutionaries fighting in the jungles of India to overthrow the state). They have also accused some NGOs of having links with extremist groups. Analysts say the government sees NGOs, which by the very nature of their work speak out on its policies and human rights record, as a source of undesirable criticism. “It’s inevitable that given how Oxfam and the others work among the poorest of the poor, the most deprived communities, that their reports on India will not show the government in a good light. This government has always struggled to accept criticism and this taking away of foreign funds can be seen as a way of arm-twisting NGOs into acquiescence,” said the political analyst Parsa Venkateshwar Rao Jr. The most prominent example was the government’s targeting of the human rights organisation Amnesty International, which prompted Amnesty to close its offices and stop its operations last year. It took the decision after its offices were raided and its bank accounts frozen. Amnesty accused the government of a “witch hunt” and of seeking revenge for its reports criticising human rights violations. Since 2014, the government has been making it harder for NGOs to function. It has altered the rules of the Foreign Contribution Regulation Act under which they receive foreign contributions to make it harder for them to receive donations from abroad. In 2018, the licences of nearly 20,000 NGOs were cancelled. Nonetheless, the failure to renew the licences of such internationally known names as Oxfam and the Missionaries of Charity has come as a shock.It’s rare that the quiet part is said out loud in British politics: the thing that arrives in a chilling soundbite a politician has let slip, or in correspondence leaked many years after those who wrote it leave power. If you have ever, for example, scoffed at the idea that the rightwing press has a hold on British politics, particularly over the Labour party, then an incident that took place 20 years ago may still your rolling eyes. Last week we learned that after Stephen Lawrence’s murder Tony Blair’s Downing Street initially opposed an inquiry into police relations with minority ethnic communities. The arguments for the government’s objection formed a checklist of the hesitations, prevarications and cynical cautions that still stalk efforts to confront institutional racism today. In his initial note recommending an inquiry, Jack Straw, then the home secretary, wrote: “There is clear disquiet, not least within the black community, about the issues raised by this case. I believe that the best way to address these, and draw something positive from this tragic case, would be to launch a broader inquiry into police relationships with ethnic minority communities generally.” Then he hedged, preempting what an uncomfortable proposition that was for Downing Street. “I am concerned,” he said, “that this should not be perceived as undermining the police but as an opportunity to identify and promote good practice.” But even that was not enough to reassure jittery colleagues. In the margins, an official whose identity was unknown addressed Blair’s policy adviser, Liz Lloyd, asking, “Is this sensible?” “No,” replied Lloyd. Others weighed in, saying “an inquiry would raise expectations” that would be hard to achieve, and “even with good presentation” the inquiry would “look like an attack on the police”. You will notice that all these concerns were about the optics rather than the substance of the issue, and the priority was protecting the police and not the Lawrence family or the ethnic minorities whose concerns they represented. Still, perhaps there is nothing that surprising about a government trying to tread carefully when it comes to something as profoundly unsettling as an investigation into police bias towards ethnic minorities. Perhaps there is nothing surprising in government officials defaulting to cost-benefit analyses; you hardly expect the ranks of advisers to be staffed with racial justice warriors instead of steely reputation managers. And Sir William Macpherson’s inquiry did eventually go ahead, such was the undeniable stench of it all and the pressure the Lawrence family wielded. But there is a kicker to the story, and in it we see how the cynicism of self-preservation prevailed at the expense of doing something long-term and substantive about race relations. Shortly before Macpherson published his report, Straw proposed a follow-up – an ambitious strategy that would prioritise race equality considerations in policymaking across government bodies. Yet taking on racial justice in such a direct manner was just too risky, too destabilising to the government. “A regulation nightmare,” said Blair. Angus Lapsley, an official in Blair’s private office, decided not to back a proposal that racist police officers should be dismissed (government was “cool” towards this suggestion, he said), not because the policy would be wrong, but because of how rightwing papers would react to it. Here is where the decibel level rises. “This could easily become a ‘Telegraph cause celebre’ if taken too far,” said Lapsley. Blair agreed, saying: “We do not want to go OTT on this.” The proposal was killed. There is a sort of sickening relief in seeing those sentiments – expressed behind closed doors – spelled out so matter of factly; in knowing for certain that concerns about racial injustice aren’t taken seriously not because they’re not believed but because they rock the boat. Indeed, the smothering of a broad, progressive race policy 20 years ago tells us much about where we are today, with a government proudly hostile to interrogating the true state of race relations. On ethnic minority matters, there is far more continuity between the Labour party and the Conservatives than there are material differences. Both parties share a notion that matters of race are merely a government liability and not something for which the government should take direct responsibility. Last year, that notion was manifest in the shape of the widely discredited report by the Commission on Race and Ethnic Disparities chaired by Tony Sewell. The denial and dishonesty in that document about the extent of the country’s institutional racism was just one step away from Blair’s timidity in front of the rightwing gallery. He passively did not want to upset the Telegraph and its reactionary contingent; today’s Tories actively want to please it. But what Labour and Tory leaderships have both exhibited is deference to a status quo that preserves racial hierarchies and refuses by default to acknowledge any criticism that might challenge Britain’s moral sense of self. Such is the slippery slope of “moderation”. An unquestioned assumption has developed that the left can prosper in this country only if it sheds “radical” notions of social justice and redistribution that are unrealistic and extreme – that are, in Blair’s words, “OTT”. The best we can hope for is that the good guys go about pursuing change incrementally and surreptitiously. This is an abdication of responsibility, but ultimately it’s worse than that. Lost opportunities to achieve racial equality don’t just throw ethnic minorities under the bus: they are also missed chances to shape the values of the country. Labour’s realpolitik on race may have saved a few fights and stabilised careers in the short term, but in the medium term it also has tilted the ground in favour of the right. And it has sent all of us, marginalised minorities and resentful majorities, hurtling down that slope towards an ever more fractious future. Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnistThe global art market performed at record levels in 2021, with billions of dollars being paid for works by impressionist, postwar and contemporary artists, and much of it bought by people whose wealth comes from cryptocurrencies or other technologies. More than $2.6bn (£2bn) of art was sold in two weeks by leading auction houses in New York in November. Four works by Vincent van Gogh sold for $161m, including $71.4m paid for Wooden Huts Among Olive Trees and Cypress Trees. In May, Jean-Michel Basquiat’s 1983 2-metre-tall painting In This Case became 2021’s single most expensive painting to change hands when it sold for $93m. The sale in November of 35 works from the Macklowe Collection – by Andy Warhol, Jackson Pollock and Mark Rothko, among others – totalled more than $676m. Landscape by Nicolas Party went for $3.2m, doubling the Swiss artist’s previous record. “The art market is certainly frothy. And I think the audience for art is larger than it’s ever been. We’re seeing record levels in the 277-year history of our company,” said Charles Stewart, the chief executive officer of auction house Sotheby’s. Art market experts say demand that was pent up in 2020 by the global Covid pandemic has released at the same time as sought-after artworks are being put up for sale. “There has been an extraordinarily high level of quality material coming to the market and that has drawn the attention of buyers,” said Stewart. It is not only paintings that are commanding enormous sums. Last month, the Hamilton Aphrodite, a Roman sculpture dating back to the first or second century AD, established a new world record for an ancient marble sculpture when it sold in New York for almost $25m, smashing its pre-sale estimate of $2m-$3m. Luxury auctions at Sotheby’s – including streetwear and skateboard decks as well as jewellery, watches, handbags, wines and whiskey – totalled more than $1bn for the first time in 2021. And a non-fungible token (NFT) of Everydays: the First 5,000 Days by Mike Winkelmann, the digital artist known as Beeple, sold for a record $69m in March, making him “among the top three most valuable living artists”, according to Christie’s. “It’s true that the market is performing at record levels, and certainly outperforming most people’s expectations,” said Katharine Arnold, the head of postwar and contemporary art at Christie’s. However, the market for old masters was less buoyant, with sales at auctions last month down almost 20% on comparable sales two years ago. According to the 2021 Contemporary Art Market Report, $2.7bn worth of contemporary art was sold at auction in the 12 months to June, representing a “stronger, more diverse and denser market than ever before”. Experts attribute the booming market to at least three factors, which may overlap: young “crypto-driven” buyers; the growth in the Asian market; and the belief that art is a good investment at a time of economic uncertainty. People who have made fortunes from cryptocurrencies and other technologies “are now participating at very high levels”, said Stewart. “They are young and they are global.” In November, Sotheby’s accepted live bids in the ether cryptocurrency – favoured by the digital art and NFT community – for the first time in the sale of two works by Banksy, Trolley Hunters and Love Is in the Air. They sold for $6.7m and $8m respectively. Cryptocurrency payments had become “a viable alternative to fiat currency”, said Arnold. In November, a cryptocurrency group amassed more than £47m, or 11,600 ether, in a few days on its online crowdfunding page in an attempt to buy a rare surviving copy of the US constitution. They were outbid by a hedge fund boss and art collector, Kenneth Griffin. Buyers from Asia accounted for 40% of sales in the contemporary art market in the year to June 2021, beating the US (32%) and the UK (16%). The Asian market has “effectively become the world’s primary zone for the exchange of contemporary artworks”, said the Contemporary Art Market Report. According to Sotheby’s and Christie’s, Asian buyers account for a third of major international sales. Last year Sotheby’s broke records for sales in Asia, reaching $1.1bn by the end of November. Another factor supporting this moment in the market was investors looking at “tangible works of art as stores of value” in a time of rising inflation, said Arnold. She added: “I don’t think this is a bubble, not at all. The conditions in the world at the moment are such that art continues to be a way of storing value. And there is constant wealth creation and new buyers entering the market.” There had been a 50% increase in millennials buying and bidding in Christie’s London sales in October, she said. “If the baby boomers were the ones buying aggressively in years past, we’re starting to see a generational shift, and that means that growth doesn’t only come from new markets like Asia, it also comes within the established markets as the younger generation steps in.”Sri Lanka is facing a deepening financial and humanitarian crisis with fears it could go bankrupt in 2022 as inflation rises to record levels, food prices rocket and its coffers run dry. The meltdown faced by the government, led by the strongman president Gotabaya Rajapaksa, is in part caused by the immediate impact of the Covid crisis and the loss of tourism but is compounded by high government spending and tax cuts eroding state revenues, vast debt repayments to China and foreign exchange reserves at their lowest levels in a decade. Inflation has meanwhile been spurred by the government printing money to pay off domestic loans and foreign bonds. The World Bank estimates 500,000 people have fallen below the poverty line since the beginning of the pandemic, the equivalent of five years’ progress in fighting poverty. Inflation hit a record high of 11.1% in November and escalating prices have left those who were previously well off struggling to feed their families, while basic goods are now unaffordable for many. After Rajapaksa declared Sri Lanka to be in an economic emergency, the military was given power to ensure essential items, including rice and sugar, were sold at set government prices – but it has done little to ease people’s woes. Anurudda Paranagama, a chauffeur in the capital, Colombo, took on a second job to pay for rising food costs and cover the loan on his car but it was not enough. “It is very difficult for me to repay the loan. When I have to pay electricity and water bills and spend on food, there is no money left,” he said, adding that his family now eats two meals a day instead of three. He described how his village grocer was opening 1kg packets of milk powder and dividing it into packs of 100g because his customers could not afford the whole packet. “We now buy 100g of beans when we used to buy 1kg for the week,” said Paranagama. The loss of jobs and vital foreign revenue from tourism, which usually contributes more than 10% of GDP, has been substantial, with more than 200,000 people losing their livelihoods in the travel and tourism sectors, according to the World Travel and Tourism Council. The situation has got so bad that long queues have formed at the passport office as one in four Sri Lankans, mostly the young and educated, say they want to leave the country. For older citizens, it is reminiscent of the early 1970s when import controls and low production at home caused severe shortages of basic commodities and caused long queues for bread, milk and rice. The former central bank deputy governor WA Wijewardena warned the struggles of ordinary people would exacerbate the financial crisis, which would in turn make life harder for them. “When the economic crisis deepens beyond redemption, it is inevitable that the country will have a financial crisis too,” he said. “Both will reduce food security by lowering production and failing to import due to foreign exchange scarcities. At that point, it will be a humanitarian crisis.” One of the most pressing problems for Sri Lanka is its huge foreign debt burden, in particular to China. It owes China more than $5bn in debt and last year took an additional $1bn loan from Beijing to help with its acute financial crisis, which is being paid in instalments. In the next 12 months, in the government and private sector, Sri Lanka will be required to repay an estimated $7.3bn in domestic and foreign loans, including a $500m international sovereign bond repayment in January. However, as of November, available foreign currency reserves were just $1.6bn. In an usual approach, government minister Ramesh Pathirana said they hoped to settle their past oil debts with Iran by paying them with tea, sending them $5m worth of tea every month in order to save “ much needed currency”. The opposition MP and economist Harsha de Silva recently told parliament that foreign currency reserves would be -$437m by January next year, while the total foreign debt to service would be $4.8bn from February to October 2022. “The nation will be totally bankrupt,” he said. Central Bank Governor Ajith Nivard Cabraal made public assurances that Sri Lanka could pay off its debts “seamlessly” but Wijewardena said the country was at substantial risk of defaulting on its repayments, which would have catastrophic economic consequences. Meanwhile, Rajapaksa’s sudden decision in May to ban all fertiliser and pesticides and force farmers to go organic without warning has brought a formerly prosperous agricultural community to its knees as many farmers, who had become used to using – and often overusing – fertiliser and pesticides, were suddenly left without ways to produce healthy crops or combat weeds and insects. Many fearing a loss decided not to cultivate crops at all, adding to the food shortages in Sri Lanka. The government made a dramatic U-turn in late October and farmers are now struggling to cover the high costs of imported fertiliser without help. “The costs of cultivating paddy [rice] have gone up astronomically … The government has no money for fertiliser subsidies. Many of us farmers are reluctant to invest money because we don’t know if we will make any profit,” said one farmer, Ranjit Hulugalle. In an attempt temporarily to ease the problems and stave off difficult and most likely unpopular policies, the government has resorted to temporary relief measures, such as credit lines to import foods, medicines and fuel from its neighbouring ally India, as well as currency swaps from India, China and Bangladesh and loans to purchase petroleum from Oman. However, these loans provide only short-term relief and have to be paid back quickly at high interest rates, adding to Sri Lanka’s debt load. Anushka Shanuka, a personal trainer, was among those who used to have a comfortable life but now is struggling to get by. “We can’t live the way we used to before the pandemic,” he said, saying the prices of vegetables had gone up by more than 50%. “The government promised to help us but nothing came, so we are just managing the best we can. I don’t know how much longer we can go on like this.” • This article was amended on 6 January 2022. “Cultivating paddy” refers to rice, not wheat as an earlier version said.Five Tuesdays in Winter Lily King Picador, £14.99, pp240 In her debut short story collection, King – the author of five highly acclaimed novels – delivers tales of adolescent self-discovery, parenthood, love, desire and grief. A teenage babysitter develops an unhealthy crush on her boss’s married son with emotionally devastating results. A bookshop owner struggles to articulate his feelings for his employee. And a teenage boy spends the summer with a pair of college students after his father’s failed suicide attempt. Intimate and revealing, this is an unflinchingly honest and insightful collection. The Treeline: The Last Forest and the Future of Life on Earth Ben Rawlence Jonathan Cape, £20, pp352 “The trees are on the move. They shouldn’t be.” So declares Rawlence in his urgent and timely investigation into the Arctic treeline: the boreal forest that has already been advancing for five decades. Focusing on the six most prevalent species of tree, and traversing regions from Scotland to Siberia, Rawlence witnesses first-hand the cultural, commercial and environmental impact of the climate emergency. Combining science, sociology, natural history and travelogue, this is a meticulously researched and compellingly presented read. Islands of Abandonment: Life in the Post-Human Landscape Cal Flyn William Collins, £9.99, pp384 (paperback) Shortlisted for multiple prizes, Flyn’s atmospheric and beautifully eerie book investigates what happens to places when humans cease to inhabit them. From Chernobyl to abandoned holiday resorts, Flyn is less interested in the environmental havoc humans have wreaked than in nature’s resilience and its ability to recuperate and thrive, resulting in a polemic that is haunting and optimistic. • To order Five Tuesdays in Winter, The Treeline or Islands of Abandonment go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyA major fire in the South African parliament in Cape Town is continuing to burn after more than six hours, causing the roof of the old National Assembly building to collapse and with authorities fearing significant damage. Images broadcast on television showed flames leaping from the roof of one large building, while several others in the parliament precinct including the National Assembly were enveloped in a thick cloud of black smoke. The fire is believed to have started in one of the older buildings in the precinct, leading to a security cordon near the cathedral where the ashes of the anti-apartheid hero Archbishop Desmond Tutu were buried on Saturday. “The roof of the Old Assembly building has collapsed and is gone,” said JP Smith, Cape Town’s mayoral committee member for safety and security. No casualties had been reported and the cause of the blaze was not yet known. President Cyril Ramaphosa told reporters at the scene an arrest had been made. “Someone has been held right now and is being questioned,” he said. A team of 30 firefighters who first arrived at the scene battled the flames for several hours before being forced to retreat and call for reinforcements.About 80 firefighters were later deployed, some using a crane to spray water on the blaze. The fire broke out at about 0300 GMT on Sunday. The National Assembly building, which has a red and white facade, is where South Africa’s last apartheid president, FW de Klerk, declared the end of the brutal white minority regime in 1990. The area around the fire in the upmarket neighbourhood was quickly cordoned off. The cordon stretched to a square where flowers were still displayed in front of the nearby St George’s Cathedral, where Tutu’s funeral took place on Saturday. After a simple mass, with a cheap coffin – according to the famously modest Tutu’s instructions – his ashes were interred in the cathedral on Sunday. Cape Town is home to South Africa’s seat of parliament, including the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces, while the government is based in Pretoria. The Houses of Parliament in Cape Town consist of three sections, including the original and oldest building that was completed in 1884. The newer additions, constructed in the 1920s and 1980s, house the National Assembly. In April, a blaze on Cape Town’s Table Mountain, which overlooks the city, spread, ravaging part of the University of Cape Town’s library holding a unique collection of African archives.As a new term is set to start for schools across the UK and the government announces masks will return for secondary pupils in England’s classrooms, we take a look at the potential impact of Omicron on children. How prevalent is Covid among children? According to case data for the week to 27 December 2021 – which is based on infections picked up by testing – rates are currently highest among young adults. However, rates per 100,000 people are also high among children, at 1,126.5 for those aged 10 to 14, and 836.2 for those aged five to nine. Further insights come from the latest data from the Office for National Statistics, based on swabs collected from randomly selected households, revealing that in the week ending 23 December infection levels in England were highest among those aged two to Year 6 and those aged 25 to 34, at about one in 15 people for both groups. An estimated one in 20 of secondary school-aged children to Year 11 in England had Covid in the same week, compared with one in 45 of those aged 50 to 69 and one in 100 of those aged 70 and over. Is Omicron more dangerous to children? Early reports from South Africa raised concerns that may be the case. However, a preliminary analysis by the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) based on the situation in England has suggested a lower risk of hospitalisation among Omicron cases in school-age children compared with Delta cases. While the findings are good news, experts have stressed some children can still become sick from Covid and require hospital care, while there are also concerns about the potential impact of long Covid. Which children are eligible to be vaccinated against Covid? Two doses of the Covid jab have been recommended for all those aged 12 to 17 in the UK, with some offered an additional jab, for example if they are severely immunosuppressed. A booster dose has recently been announced for all 16- to 17-year-olds and some children aged 12 to 15, such as those who are in a clinical risk group. Last month the UK’s Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) said that two Covid jabs would also be made available for clinically vulnerable five- to 11-year-olds, as well as those living with someone who is immunosuppressed. The doses will be a third of the quantity used for adults. What about testing? Educational staff and secondary school pupils in Scotland, Northern Ireland and England are asked to take two lateral flow tests a week, while in Wales they have been asked to take three. “Testing remains voluntary but is strongly encouraged,” guidance from the Department for Education states, adding that secondary schools should also retain capacity to carry out asymptomatic testing on-site for pupils who are unable to test themselves at home. Concerns have been raised about the availability of lateral flow tests, with those attempting to request kits online in recent days having repeatedly been faced with messages stating “no home delivery slots left”, and some pharmacies also running out. However, the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, has said schools will have their own supplies of lateral flow tests. What other measures are in place in schools? This varies from country to country. However, there are common approaches, including an emphasis on hygiene and sanitation. On Saturday it was announced that secondary school pupils in England should return to wearing masks in classrooms, not just communal areas, a measure already in place in the other countries of the UK. While Robert Halfon, the chair of the House of Commons education select committee, has raised concerns, including saying that there is very limited evidence of the efficacy of masks in educational settings, others have backed the measure, pointing out that while masks are not perfect, and their effectiveness depends on their quality, a number of studies have suggested mask-wearing in schools is linked to smaller increases in case rates and a lower likelihood of outbreaks. Zahawi has also announced that nurseries, schools and colleges would be given 7,000 more air cleaning units in a bid to improve ventilation, a move the joint general secretary of the National Education Union, Mary Bousted, said would be “completely inadequate”. Will schools have to close? Zahawi has said he will do “everything in his power” to protect education. However, some experts have said more should be done. “The fact that children [in England] who are household members of a case are mandated to come into school, and children sitting next to a case in a classroom are not even considered close contacts, suggests that policies are geared towards maximising transmission rather than protecting children and their families,” Dr Deepti Gurdasani, a clinical epidemiologist at Queen Mary University of London, told the Guardian. Another key issue is staffing, given the level of absences because of Covid and self-isolation, with ex-teachers being encouraged to return – although there are doubts this will happen in time for the new term in England. It seems likely that at least some teaching will be done remotely, with Zahawi urging schools to implement a flexible approach to learning where necessary, to maximise on-site education.A second teenager has been arrested on suspicion of murdering 15-year-old Zaian Aimable-Lina, who was stabbed to death in a park in south London on Thursday. A 15-year-old boy was arrested on suspicion of murder late on Saturday and is being held at a south London police station, the Metropolitan police said. Another 15-year-old boy was arrested on suspicion of murder on Friday and has since been released on bail until a date in late January. The killing of Zaian marked the 29th teenage homicide in London in 2021, a total that now stands at 30 after a 16-year-old was killed in west London less than an hour later. It is the city’s worst ever annual death toll from teenage homicides. Zaian died at the scene of the attack in Ashburton Park in Croydon shortly after 7.30pm on Thursday. Police said a postmortem examination gave the cause of death as a stab wound to the heart. DCI Richard Leonard made a direct appeal on Saturday for information about the local boy’s death. He said: “My team are continuing to work around the clock so that we can give Zaian’s family the answers they deserve. “No matter how insignificant you may think it, if you have information that can help, you must do the right thing and contact us immediately.” A 16-year-old boy in Yiewsley, west London, who has yet to be named, was the victim of the second fatal stabbing on Thursday. No arrests have been confirmed.Have Australia been good or have England been bad? Obviously, this is the only way to analyse the Ashes. And it allows us to fling open the door to a frenzy of sizzling takes through its zero sum, binary veneer. “Hapless England” certainly makes for engaging copy. Not only can we pick at the carcass of an on-field humiliation, but we can opine on the macro social, cultural and economic forces that shape Haseeb Hameed’s low hands. It allows David Warner to gift advice on syntho preparation. The Barmy Army can become cricket’s version of an industry lobbyist. And while “Chris Cooke bowling spells the death of Test cricket” might offer a lively conversation point, it conveniently ignores the fact he actually hoops them. It is also true, though unpopular, to say that Australia have been good. Six weeks ago this was a team that had more questions hovering over it than Prince Andrew. David Warner was turning 35. The young prodigy deigned to partner him had withdrawn, and the alternatives failed to inspire. Steve Smith hadn’t dominated for a while. Marnus Labuschagne was due a downturn. There was a yawning gap in the middle order. Cameron Green was an all-rounder without a wicket. The frontline bowlers didn’t deliver last summer. The team hadn’t played in nearly a year. The rare units of the triumphant T20 team weren’t around to offset the coach. If England could just apply some pressure, would the team return to old dynamics? Then the skipper resigned amid scandal. We chin-stroked over a bowling captain, irrespective of his eyes and his blazer fitting just-so. We weren’t used to new keepers. For a cricketing nation welded to a tradition of conservatism and incumbency, there was a fair bit of flux. These were conditions ripe for a surprise. Instead, the Ashes were secured in twelve days. Beyond the influence of white balls and private schools on England’s cricket, the component parts of Australia’s victory are worth exploring. Most significantly, every single player involved has contributed something meaningful to a win. This is important, because it illustrates a team with a complete working configuration, rare for Australia in modern times. Previous series wins, however close or dominant, tended to happen on the back of one or two outsized contributions, particularly with the bat. Warner against Pakistan. labuschagne against New Zealand. Smith in England. Here, every incumbent has firmed their grip on their position. Warner navigated the Gabba with a grizzled opener’s maturity, before an altogether more complete contribution in Adelaide. Labuschagne did the same, but in the reverse fixture. Smith almost capped a return to the captaincy with a century. Travis Head upended a rare moment of English pressure with a violent, match-winning hundred. Cameron Green graduated from gun-barrel to gun with the ball. Alex Carey has twice played the sort of brisk, keeper’s innings to close the door on opposition opportunity. He’s also gloved the ball well enough and eschewed the stardom of the stump mic. Of the batters, last to join the party was Marcus Harris. He was retained by selectors in Melbourne despite growing calls for change, and responded with an innings of 76 runs from 190 balls, outstripping the entire opposition’s second innings for balls faced. This was a match-winning innings, yet in some quarters it merely cemented views on Harris’s low ceiling. There is a unique phenomenon in Australia, possibly born of the pathways ideology, where we regard players for their future, not current, output, but Harris’ innings would’ve warmed the hardest opener’s heart, and seasoned eyes understand these types of knocks are vital to the consistency of any outfit. Australia will need more of these. Not least because they ensure bowlers always have something to work with. “The Cartel” have been irrepressible, with hard statistics showing their rewards aren’t simply a function of English ineptitude. For many years track-suited coaches have been wont to say that bowling is a closed skill, and CricViz’s Freddie Wilde gave Australia’s efforts some teeth, noting that, “Australia’s bowling in the Ashes has been the best in a 3+ match series in our ball-tracking database. No team on record has bowled as fast (38% above 140kph) &amp; as accurately (41% on good line &amp; length).” The world class operators have delivered, and each understudy has impressed. Where Scott Boland’s spirit soared after he stood on the shoulders of his ancestral giants, it was also reward for years and years of pounding the bitumen-esque Junction Oval with hard length after hard length. There is harmony in the unit too. There has been no macho bullshit, yet. The leadership dynamics overseeing present life are not yet clear, but one suspects the rising influence of calm heads like George Bailey, Tony Dodemaide, Michael Di Venuto, Andrew McDonald and Pat Cummins have helped. Justin Langer – whether through direction or design – has permitted this and must be afforded credibility for doing so. It begs an awkward question: what does Langer do now? To be fair to him, whatever it is (or isn’t), it’s working. Cummins will be the key voice in his renewal. For now, the going is good, and the Australian cricketing public is rightly accepting the home Ashes opiate, because like England, the home country has its own systemic problems ready to be revealed once stronger opponents line up in less homely conditions. That’s when when we’ll learn more about the merits of this perennial “almost-team”, as they ready themselves for another trip to explore the summit.Brentford got their ball back, although it needed an almighty wrestle. After Manchester City won here on Wednesday, Ivan Toney likened their thankless chasing of possession to being robbed by “year 11s” in a playground kickabout. Here the striker was similarly peripheral but it proved immaterial because, through persistence and sheer bloody-mindedness, his side confounded most of the afternoon’s evidence with a comeback win that makes their new-year outlook decidedly sunnier. In doing so they leapfrogged Aston Villa, who will kick themselves at letting this slip. It was not that Steven Gerrard’s players ran Brentford ragged, it was more that, after taking the lead when a piece of magic from Emiliano Buendía set up Danny Ings, they failed to build on their advantage despite broadly dominating the entire game. They were entirely untroubled until Yoane Wissa brilliantly levelled shortly before half‑time and, although that pattern persisted for most of the second period, they did not open up their opponents nearly enough to make their territory count. Emboldened, Brentford found a new lease of life as the clock ticked down. They served Villa a warning when Frank Onyeka drew a marvellous save from Emiliano Martínez and, seven minutes from time, found their hero. Mads Roerslev has been a deputy for much of his time at Brentford and, at 22, has made a modest 32 career starts. He had a convincing game at right wing-back, though, and had already teed up Wissa’s leveller when Shandon Baptiste found him in space on the right of the box. Martínez parried his first effort but had no chance from the emphatically converted rebound. It was the Dane’s first goal at senior level. “It’s a fantastic Brentford story, classic us, bringing in a young player that hadn’t played a full season for anyone,” Thomas Frank said of Roerslev, who joined in 2019 after failing to break through at FC Copenhagen. “He’s growing. He got an assist and an even better goal today.” Frank had been perplexed by Brentford’s performance in the first 43 minutes, finding them sluggish and fretting about their body language. “We were low on everything, quality and energy, in the first half,” he said, and it appeared Villa would make them pay. After a scrappy opening phase Buendía stepped up to provide a reminder of the quality he has rarely shown since joining from Norwich for £30m last summer. To the less imaginative eye there was little on when Buendía took a return pass from Douglas Luiz 10 yards inside Brentford’s half. Christian Nørgaard was quickly at his back but the Argentinian was just too smart, losing his opponent in one movement with a giddying two-touch spin and drag back. Now the hosts’ defence was exposed and Buendía made no mistake, supplying Ings with the type of delicately weighted through-ball that earned him renown at Carrow Road. The finish across Álvaro Fernández was impeccable and Villa should have pushed on from there. “Big time,” Gerrard said when asked if they had missed an opportunity. “I couldn’t believe we were level at half-time, I was scratching my head. It was a matter of when the second goal would come.” The fact was, though, that beyond a rising drive from John McGinn, the visitors had not come especially close to scoring it. Perhaps they missed Ollie Watkins, who was denied a reunion with his old club due to an unspecified problem. Brentford had offered nothing beyond a wayward swipe from Mathias Jensen but, when the midfielder exchanged passes with Roerslev, Villa backed off and provided an opening. There was still plenty to do: Roerslev found the onrushing Wissa, who cajoled the ball on to his left foot with a smart touch and curled it past Martínez from inside the D. “Sometimes you need that moment of magic in a game where it wasn’t working,” Frank said. It enlivened the crowd but Brentford, already cursing a lengthy injury list, lost Jensen and Sergi Canós to knocks after the break. They were more competitive but remained on the back foot even though Villa seemed light on ideas. Then Onyeka seized the initiative by forcing Martínez to tip onto his left post and, while Ings planted a free header at Fernández in response, there was a visible opportunity for Brentford. Roerslev took it and Gerrard fumed. “They’ve had three good attacks and scored two goals, it’s not good enough from our point of view,” he said. “If you lose your grit, your fight and your aggression to stop conceding goals it’s going to leave you vulnerable.” Villa belatedly worked Fernández through Ings and Buendía, while the substitute Trezeguet shamed his club by attempting to bail them out with a disgraceful dive in added time. It was too late; Gerrard faced the most disappointing defeat of his short reign while Brentford, amid the rough and tumble of the schoolyard, continue to mix it with the big boys.The new year may only be hours old, but here was a game to suggest Leeds United and Burnley could be moving in different directions in the months ahead. For Leeds this pressure-relieving result will have reinforced what their most optimistic supporters always believed: that the team had the quality and mettle to drag themselves away from a relegation battle this season. This result does not make things guaranteed in that regard. But a gap of eight points between Leeds and the bottom three offers hope that Marcelo Bielsa and his side can now tentatively look up the table, rather than glancing over their shoulders at the sides below them. Had the home side failed to capitalise on their dominance against Burnley, the questions which have already been levied at Bielsa’s players on numerous occasions this season would have resurfaced. Perhaps that is why Bielsa, so often a master of keeping his emotions in check, could not help himself when he enthusiastically embraced members of his coaching staff when Dan James finally put this result beyond doubt with his injury-time goal. That made it 3-1 in Leeds’s favour, and in truth the result and the margin of the win did not flatter the hosts. “It was a fair victory, and the difference was also fair,” Bielsa said afterwards, while also calling on his side to use this new-found momentum moving forward. “I don’t ignore the situation that we are in. In football, you have to prove yourself every week and even if the performance today was a step forward, we need to maintain that level of performance against any opponent and on any pitch.” Bielsa’s side led 1-0 at half-time and, just like the final outcome, it was no less than they deserved at that stage. Having enjoyed the better of the chances in the first half, the goal Leeds’s play merited came when Jack Harrison scored on the rebound after his initial strike was saved by Wayne Hennessey. Had Tyler Roberts done better with a Luke Ayling cross he headed wide of Hennessey’s goal, the hosts could have even been out of sight by half-time. It was fast becoming a case of when, not if, Sean Dyche called for Maxwel Cornet to inspire his side as he has done so often already this season. The change came at the interval and within nine minutes of the restart the Ivorian had dragged his side level with a wonderful curling free-kick. It was Cornet’s sixth goal in only 11 Premier League appearances, and as he prepares to head to the Africa Cup of Nations for potentially the next month, it is tempting to wonder just how entrenched in the relegation quagmire Burnley could be upon the Ivorian’s return. Cornet’s influence on this side is without question. How do Burnley cope without him? That is a pressing question to which Dyche must find the answer this month in the transfer window. “They had a little bit more edge against us today with that desire,” the Burnley manager said. “They had a physical will to go and take on the game, even in times they weren’t playing well. “All these details eventually, if they go in the melting pot, they’re going to hurt you: and we hurt ourselves.” Cornet’s free-kick was a moment of brilliance, the latest the 25-year-old has delivered in a Burnley shirt. It sparked enthusiastic celebrations from the travelling players in front of the Leeds supporters before Matthew Lowton was struck by a bottle. Paul Tierney had pleaded with the Burnley players not to celebrate at the home end but, regardless of that, the fact Lowton required medical attention underlined what a mindless act it was from the supporter – if you can call him that – in question. Leeds regrouped from that setback though and, freshened by the introduction of James and Joe Gelhardt from the bench, went back ahead when a clever short corner found its way to Stuart Dallas. His magnificent strike left Hennessey flatfooted as it curled into the corner to put the hosts 2-1 in front, before Leeds finally added the killer touch in stoppage time. How pleasing it must have been for Bielsa to see two substitutes combine for the third, as Gelhardt’s cross was met by the head of James. Hennessey parried it, but could not keep it out, sparking wild celebrations inside Elland Road. Perhaps the home supporters, much like Bielsa judging by his own reaction, can sense the tide may be turning as 2022 begins.Thank you for joining me. Here is Andy Hunter’s match report from Goodison Park. Here is the report from Leeds. Your man Nick Ames - and his big woolly hat - was at Brentford. You will probably want to join Rob Smyth for the main event. At least I am not alone when it comes to Trezeguet being banned. Real Madrid lost. Congratulations, Danny! Burnley managed two shots on target and create just eight chances in total. Their goal came from a 30-yard free-kick. They are not good enough in the final third, that’s for sure. The Clarets are in big trouble. A bit of a smash and grab. A fine win for Brighton. Brentford 2-1 Aston Villa: Martinez comes up for a corner but Fernandez punches clear. Trezeguet dribbles the ball into the box and then throws himself to the ground in hilarious fashion. Ban him for life. A James header finishes this as a contest. Brentford 2-1 Aston Villa: Buendia rises above everyone (somehow) to head towards to the corner but Fernandez palms it wide. Brentford 2-1 Aston Villa: A deep cross to the back post finds Targett but he cannot direct his header on goal and it drifts wide. Brentford 2-1 Aston Villa: We are almost level once again as Ings gets away a shot from eight yards which Fernandez does well to save, before watching defender Jansson clear behind for a corner. Brentford 2-1 Aston Villa: Roerslev gets into the box and the ball lands at his feet, he takes a wicked shot which Martinez can only palm straight back to the Brentford man who makes no mistake at the second time of asking. A fine finish from the wing-back at the second attempt. Brentford 1-1 Aston Villa: McGinn whips in a free-kick from the right which is flicked towards goal by Ings but the header lacks pace and Fernandez takes hold. A fine finish from the Northern Irishman who curls the ball into the corner from outside the box. Brentford 1-1 Aston Villa: Buendia is in pain on the deck after an awkward landing following a challenge for a header. Looks like he might have dislocated a shoulder or something of that ilk. Trezeguet replaces Trao. Everton 2-3 Brighton: Gordon sweeps home a Kenny cross to get Everton back into the match. Game on again? Brentford 1-1 Aston Villa: Onyeka dribbles towards the box and picks his spot from the edge of the area but Martinez gets down well to the left to tip the ball wide. Leeds 1-1 Burnley: Some fine work by James on the wing ends with a fine cross into the box, which reaches Raphinha but he can only direct the ball wide from six yards. Everton 1-3 Brighton: A second for the Argentinian who volleys home with aplomb (and power). Game over? Everton 1-2 Brighton: Allan lets rip from 30 yards and it looks to be sailing into the top corner until Sanchez reaches the ball with his fingertips. Brentford 1-1 Aston Villa: Cash lays off a pass on the touchline and is caught late by Baptiste. He holds his leg in pain but gets up to carry on. Brentford 1-1 Aston Villa: Sanson is on for Ramsey. Leeds 1-1 Burnley: A couple of changes for the hosts as Gelhardt and James are on for Roberts and Harrison. Leeds 1-1 Burnley: “Is Wood really that bad?” asks Joachim Suggate. “I’d been under the impression he was okay.” He is, to be fair, OK but has scored three goals in 19 games this season, which is less than ideal. Brentford 1-1 Aston Villa: The visitors are back on top and looking pretty slick. Ings collects a pass on the edge of the box, shuffles to find some space and takes aim but his shot is deflected wide. Everton 1-2 Brighton: Love a good myth. Leeds 1-1 Burnley: I was there for this goal. I support neither team. Leeds 1-1 Burnley: I think the Clarets need to do business more urgently than anyone else around them at the bottom. Their squad lacks any sort of quality in the final third currently and with Cornet departing for a month, they could be in a world of trouble by the time he returns. Leeds 1-1 Burnley: Lowton needs treatment after being hit by a missile thrown by Leeds fans, it would seem. Leeds 1-1 Burnley: Cornet pings in a free-kick from 30 yards to score his sixth goal in 11 Premier League appearances. A shame he is off to Afcon ... Everton 1-2 Brighton: Gordon cuts in from the right and fires a shot at goal which is deflected in. Burnley’s only decent forward scores! The Toffees are back in it. Brentford 1-1 Aston Villa: Buendia looks to curl one into the corner from just outside the area but it flashes past the post. Canos walks back off. Ghoddos on. Brentford 1-1 Aston Villa: Canos jogs back on ... Brentford 1-1 Aston Villa: Canos looks to have done his hamstring. Everton 0-2 Brighton: Calvert-Lewin has a fine chance but his volley from inside the area is superbly blocked by Burn. Everton 0-2 Brighton: No changes for Everton, however, despite being pretty ruddy awful in the opening 45 minutes. Leeds 1-0 Burnley: Dyche sends on Cornet for Gudmundsson to ensure he has one decent forward on the pitch. The whistles are blown to indicate another 45 minutes of action in the Premier League matches. Over in Spain, Real Madrid have lost at Getafe thanks to a goal from Manchester City legend Enes Unal. It’s a good goal. Brentford 1-1 Aston Villa Everton 0-2 Brighton Leeds 1-0 Burnley Brentford 1-1 Aston Villa: Another dangerous cross from Canos is sliced over his own crossbar by Ramsey. Brentford very much on top now. Brentford 1-1 Aston Villa: The equaliser has given the hosts a lift. Canos does some fine work on the left before sending in a very dangerous cross that no one attacks. Brentford have been pretty poor for the majority of the match but Wissa draws them level thanks to a beautiful first touch and a wonderful curling effort from 20 yards. Leeds 1-0 Burnley: The blame for the opener can be laid at Tarkowski’s door after his poor pass meant for Lowton is intercepted by Harrison, allowing him to get in on goal. It has been coming at Elland Road as the winger finds the back of the net at the second time of asking after Hennessey saves his first shot. Everton 0-2 Brighton: Almost a third for Brighton as Lallana takes aim for the bottom corner but Pickford reacts well to keep it out. Everton 0-2 Brighton: Not the best. Leeds 0-0 Burnley: Roberts really should give the hosts the lead but he plants his header from six yards wide. Burnley need to up their game. Brentford 0-1 Aston Villa: Onyeka is now in the book for bundling Buendia over. Everton 0-2 Brighton: Get Graham Stuart on, Rafa! Brentford 0-1 Aston Villa: Ramsey is booked for an impressively cynical trip on Onyeka. Leeds 0-0 Burnley: The hosts are certainly on top and Burnley are feeling the pressure. Tarkowski goes into the book for felling Firpo. Brentford 0-1 Aston Villa: McGinn is given plenty of space 25 yards from goal, he takes a couple of touches and then lets rip but his effort flies over the bar. Calvert-Lewin whacks it over the bar. Oh dear. Everton 0-2 Brighton: A penalty to Everton after a VAR review finds Anthony Gordon was fouled by Enock Mwepu. The big defender heads home a corner. A dreadful day for Everton thus far. Leeds 0-0 Burnley: Raphinha picks up the ball just inside the Burnley half, spots Hennessey off his line so decides to chip him causing the goalkeeper to panic and backpedal until he sees the shot drift just over the bar. Brentford 0-1 Aston Villa: Ramsey is on the deck after a clash of heads with Norgaard. The medical staff are quickly on to assess the midfielder. Leeds 0-0 Burnley: Dallas bursts into the box and whacks a shot at goal but Hennessey is very much equal to it. The striker drifts away from the centre-back to find space in the channel where he collects a lovely weighted pass from Buendia before sliding it across the goalkeeper with his left foot into the corner. Leeds 0-0 Burnley: Roberts goes into the book for a lunge on Lowton who needs treatment after being caught by the Leeds man’s studs. The Burnley defender does get back up and is fine to continue. Brentford 0-0 Aston Villa: Traore collects a loose ball after a poor touch from Toney, he moves the ball to Buendia, allowing him to slip a pass through to Ings, who shifts it into space and fires off a shot which is deflected wide. Everton 0-1 Brighton: Kenny, the man who played Maupay onside for his assist for the goal, is booked for clattering into the scorer Mac Allister. Leeds 0-0 Burnley: It is absolutely pelting it down in Yorkshire to make things tricky for those on the pitch at Elland Road. Everton 0-1 Brighton: The Argentinian collects a Maupay knockdown as the Everton defenders watch on, allowing him to calmly finish in style. A cracking start for Brighton at Goodison Park. Everton 0-0 Brighton: Benitez is using Seamus Coleman as a left wing-back and is forcing Lucas Digne to watch how it goes. Brentford 0-0 Aston Villa: Sergi Canos puts in an early tackle on Matt Cash to get the home crowd going. The whistles are a-peeping across the country! A new face at Goodison Park. Brentford’s Mathias Jensen has had a problem in the warm up and is being assessed in the changing room. If he can’t start, he will be replaced by Shandon Baptiste. Steven Gerrard says the club have a mix of Covid and injuries problems does not thing he is allowed to offer up the details. “Who has already moved?” I hear no one ask. Calvert-Lewin starts for Everton which is fine news for them. They have really missed him since he was injured at the start of the season. Lucas Digne is also recalled to the bench following his well-documented beef with Rafa Benitez. All these teams need to do a bit of business. Our man at Brentford, Nick Ames, has been in touch. He says it is raining in west London and most of it is falling on him. #PrayforNick. And a little bit of Rich Jolly to add to that. Aaron Lennon keeps his place in the Burnley starting lineup upon his return to Leeds, the club he made his debut for in August 2003, after being their best player at Old Trafford in the week. They also have Maxwel Cornet on the bench, giving them some hope they can change the game with a substitution for once. One man not playing for Aston Villa ... Brentford: Fernandez, Pinnock, Jansson, Sorensen, Roerslev, Norgaard, Jensen, Onyeka, Canos, Wissa, Toney. Subs: Cox, Thompson, Forss, Ghoddos, Ajer, Baptiste, Janelt, Bidstrup, Stevens. Aston Villa: Martinez, Cash, Konsa, Hause, Targett, Douglas Luiz, McGinn, Buendia, Ramsey, Traore, Ings. Subs: Steer, Sanson, Trezeguet, El Ghazi, Philogene-Bidace, Chukwuemeka, Archer, Iroegbunam, Feeney. Everton: Pickford, Kenny, Holgate, Keane, Godfrey, Allan, Doucoure, Gordon, Coleman, Gray, Calvert-Lewin. Subs: Begovic, Digne, Iwobi, Gomes, Gbamin, Rondon, Simms, Dobbin, Onyango. Brighton: Sanchez, Veltman, Webster, Burn, Cucurella, Bissouma, Mwepu, Lallana, Trossard, Mac Allister, Maupay. Subs: Steele, Lamptey, Gross, Moder, Alzate, Welbeck, March, Duffy, Richards. Leeds: Meslier, Ayling, Koch, Llorente, Firpo, Forshaw, Dallas, Klich, Raphinha, Roberts, Harrison. Subs: Klaesson, James, Bate, Gelhardt, Hjelde, Summerville, Greenwood, Jenkins, Moore. Burnley: Hennessey, Lowton, Tarkowski, Mee, Taylor, Lennon, Gudmundsson, Westwood, Cork, McNeil, Wood. Subs: Norris, Stephens, Rodriguez, Cornet, Collins, Pieters, Bardsley, Vydra, Long. Despite Covid’s best efforts, we have three 2pm kick-offs for your enjoyment. The most important fixture, arguably, is Burnley’s trip to Leeds as it is bordering on being a relegation six-pointer. Burnley are in relatively poor form, as they have been since the start of the season, but they are up against a Leeds side who are struggling and lacking some pretty key players. Kalvin Phillips and Liam Cooper are out for the hosts, a less than ideal outcome for Marcelo Bielsa as he needs to fill two key roles within the spine of his team. They have conceded 14 goals in their past three games, all defeats you will not be surprised to hear. Burnley have not won away since May but will think they are in with a chance at Elland Road. Everton are hosting Brighton in a game which should see Dominic Calvert-Lewin make his first appearance since August. His teammates haven’t played for a while either after seeing their past three matches called off due to Covid. Brighton arrive off the back of earning a dramatic draw at Stamford Bridge to give them a big boost. Brentford will be hoping to have retrieved their ball from Manchester City as they await Aston Villa’s trip to west London. The Bees have lost their past three games, which is less than ideal. Anyway … let’s hope for a fun afternoon.As Covid-19 case numbers have continued to rise following the arrival of the Omicron variant alongside the easing of restrictions in Australia, the focus has begun to turn to the positivity testing rate. In New South Wales, where the rise in cases has been steepest, the infection rate as a proportion of the population is now one of the highest in the world. By New Year’s Eve the rate of infection was about 2.59 per 1,000 people, higher than the United States. As cases have risen, so too has the positivity rate, which by Sunday had reached 20% in NSW. Other states have also experienced a steady increase in the ratio of positive cases. In Tasmania it reached 26% on Sunday, Victoria’s was 14.8% and Queensland’s 10.5%. So what is the positivity rate? And what does it tell us about the spread of the virus as evidence of Omicron’s milder severity continues to mount and governments try to shift the focus away from case numbers? What is the positivity rate? The positivity rate of infection is the number of positive cases of Covid as a proportion of the number of PCR tests carried out. For example, a positivity rate of 20% in NSW means one in five people whose tests were processed in the reporting period had the virus. The figure doesn’t tell us how many cases are circulating in the community, but it can help to understand how many of the likely cases are being picked up. That, according to Alexandra Martiniuk, a professor of epidemiology at the University of Sydney, was particularly true at the beginning of the pandemic. “In general, the lower the positivity level, the more likely we think we’re catching, if not all, then most of the cases in the community,” she said. “As it rises you think we’re likely missing cases, and the more it goes up we’re likely to be missing more and more.” Why is it rising so quickly? Martiniuk says that throughout the Covid pandemic, the reliability of the positivity rate has been affected by testing levels, and the policies dictating who gets tested and who doesn’t. She uses the example of Malawi, where she previously worked as a representative for the World Health Organization. Throughout the pandemic that country did very little population testing, limiting it to people who presented at emergency departments. In Australia, policy changes may be affecting the positivity rate. Recent changes to Covid-19 testing policies have seen governments ask people not to get tested unless they are symptomatic or fit a new and narrower definition of a close contact. As test numbers begin to fall, as they did on Sunday, it’s likely that the positivity rate will increase. “It’s like we had this bigger bag which contained all the people we have now, but also a lot of other people. People who might have been a casual contact, or who fit the old definition of a close contact, or who might have had very mild symptoms,” she said. “So now our bag is smaller so that we just have those symptomatic people and the very close contacts. So we may be missing those other people.” The positivity rate can also be affected by other things, such as the Christmas and new year holiday period. While the NSW positivity rate was 20% on Sunday, the seven-day average was about 10%. Does it matter? Certainly for scientists trying to understand how the virus is spreading, it is a figure worth watching. As Martiniuk puts it, for people seeking to respond to the pandemic, data “is like the flight path”. “Without it you’re flying blind.” And while changes to testing may affect the number of cases being caught, she said it was also important to recognise the need to focus resources. “I’m not so silly as to think we’re not in the situation that we’re in,” she said. “I think epidemiologists recognise times are changing and they need to and it’s both good and bad at the same time. We are having a resource issue and there’s no way we could PCR test everyone with Omicron. “PCRs need to get turned around faster because a lot of the treatments are needed in the first five days, so particularly vulnerable people need to know their status.” So as the focus of the pandemic shifts so that case numbers are no longer the focus of government, is it still relevant? As the positivity rate in Australia has climbed, some have pointed to the World Health Organization’s declaration that a positivity rate of 5% and under is evidence of spread that is under control. But that declaration was made towards the beginning of the pandemic in May 2020. At that point, governments were still seeking to control the virus, while Australia was trying to suppress it, or in some states, eradicate it. “Test positivity still has value, as in the metric is still valuable, but the benchmark of 5%, I’m not sure,” Martiniuk said. “I think obviously if a country is at 5% that’s great, it is a good indicator that their local pandemic is under control, but whether it’s achievable for most countries to aim for that at this point is another question.” However that doesn’t mean people should believe the pandemic is over. “We still need to test and we still need to go back to that 2020 thinking of bending the curve so if someone is really sick they can get the care the need. I think that message has been lost a little bit. “We still need testing to stop those chains of transmission even though it does feel overwhelming.”Sorry? Bugger that. It’s “no” that always seems to be the hardest word. Every time I look at my diary for the upcoming week, there is at least one entry that triggers the thought: “Why did I say yes to that?” It’s a common problem among my many people-pleasing friends. It’s like a pokies hit. Someone asks a favour, you say “yes”, you get a smile in return. Ka-ching! Good feelings. Until the dreaded thing looms in the calendar and the good feelings disappear like coins into a slot machine. As with all personal problems that have an easy answer (say “no”), I overthought the issue, catastrophised about the consequences of turning things down, and ultimately researched the shit out of it. I read productivity books (well, listened to the condensed versions on Blinkist, because who has the time?). I looked at the habits of effective people, thought fast and slow about life hacks, tried to learn the subtle art of not giving a fuck. I cogitated on all the hints, tips and tricks that people have written entire books about, and came up with two things that have been helping me ever since. No 1: Write a not-to-do list. The not-to-do list is potentially endless, but for the purposes of saying “no”, should be kept to things you are asked to do by those who would suck your very soul from your body. Mine includes things like “give speeches”, “drive long distances to catch up with people whose conversation is only bearable with copious amounts of wine”, and “work for free”. It helps crystallise in my mind the things I am allowed to say no to. Sorry, I don’t do speeches. I don’t do long drives (I usually leave off the bit about the conversations). I don’t work for free. It’s still not easy, but having the list at least gives me pause before “sure, I’d love to” trips off my traitorous tongue. No 2: Ask “would I want to do that tonight?” This is handy for all the other requests that have not yet made it on to the not-to-do list. It’s about being nicer to Future Tory. See, I suffer from peoplepleasia to an extent, but my larger problem is an entirely misplaced optimism about the capacity of Future Tory. Today Tory, when asked to commit to something in the hazy future, firmly believes that Future Tory will have her life in order by that point. Future Tory will have boundless energy and limitless time to spend on things other people want her to do. Future Tory, when she sees what Today Tory has committed her to, generally thinks Today Tory is a bitch. So now, when someone asks if I’d like to pop along to their crochet circle in a month and give a talk about defamation law, I think of Future Tory, and I ask myself if I’d say “yes” if the crochet circle was tonight. The answer is, almost invariably, “no”.Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune condition where your immune system mistakenly attacks healthy tissue in and around your joints, causing ongoing inflammation and pain. Some people have arthritis in the small joints of their hands and feet. In others, the inflammation involves major joints, such as the shoulders and the hips. Sometimes just getting out of bed and making it through the day with rheumatoid arthritis may feel like all you can manage. “But humans are designed to move,” says Dr Daniel Lewis, a rheumatologist and chronic pain specialist. He says every system of the body – from the endocrine system to the nervous system, the musculoskeletal system, the sleep-wake cycle and mental health – is influenced by how physically active we are. “When you stop moving, systems start to collapse,” he says. “Movement encourages the natural healing function of the body – if you rest, you rust.” Errol Lim, a physiotherapist and the managing director of BJC Health, says that in the early stages of the disease, exercise can help prevent worsening of the joints. In more advanced stages, exercise can help reduce stiffness and pain. It can also improve mood and self-confidence. “There is no form of arthritis that won’t benefit from exercise, and a form of exercise can be found for every individual, irrespective of the pattern of their arthritis,” Lewis says. “Age is no barrier.” Activities like strength training and low-impact workouts can help relieve the pain. Here is a simple guide that can help you get moving, but it is always best to seek advice from a physiotherapist before you begin an exercise program. The class: hydrotherapy Hydrotherapy can be beneficial in treating rheumatoid arthritis, particularly when the pain makes exercising a challenge. It involves a series of exercises that generally focus on slow, controlled movements done in a warm-water pool. The water temperature is usually 34ºC, warmer than a typical swimming pool. The water supports your weight, and the warmth allows your muscles to relax and eases the pain in your joints, helping you exercise. The water also provides some resistance to moving your joints. By pushing your arms and legs against the water, you can improve your muscle strength. The move: the deadlift Everyone could benefit from the deadlift exercise, Lim suggests. “That’s a really functional position for all of us,” he says. “That’s how we lift children, how we lift our luggage, the box from the boot of our car, the six bottles of wine that we carry back from the supermarket.” Stand upright with your feet shoulder-width apart and your hands just outside your legs. Travel your hands along your thighs as you bend your knees and hips, keeping the spine straight. Then slowly lift by straightening the legs, as if you are picking up something from the floor. Lim recommends beginning with this simple movement and then progressing by increasing the number of repetitions or adding lightweights. “It’s a very slow progression.” The deadlift forces you to grip, recruiting the wrist, forearm and shoulder muscles. “A significant percentage of people with rheumatoid arthritis have issues with their upper back and neck,” Lim says. “This particular exercise can help with that.” The activity: dancing Dancing can be a fun activity to keep the body moving. Dancing can help improve blood circulation and lubricate your joints, improving flexibility. It also releases serotonin and endorphins in your brain, which lift your mood and help prevent the mental health issues often associated with a chronic disease. A morning playlist can help you move through gentle dance moves to relieve the morning stiffness most people with rheumatoid arthritis experience. Dancing does not need to be vigorous. Small, rhythmic movements that follow your favourite tune can still offer the joy of dance without putting too much pressure on the joints. Lim says he was surprised to find that dancing is very popular among his patients. “It’s the music, and people love moving with it.” The hard pass: don’t overdo it Lewis says people with rheumatoid arthritis should avoid exercises that aggravate pain or make it last into the next day. “It’s about finding the movement that allows people to function and keep their body moving, but not flare up.” “We spend a lot of time teaching our patients how to do appropriate pacing,” says Lim, “and staging the amount of activity they do throughout the week. We teach them how to listen to their body so that they know they’re not over-pushing it.”April Fool’s Day 2015 was just another routine day for us. Late that afternoon I parked the car above Dripstone Cliffs and headed towards Casuarina Beach. Even though you can’t swim in the Northern Territory’s coastal seas because of crocodiles and stingers, I loved the beaches and would run with my Tenterfield terrier, Finn, most evenings. Before letting Finn off his lead, I checked the water for crocs. You can’t be too complacent; dogs have previously been a croc’s dinner here. This was my main concern that evening. Not the approaching storm or getting wet. Storms usually pass as quickly as they come. I remember the storm clouds rolling in, some thunder and lightning from behind us. It didn’t stand out as potentially life-threatening. The remainder was like playing in a rugby game, where you remember running on to the field then waking up concussed, knowing nothing of the game’s final score. I worked as a general paediatrician at Royal Darwin hospital. I woke up there, surrounded by fellow doctors and repeatedly asked them, “Where am I? What happened? Did lightning strike me?” During my night in ICU, I dreamed of being on the beach with Finn, feeling exposed, vulnerable and a bright flash. I don’t recall any other specifics. Thankfully, Finn was safe. He was off his lead and further down the beach. Over the following weeks, others relayed their recollections. Lots of people were on the beach that night. They saw the flash. Some even felt the ground shudder. They saw me fall and try to get up before collapsing. A medical doctor was running directly behind me. Her quick attendance saved my life. I was resuscitated on the beach before being taken to emergency by ambulance. Besides my physical signs of a burnt lip and mouth abrasions, they’d picked up a heart arrhythmia and immediately performed CPR. A week later, I broke out in a widespread rash – a delayed reaction to the strike. It looked terrible and was extremely uncomfortable. The doctors and I struggled to find an exact cause. It was either a post-lightning phenomenon, where the lightning strike rattles the bacteria on your skin and you become more susceptible to irritation, or a delayed reaction and an overwhelming stress response to the strike. While it took a few days to settle down, I haven’t had any issues since. Although I only spent a night in ICU, a series of cognitive tests were undertaken with a neuropsychologist, monitoring my heart and brain to ensure there were no lingering effects. I resumed work six weeks later, after the tests returned satisfactory results. In 2020, I moved to John Hunter Children’s hospital in Newcastle. I grew up in South Africa, and after uni, I applied for jobs in Australia principally because I wanted to enjoy its renowned beaches and surf. Today, Amalia, my three-year-old daughter, and beach activities occupy every spare minute of my time outside work. I know I’m extremely lucky to be alive. I’m still living the Aussie dream. I don’t have any fear or anxiety about storms, because I don’t remember being struck. They also say lightning never strikes twice. I haven’t stopped running on beaches, or in storms. It hasn’t changed my lifestyle, but it has made me assess my life and what’s important. I don’t take anything for granted these days.In the second year of the pandemic I ran 2,000km. This was a big leap from the first year of the pandemic, and the preceding 50 years, during which I’d only ever dragged my dad bod around the same 5km route a few times a week. In running terms I was stagnating, so my New Year’s resolution was to run further and faster. Go Forrest! To help, I downloaded a running app to track each effort. The GPS recording of times, routes and distances turned into a challenge (obsession) to go faster and beat personal records. I re-read Murakami’s What I Talk About When I Talk About Running and imagined myself following his disciplined daily running routine. Through January and February the runs stretched to 7km and then 8km. By March they included a 10km weekend effort. My legs ached and there were blisters, but I lost weight and my legs strengthened. In April I was running up to 12km. I registered for a June half-marathon. When May came I was doing 15km runs and by the start of June I’d tackled a 20. This gave me confidence I could complete the race. Then the pandemic kicked-off again. With three days to go, the marathon was cancelled as the Sydney lockdown began. So I ran my own half-marathon length on the day and finished in a respectable time. Murakami would be proud. While exploring my app’s advanced features, I discovered the goal-setting function. Reviewing my the distance I’d already covered, I set a goal of finishing 2,000km by the end of the year. It had a nice round-number sound to it. Lock it in. Working from home during lockdown, my day was structured around a lunch run. With nothing going on, it was always the highlight of my day. I ran the deserted Sydney CBD, down an empty George Street to Circular Quay, past the Opera House, through the Botanic Garden. As restrictions eased I’d head over the Harbour Bridge or to Bondi, the inner west or Centennial Park. Sometimes I’d run with a friend, but usually it was solo. At first the family feigned interest in where I’d gone each day. I’d tell them what I’d seen, how far I’d run. I’d share my pace and my exertion rate. And then they stopped asking. On a group run in October, while chatting and distracted I rolled an ankle on a kerb. Pain shot up my leg. I hobbled home and removed my sock to find a swollen foot. By evening it turned purple-black. I retired to the sofa with an ice pack and an exaggerated war story for anyone who’d listen. There were doctor trips and an ultrasound and I was advised to take at least a month of rest. I tried to accept the end of my challenge. In the absence of running I felt stale and sluggish. I scoured running websites for recovery-time advice. Most concurred with the doctor but I kept looking until I found shorter recommendations. Call it stupidity or hope, but three weeks after the injury I was doing short walks and a gentle shuffle. In the absence of searing pain I was back. Building up from short, slow runs, I increased to 5km and then 7km in the first week. With no significant complications I reviewed my challenge: I’d lost a lot of time. I was way behind the schedule. But I was also obsessed, and it was mathematically possible that by running 11km a day for six weeks, with one rest day a week, I could reach my target on Christmas Eve. This would give me an end-of-year break, and a chance to boast at the family Christmas table. It was back on. By December it was hot and wet. I learnt why running is not a summer sport. The morning runs got earlier to avoid the heat but the humidity was miserable and I was dripping and exhausted. With only one day off a week, the relentless schedule became a chore. When the alarm went off I’d lie there dreading the kilometres I had to run before work. But I also had to do it. And I did. On Christmas Eve I completed my challenge. It was the first New Year’s resolution I’d kept longer than two weeks. To celebrate I did the final run with my sons, who came along for the glory lap. Heading up the last hill, I considered whether to keep going in 2022. But then we rounded the last corner and sprinted home, while I ignored the twinges in my ankle. Two-thousand kilometres sounds like a long way – but it feels even further.Is it possible to let that go? Is there someone else who can help you? Could you defer it for a week? To each of these queries and other similar ones, Mary gave a firm shake of the head and an even firmer “no”. This was a pattern. Our sessions had a real “groundhog day” feel to them. Mary would arrive looking harassed and tired, tell me how frantic her week had been and how many things there were still to do. We tried problem solving and planning, prioritising and all manner of productivity hacks. Nothing shifted. Mary’s struggle was also too familiar. She reminded me of many other high-achieving people I have worked with who had sought help for exhaustion, or health difficulties or burnout. One of their hallmarks is seemingly endless resources of grit. American psychologist Angela Duckworth is well known for her research on the phenomenon of grit: Grit entails working strenuously toward challenges, maintaining effort and interest over years despite failure, adversity and plateaus in progress. Her studies indicate that grit is more predictive of success and achievement in areas like education and business than intelligence or natural ability. Greater grit is associated with people sticking it out through difficult periods and staying longer in a job. Interestingly, research also indicates that those with higher grit are happier and more satisfied with their lives. This finding certainly didn’t hold true for Mary. Is there a downside to too much grit? A 2015 study found that people with high levels of grit often persist with difficult tasks to their own detriment. Participants had to solve as many puzzles as they could – but some of the puzzles were unsolvable. Grittier individuals spent more time attempting to solve unsolvable puzzles and solved fewer overall than their less gritty counterparts. The researchers’ conclusion? There is value in knowing when to quit. Discussing this knowledge at an intellectual level is one thing. Translating it into a felt sense that some change is possible is much harder. One of the shifts in my work with Mary came after a good discussion about strengths and vulnerabilities. Often we use our strengths to protect ourselves from experiencing our vulnerabilities. Perhaps I over-work to keep feelings of vulnerability at bay, or book myself up with social engagements to avoid noticing I’m feeling alone. It’s smart coping, but it has a downside. Overusing strengths can mean we can rely on them too much, or use them too often, or miss noticing that they are not so helpful any more. Mary’s grit was definitely a strength and it was definitely over used. Gently, to make sure we didn’t trigger too much emotional distress, we brainstormed what the grit might be protecting her from. Mary’s protections again reminded me of other high achievers: protecting her from asking for help; protecting her from feeling vulnerable or not in control; protecting her from feeling that she had somehow failed if she didn’t nail every challenge. Another important insight was helping Mary to recognise that she is living and working in an environment that reinforces grit. Our western culture celebrates the qualities of persistence and striving. We love stories of people triumphing over adversity of all kinds. We are also quick to criticise anyone who appears to “give up”. The great basketball player Michael Jordan declared: “If you quit once it becomes a habit. Never quit.” Not persevering is seen as the “soft option” or taking the easy road out. For Mary, moving away from too much grit then needed to be an individual journey but also a shared experience. Another young woman I worked with who was a successful athlete gave a presentation on grit to her team and coaches to spark better conversations about persevering and also recovery, when to push and when to pause. When we speak freely about our struggles with family, colleagues and friends, we are better able to identify when someone else, or ourselves, might need a gentle nudge towards pausing instead of pushing. This means we don’t need to walk the path alone. We know from psychological research that we are more likely to succeed and lift our wellbeing with new behaviours if we seek to “add” rather than eliminate (ie set ourselves an “approach” goal rather than an “avoidance” goal). Supporting Mary to practise some active “letting go” , asking for help, learning to ease up on how much she could get done in a day, and to find new hobbies that are more about experiences and being rather than achievements all helped to create some small shifts. And my athlete pulled back from competitions for a period of time to study and have more time with friends. When she returned, her form and performance were better than ever. If you have too much grit, I hope reading this gives you permission to gently check in with yourself (and maybe others). Is this useful for me? When is it not? What else could I do instead? And what other strategies might I learn that enhance my wellbeing rather than deplete it? Interested in how “gritty” you are? Take Angela Duckworth’s grit survey here. • Gaynor Parkin is a clinical psychologist and CEO of Umbrella WellbeingThe last couple of years have surely reminded us that nobody can predict the future and nobody knows what’s coming around the corner. We can safely assume, however, that whatever troubles befall us, artists will struggle on, fighting the good fight, telling stories and taking us to places of imagination and illumination. As always, the new year offers a range of Australian films to look forward to. Here are 10 of them. Loveland Director: Ivan Sen Ivan Sen – the director of Mystery Road, Beneath Clouds and Toomelah – behind the wheel of a sumptuous-looking cyberpunk drama set in a futuristic Hong Kong? Yes please! Ryan Kwanten leads the cast as an assassin romantically drawn to a nightclub singer (Jillian Nguyen) and periodically given lecture-like monologues from a scuffy, intellectual-looking Hugo Weaving about loneliness, machines and how he should “walk away while you can”. A line that of course guarantees the protagonist will embark on a perilous journey. In cinemas 10 February Three Thousand Years of Longing Director: George Miller The great director George Miller is far from prolific, generally helming around two or three major productions a decade. Not much is known about his upcoming fantasy-drama, other than that it involves a British woman who discovers an ancient bottle in Istanbul with a genie inside it that offers her three wishes. The film (starring Idris Elba and Tilda Swinton) must therefore address the old “why not just wish for more wishes?” chestnut. Which we all know is a) a very good wish but b) prohibited by most genies. Seriously Red Director: Gracie Otto Sometimes, when your career’s on the skids and you’re determined to get your life back on track, the only thing to do is become a Dolly Parton impersonator. Right?! This is the premise of Gracie Otto’s musical dramedy, executive produced by and co-starring Rose Byrne, about a realtor, Red (Krew Boylan), navigating the aforementioned new career with (quoting the official synopsis) “bouncing silicon breasts” and “an intense relationship with a Kenny Rogers impersonator”. 88 Days a Slave Director: Christina Stenseth The concept of slavery is often relegated to historical discussions, implying we live in a world where it is no longer a problem. Christina Stenseth begs to differ, and has made an observational documentary arguing modern slavery in fact takes place in this very county – on farms where travellers are exploited and underpaid through the Australian government’s working holiday maker program. The Mountain Director: Rolf de Heer In the first one-and-a-half decades of the new millennium, veteran genre-hopping director Rolf de Heer (Bad Boy Bubby, Dance Me to My Song, Dingo) pumped out eight feature films and one TV documentary – but his output has been scarce in recent years. When I bumped into him recently at a hotel in Adelaide, De Heer assured me he was not retiring; not by a long shot. His next film is about a character named BlackWoman who is abandoned in a cage in the middle of the desert, continuing an array of highly respected films De Heer has made in close collaboration with Indigenous people – including Ten Canoes and Charlie’s Country, starring the late and great David Gulpilil. Blueback Director: Robert Connolly Director Robert Connolly’s latest literary adaptation (his others include The Dry and Barracuda) joins a growing number of films based on Tim Winton books. With a message about preserving the beauty of Australia’s oceans, the story follows a child named Abby (Ilsa Fogg) who becomes besties with a wild groper, thus continuing another trend of homegrown films about people becoming pals with animals and creatures. This is the cinema of Babe, Storm Boy, Red Dog, Oddball and Penguin Bloom. The cast includes Mia Wasikowska, Radha Mitchell and Eric Bana. Gold Director: Anthony Hayes There’s gold in them thar Zac Efron! No wait: there’s Zac Efron in them thar Gold! In his outback drama, director Anthony Hayes plonks the American heartthrob in the unforgiving Australian desert, where Efron’s drifter character a) finds a very chunky nugget of the good stuff, but b) gets increasingly distraught and frazzled, continuing a line of films in which white people in the desert get burnt like pork chops (see also: Gary Bond in Wake in Fright, Mia Wasikowska in Tracks and David Wenham in The Furnace). In cinemas 13 January; and Stan on 25 January War &amp; Order Director: Larissa Behrendt Larissa Behrendt has carved out a significant niche as a cine-essayist exploring subjects important to Indigenous Australian culture, including in Araatika: Rise Up! (about the creation of an Indigenous Australian haka) and After the Apology (about removal of First Nations kids from their families following Kevin Rudd’s apology to the stolen generations). In War &amp; Order, Behrendt will explore half a century of First Nations activism in Australia and the ways it has been captured by artist Richard Bell. Elvis Director: Baz Luhrmann The latest display of Extreme Cinematic Excess – also known as “a Baz Luhrmann movie” – made last year’s list of films to look forward to, as did a few others delayed due to the funny old year (understatement of the century) that was 2021. But given Luhrmann movies have a way of soaking up all the attention, a double inclusion feels justified. A teensy-weensy bit of footage from his upcoming Elvis Presley biopic was tweeted by the man himself last month; expect, in the full film, tonnes more glitter. In cinemas 24 June The Drover’s Wife: The Legend of Molly Johnson Director: Leah Purcell Like The Nightingale, key themes of Leah Purcell’s feminist western – which reworks Henry Lawson’s short story The Drover’s Wife – include vengeance, gendered violence and class. The film expands on a play Purcell wrote and starred in and also adapted into a novel. Set in the New South Wales Snowy Mountains circa 1893, tough-as-nails protagonist Molly (Leah Purcell) runs a farm and raises four young children in the absence of her drover husband. The plot involves the arrival of an Aboriginal fugitive (Rob Collins) and a multiple murder case for a local police sergeant (Sam Reid, recently in The Newsreader). In cinemas 5 MayPruning is usually a technique applied to roses in winter, but more recently the gardening term has been cropping up whenever sociologists talk about our social lives. People have been pruning friends. Confined to our homes, or separated by borders, with too much time gifted to us in isolation, and new ways to communicate online, experts say we’ve unwittingly – or in some cases very deliberately – socially distanced ourselves out of a social life. Some say the silver lining is that we’ve been cured of Fomo, others say it heralds a widening of the already growing loneliness gap. So has everyone Marie Kondoed their mates, and what does this mean for the future of friendship? Bryan and his wife have two children, aged six and four. They haven’t really made any new friends in the past two years, and they dropped out of contact with a couple of close friends. “Just through no energy, nothing to talk about, no social setting, or parent life commitments.” The couple thought they might make new friends when their eldest started primary school but rolling lockdowns stymied those opportunities. Meanwhile, there is one friend Bryan doesn’t know how to approach. “It’s the one that hurts the most – but I think maybe I thought the friendship was stronger than it was,” he says. “Nothing bad happened … I just … had to stop trying to make social things happen.” Roger Patulny, an associate professor of sociology at the University of Wollongong, says a lot of people “got very serious and they focused on the people most important to them in their lives”. “So there was sort of a bunkering down … The difficulty now is adjusting to coming out of that, and reengaging in those more distant connections.” It’s possible that Bryan was pruned, or that he subconsciously made the cut himself. Now, many people like Bryan genuinely don’t know where to start when it comes to rebuilding their social lives. We’re caught between re-embracing the office, the gym, the classroom and wanting to resist these places entirely. The incidental friendships of those spaces, along with the opportunity to make new friends, is still not a given, and effort needs to be made to reach out and rebuild. ‘Particular groups were more vulnerable to losing friends’ Patulny and colleague Marlee Bower from the Matilda Centre for Research in Mental Health and Substance Use at the University of Sydney have surveyed more than 2,000 Australians over the past two years to capture a collective picture of people’s interactions, lifestyles and plans during and after lockdown. Given Australia’s early, if temporary, exit from lockdown last year, it offers a unique glimpse not just about Australians’ experience during lockdown but importantly, and pertinently, many months post-lockdown. Some key findings came out of the study, says Patulny. “Social networks have become more insular and bonding-oriented, plus particular groups of people were more vulnerable to losing friends, including singles, or those with social anxiety, physical and mental disabilities – anyone lacking ‘prior social capital’. Then there were the people who were caught at major intersections of their life journey – think finishing school/starting uni/having kids; they could be more vulnerable to long-term disconnection and loneliness.” Like Bryan with his child starting school, Reggie was unlucky enough to be hovering at a “life intersection” when the pandemic hit. She completed year 12 in 2020. The opportunity to make or cement friendships has been curtailed especially severely for young people. “The fear that we have missed out on so much … Makes me want to be in a million places at one time,” she says. But as with any aspect of this pandemic, the most vulnerable members of the community have suffered the biggest fallout. “Those lacking physical health, social capital and digital interactive skills are already more marginalised and at greater risk of loneliness in the post-Covid-19 world,” Patulny warns. It’s too early to tell whether that has the potential to “grow into entrenched cultures of loneliness, or an expanded ‘loneliness gap’”, but even the general signs pre-pandemic point to people having fewer friends. Thirty years ago, 33% of US adults reported having 10 or more close friends, not counting relatives. Now, 13% say that. People already had less time to invest in friendships (one 2018 study says it takes 50 hours together to make a casual friend, and 90 hours before you consider them a good friend) but the unique social dilemmas imposed by the pandemic could have serious long-term consequences for some people. Melbourne-based counsellor Monica spoke to many single people who were worried in the midst of lockdown about whether they’d be picked to be in a bubble or asked to join a picnic. Restrictions on the number of humans interacting meant grown adults were once again reduced to the schoolyard dilemma of picking their one best friend. “Often they weren’t asked, and they were too afraid to take the initiative to ask anyone else themselves,” says Monica. “That perceived rejection, real or otherwise, has now really dented their confidence going back out into the world.” Pat struggled with social connection and loneliness pre-pandemic and is now trying to find avenues where they can make connections after lockdowns. They’re not having much luck so far. “It’s funny, actually, I didn’t feel lonely at all during lockdown – but as soon as things opened up this year and last, it started up again.” ‘It’s cut to the core of people for me’ For many older people cut off from families and traditional get-togethers with friends, the pandemic offered a crash course in online communication, in a way that could continue to shape how they keep in touch with people. Research from the Australian Communications and Media Authority shows that the number of people aged 75 and over using social media and emails to connect doubled. Without the physical context of the cafe, the office or the gym, people found other ways to, almost instantly, rank and order our friends. There were the dozens of designated WhatsApp groups, the few friends you pinged with random texts about recipes or dogs, the handful of people you’d DM on Instagram, family you’d fight with in the Facebook comments, colleagues doomed to Zoom, and the one friend you might actually pick up the phone to. So where do those friends rank now? It helps to start by asking ourselves exactly what friends are for. Countless studies tell us why we need them, including linking them to the health of our hearts. The ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle might offer some clues. Friends were central to his overall conception of what constitutes a good life, and what it means to be human. But even the philosopher ranked his pals into three different types of friendship: friendships of utility, friendships of pleasure and “friendships of the good”. Co-workers and classmates fall under friendships of utility. A friend that sparks joy comes under friendships of pleasure – the friends of love affairs, book clubs, footy teams. But most important of all are those friendships of the good, which are based upon mutual respect, admiration and a strong desire to “aid and assist the other person because one recognises an essential goodness in them”. These top-shelf companions have most sustained us in the past two years, and they’re also the ones we’re most keen to keep. Patulny and Bower’s study finds that “rather than experiencing a wholesale loss in connections and increased loneliness, many instead consolidated networks, and shifted from broad, locally-focused bridging networks towards more selective, online, bonding networks”. For many, a shared experience of a deeply traumatic time has either solidified existing friendships or forged new significant friends. Stephanie made local friends for the first time during the pandemic. Parents from her children’s school, who hadn’t known each well, started spilling their guts on WhatsApp once they went into lockdown. Then Stephanie’s young daughter contracted Covid. “They were the first to drop things, share information with the school and protect our family. Local friends are a new thing for me … I think it’s easier to become deep friends more quickly, to say I’m not doing OK and to be more open for others to say the same. It’s cut to the core of people for me.” Rose lived alone throughout the pandemic. “It was about vulnerability. I realised once I opened up about what I was going through, that created room for my friends to open up too. Being real with each other through Covid brought us closer. During lockdowns, I used socials a lot to connect. But now I love socialising in person, more than before. I’m normally introverted, but iso was too lonely, so I’ve swung in the other direction towards extroversion. I’m throwing parties, where once upon a time I dreaded those. And I’m going out of my way to make new friends.” But while it’s wonderful to focus on the friendships that enrich us, Patulny and Bower warn that we can’t forget “the cost of potentially increased social and collective loneliness through losing more distant community connections”. As we all muddle through maintaining a social life while continuing to deal with rolling uncertainty, for some the future of friendship will mean offering people the space to flake on a party, to not text back, to let friends check back in when they’re ready. For others, it’ll mean jumping at any opportunity to meet new mates. Like Bryan and his wife, Melbourne based Cynthia hadn’t really met anyone new over the last couple of years. But she recently struck up a conversation with a stranger at the local cafe, and liked them immediately. At first she tried to play it cool, but eventually she figured “fuck it – I invited them over for a BBQ. Nothing beats a new friend crush, and it’s been a while.”Good poo donors are so hard to find they’re sometimes called “unicorns”. These elusive, healthy creatures service a market for faecal transplants that is growing rapidly as evidence of its benefits mounts. Emerging science shows that a human’s microbiome – their constellation of gut microbes – has a far greater effect on health than anyone previously imagined. This enormous ecosystem we host in our bodies includes bacteria, fungi, viruses and more. The collective genetic material in the microbiome performs myriad functions that affect our mood, our immunity, and our physical and mental health. Crappy western diets and antibiotics are depleting our microbiota. And in some cases, a person’s microbiome is disordered enough that it needs a little boost from someone else’s. Restoring them to health has become a very serious scientific endeavour, as the diversity of our gut bacteria is linked to everything from depression to how we respond to cancer treatment. The transfer of healthy stool into the gastrointestinal tract of an unhealthy recipient has been proven to treat people with intestinal conditions, including the superbug Clostridium difficile colitis, or C diff – which can cause diarrhoea, sepsis and even death. But as scientific understanding of the microbiome improves, the possibilities of faecal transplants are expanding. Now researchers are working on a “super stool” – a poo pellet you can eat that mimics a so-called unicorn’s special abilities. Replicating unicorns BiomeBank’s office is located in a hub in the suburbs of Adelaide. Chief medical officer Sam Costello and chief executive Thomas Mitchell wear lanyards emblazoned with depictions of bacteria – and Costello jokes that an organic-looking spill on his is probably a real-life experiment. The biotech company has been on a unicorn hunt. This place is home to a stool bank – and it’s a place where designer poo transplants are made. There’s a special donor room (a glorified toilet) where poo donations are received. There’s a lab with an anaerobic work station, where donors’ bacteria strains are put into a “secret sauce” to grow and then isolate strains. Those strains are categorised and catalogued for future use. BiomeBank’s head of donor screening, Dr Emily Tucker, says there’s a long list of requirements for a stool donor. They have to be healthy, obviously. They have to be screened for infections. A detailed history of their medical, travel and antibiotic history is taken. Those who make it through all the assessments are enrolled for an eight-week program where they have to turn up on time, fill out a questionnaire, then (ahem) make a deposit inside a special room. So what happens if there aren’t enough unicorns? That question inspired BiomeBank’s latest endeavour – to replicate the contents of a unicorn’s guts. The poo factory People are building libraries of the very best that poo has to offer, and BiomeBank is part of the effort to categorise premium stool strains. Costello, a gastroenterologist, says that humans historically had much more diverse microbiota. We lived more closely with other people and with animals, and we ate more unprocessed food. There’s evidence, he says, that this depletion is evident across society – particularly western society. He describes a “microbial extinction event” in the modern world. As on Earth, so it is in our intestinal system – we’re living with the consequences of a hollowed-out ecosystem. Mitchell explains that in BiomeBank’s first generation of microbial therapy they extracted the right bacteria, freeze dried it and put it in a capsule. Patients can take it orally to treat specific infections. This generation has already been rolled out in hospitals, and, if approved by the Therapeutic Goods Administration, it will be the first microbial therapy in the world approved as a biologic (it currently has provisional approval). Then there’s the second generation – a replication. Think of the unicorns as Adam and Eve types, but their genomic sequences can be reproduced. You can grow them. Isolate them. Identify them, name them, put them in a library, and gradually build up knowledge about what each strand can do. And when you hit a vein of gold – a bacterial strain that sorts out a deficiency in someone’s microbiota – you scale it. Then you put it that bespoke bacterial recipe in a capsule that someone else swallows. “It’s a new way to treat disease,” Mitchell says. “It’s a little factory.” Why is the microbiome so important? From the moment we’re born, and throughout our lives, our microbiota are shaped by our environmental and dietary inputs. Babies born by caesarean section have a different mix to those delivered vaginally, a major study has found. The C-section babies pick up more strains from the hospital, which could explain higher rates of immune problems such as asthma and allergies in those babies. Prof Felice Jacka, director of Deakin University’s Food and Mood Centre, is a nutritional psychiatrist (and the author of There’s a Zoo in My Poo, which features recipes for “better bog burgers”, “farty toast” and “zoo poo stew”). The centre examines the “mindbogglingly complex” links between diet, gut and brain health. “You have all these organisms that interact with each other in a way that’s impossible to map at this stage,” she says. “We’re still really at the beginning of working out what microbiota can do.” And Jacka’s a fan of the “super stool” plan, not least because “giving people other people’s shit” has a bit of the icks about it. “It’s absolutely worth doing,” she says. “Finding those super donors is hard. Only about 3% of people qualify … Those super poopers are kind of rare, so it you can distill that, if BiomeBank can come up with a stool equivalent, it’d be awesome.” Jacka, as one of the world’s top microbiome experts, says scientists are still working out exactly how the gut-brain axis works, how the microbiome affects health, and how it can be manipulated. There are dozens of studies under way in Australia, but existing research has already shown that a bad diet – like the standard American diet – leads to increased inflammation in the body, which means a higher risk of cancer. A team from the Imperial College London and the University of Pittsburgh compared African Americans to rural South Africans. The volunteers were tested, then swapped diets and were tested again. After just two weeks on the fibre-rich rural diet, the Americans had significantly less colon inflammation and a lower cancer risk. Unfortunately, the rural group went the other way. Cancer and the gut The Food and Mood Centre is studying nutrition and its effect on depression, on muscle and heart health, on psychotic disorders, on post-traumatic stress disorder, eating disorders and a host of other health concerns. Jacka nominates cancer research as one of the most exciting fields in microbiome studies. Data show better responses to treatment, particularly immunotherapy, in people with more diverse gut microbes. But she warns much research is still nascent, and that industries out to make a buck are capitalising on it too quickly, selling products with vague promises of promoting “gut health”. “Be aware, keep an open mind, but not so open your brain falls out. Or your wallet, more to the point,” she advises. The University of New South Wales’ Microbiome Research Centre is studying the effect of the microbiome on cancer, women and children’s health, infection, immunity, inflammation, critical care, and mental health and neuroscience. The centre’s director, Prof Emad El-Omar, says there while there is advanced research showing the benefit of a more diverse microbiome (and therefore faecal transplants) when dealing with C diff, in other disorders researchers are still working through what works, and how. He says the the number of genes in these microorganisms dwarfs that of the human genome. “It’s a very exciting field, but there’s still a bit of work to be done to maximise the benefit for all humanity.” And he agrees with Jacka, that the “wellness” industry is sometimes jumping the gun on “gut health”. How can you help your gut? At this stage, poo transplants are only recommended, or useful, in very specific cases. But everyone can improve their microbiome – and you don’t need supplements. Jacka says for most people changing their diet is enough to change their bacteria. “To have what we understand to be a healthy microbiota, where the microbes present are associated with healthy conditions and those that aren’t present that are associated with unhealthy conditions, we already know what you should do,” she says. “Eat lots of plants, different types of plants, different-coloured plants and throw in some fermented foods.” Think kimchi, kombucha and sauerkraut. And think fibre. Jacka says that with typical western diets your gut microbiota is so “weak, wan, pale and deficient” that it just can’t cope with fibre. Then when people try to incorporate more roughage, they get gas or a stomach ache. Some people then mistakenly think they have irritable bowel syndrome or a gluten intolerance and back off the fibrous foods. You have to start gently, she says. Increase the amount and type of fibre gradually. “The answer to a problem with beans,” she says, “is actually more beans”. Costello says BiomeBank hopes to be “part of the global effort work to solve this big problem, which is this loss of microbial diversity associated with disease … on a massive scale”. “We see it as a modern pandemic,” Costello says. And there is plenty of work still to be done. At BiomeBank, researchers are beginning to understand the microbiome strains in frozen storage. Then there are the many strains yet to be understood – we don’t know yet what they might one day be capable of. Costello and Mitchell call that library of the known and unknown, next door to the unicorns’ toilet, the “cave of wonders”.More than 137,000 new Covid cases have been reported for England and Wales on Sunday, official data reveals, as concerns grow about the spread to older adults. Figures have not been reported for Scotland or Northern Ireland due to the new year weekend, but in the past 24 hours 137,583 new Covid cases have been reported for England and Wales combined. The figures for England and Wales also show that there were another 73 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, while in England there were 13,151 patients in hospital, up from 12,615 the day before. On Saturday cases in England alone hit 162,572, a new record high for daily reported cases. However, figures tend to be lower on Sundays and early in the week as a result of fewer tests being taken over the weekend. Daily case numbers refer to cases by date reported, only cover infections picked up by testing and do not include reinfections – although the Guardian understands these may be included from the end of January – meaning the true number of infections will be higher still. Prof Sir David Spiegelhalter has said the UK’s daily Covid infections could be closer to 500,000 given normally less than half of infections are recorded as positive cases, while reinfections are not counted and testing is limited, meaning the proportion could now be even smaller. According to data from the Zoe Covid study, there were 205,235 new symptomatic cases of Covid alone in the UK on New Year’s Eve, based on PCR and lateral flow test data as of two days ago, with almost 2.4 million people predicted to currently have symptomatic Covid. According to official data for England, while cases began rising sooner among younger age groups, since around the middle of last month they have also been rising rapidly in those over the age of 60. Tim Colbourn, professor of global health systems, epidemiology and evaluation at the UCL Institute for Global Health, said that the peak of the Omicron wave might also be some weeks away. “Case numbers in London – which is ahead of the rest of the country in the Omicron wave – seem to be going up again after voluntary reduced mixing before Xmas had suggested a peak,” he told the Guardian, noting that still-incomplete cases by specimen date are the highest ever for London at 31,444 on 29 December. “Xmas and New Year’s mixing is likely to increase cases in London and the whole of the UK further over the coming days,” Colbourn added. Prof Graham Medley, a member of Sage, said data on cases is hard to interpret directly at the moment, given that testing supply is probably below demand. “More importantly, the delays in testing that are changing day to day make it harder to understand the dynamics,” he added. “But any rise in cases in older people is a concern.” Prof Andrew Hayward, co-director of the UCL Institute of Epidemiology and Health Care, agreed. “Omicron moving into the older population is a pivotal moment in the Omicron crisis. We only really expect hospitalisation rates to rise dramatically a couple of weeks after the infection has started to infect the older population, who are at most risk of severe disease,” he said. “We will likely start to see the impact of intergenerational mixing over Christmas on hospitalisation rates over the next week or two. Also, as the elderly were the first to get boosted they have had longest for immunity to wear off.” Prof Adam Finn, of the University of Bristol and a member of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, said questions remain about the proportion of older people who will become sick enough to require hospitalisation in the coming few weeks. “It’s now clear that a smaller proportion of people who get Omicron infection end up in hospital than was the case with earlier variants, although it remains unclear how much of this welcome trend is down to immunity from vaccines and previous infections and how much down to this new variant being a less aggressive virus,” he said. “Either way, although we are learning fast, the margins of uncertainty around this Omicron wave are still wide and people would be well advised to remain cautious and avoid infection as best they can for now as it still looks as though we are in for a very tough couple of months at least.”The US government’s top medical adviser, Dr Anthony Fauci, has joined a growing body of experts who say hospitalisation figures form a better guide to the severity of the Omicron coronavirus variant than the traditional case-count of new infections. Referring to the Omicron surge in the US as a “tsunami”, Fauci also cautioned the public not to be fooled by preliminary data suggesting the variant lacks the severity of earlier Covid-19 variants, such as Delta. “You have a virus that looks like it might be less severe, at least from data we’ve gathered from South Africa, the UK and even some from preliminary data from here in the US,” he told CNN’s State of the Union. “It’s a very interesting, somewhat complicated issue … so many people are getting infected that the net amount, the total amount of people that will require hospitalisation, might be up. We can’t be complacent in these reports. We’re still going to get a lot of hospitalisations.” On ABC’s This Week, Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, was asked if it was time to focus less on just the case count, which has soared close to 500,000 reported new daily infections. A number of experts have questioned if such reports cause unnecessary worry, and suggest deaths and hospitalisation data should better inform mitigation efforts. “The answer is, overall, yes,” Fauci said. “This is particularly relevant if you’re having an infection that is much, much more asymptomatic and minimally symptomatic, particularly in people who are vaccinated and boosted. “The real bottom line that you want to be concerned about is, are we getting protected by the vaccines from severe disease leading to hospitalisation?” The Biden administration has made improving vaccination rates a priority but concedes progress is slower than it would like. Fewer than 25% of US children are vaccinated, pediatric hospital admissions are surging and nationally only 62% of eligible residents are fully vaccinated with barely a third receiving a booster. “I’m still very concerned about the tens of millions of people who are not vaccinated at all because even though many of them are going to get asymptomatic and mildly symptomatic, a fair number of them are going to get severe disease,” Fauci said. Surging infection rates, Fauci told CNN, will cause disruption to everyday life, already evidenced in pressure on healthcare in several states and in other areas such as education and public transport. A number of universities and school districts will begin 2022 online and in New York City several subway lines have been suspended because of staff shortages. Fauci said those concerns contributed to the decision by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) last week to reduce the recommended isolation period for those who have tested positive but are asymptomatic, from 10 days to five. “You’re certainly gonna see stresses on the system, the system being people with any kind of jobs, particularly with critical jobs, to keep society functioning normally. We already know there are reports from fire departments, from police departments in different cities, that sometimes 30% of the people are ill. “The CDC is trying to get a position where people without symptoms who are infected, that you can get them back to work a little bit earlier if they remain without symptoms.” But he rejected criticism that the change was sparked by economic pressure rather than science. “In the second half of a 10-day period, which would normally be a 10-day isolation period, the likelihood of transmissibility is considerably lower,” he said. “For that reason, the CDC made the judgement that it would be relatively low risk to get people out. “You’re right [that] people are concerned about, ‘Why not test people at that time?’ I myself feel that that’s a reasonable thing to do. I believe that the CDC soon will be coming out with more clarification of that since it obviously has generated a number of questions about that five-day period.” The new mayor of New York, Eric Adams, said he thought the city was doing “an amazing job” of reacting to the shifting challenges of the pandemic, including transportation issues and having one-fifth of police out sick. “We are pivoting based on where the urgency is located. We’re not taking it one-size-fits-all, we’re thinking about it and making the right moves and decisions,” he told ABC. “I was with my police commissioner. We have a 20% sick rate but now we have officers coming back after the five days. “But we can’t live through variants. We spent $11tn on Covid and we don’t have another $11tn, so our lives can’t be based on what’s the new variant. No. We have to figure out, how do we adjust? “I say to those who are not vaccinated, ‘Stop it. It’s time to get vaccinated. It’s time to have the booster shots. You’re endangering yourself and you’re endangering the public and your family as well.’”The family of an autistic man confined to an apartment and fed through a hatch are planning a legal challenge against his conditions, in a case that will increase pressure on the government to end the practice of keeping people with severe learning disabilities in “modern-day asylums”. Nicola, whose 24-year-old son has been detained under the Mental Health Act since September 2017 at Cheadle Royal hospital in Cheshire, said his care is “worse than being in prison” and “people wouldn’t treat an animal” as badly. She has appointed lawyers at Irwin Mitchell to explore a legal challenge to his circumstances which include constant monitoring by CCTV and outdoor access into a fenced-off garden at the facility which is run by the private Priory Group. “We fully appreciate that my son has complex needs but he’s being treated terribly,” she said. “He’s locked away from the world and has no physical contact with anyone.” He also has a learning disability and Tourette syndrome and has been treated for aggression and anxiety. “I can’t even hold his hand or hug him because of the conditions he’s kept in,” his mother said. “Every time I see him it breaks my heart. He has no quality of life, he just exists.” Campaigners are calling for greater efforts to provide care in the community for people like Nicola’s son and say about 2,000 people are held in such “assessment and treatment units (ATUs)” in hospitals, with about half of them having been there for at least two years. The placements are expensive partly because they require so many staff. Mencap, a learning disability charity, said many of the people in inpatient units ended up there because of the lack of funding for social care and not because they have a genuine need for inpatient mental health care. “The government must treat this scandal with the urgency that’s needed,” said Dan Scorer, head of policy at the charity. He said ministers had “broken promise after promise to close beds and support people in the community”. The standard of some care homes for people with learning disabilities is also under growing scrutiny. In October, the Guardian revealed how conditions at Berkeley House, a care home in Kent run by a private chain, Achieve Together, declined so badly families were given less than a day’s notice of its closure. Inspectors from the Care Quality Commission found residents “living in inhumane conditions”, according to a recently completed inspection report. There was no toilet roll and “faeces was found on two people’s bedding, pillows and another person’s chair”. One resident had no bedding at all and staff had damaged residents’ furniture. Inspectors “observed a staff member pushing and forcing a person to sit in their wheelchair against their will” and others using derogatory language. There were not enough qualified staff, one bedroom stank of urine and safeguarding incidents went unreported. “Staff spoke with people in a harsh tone and were focused on tasks rather than engaging with people to meet their emotional needs,” the inspectors reported, before labelling the facility “inadequate” and triggering its closure. A spokesperson for Achieve Together, which is ultimately owned by an international investment fund, said: “We unreservedly apologise for the unacceptable shortcomings … We are clear that the provision fell way below the high standards that the people we support rightly expect and deserve, and that we know we can provide.” The cases come a decade after the Winterbourne View scandal, in which BBC Panorama exposed the abuse of people with learning disabilities in a private hospital in Gloucestershire. Kirsty Stuart, a public law and human rights lawyer at Irwin Mitchell representing Nicola and her son, known as patient A, said she was now representing 25 other families whose loved ones are in ATUs. “They feel they have no option but to seek legal advice in order for their loved ones to receive the care they deserve,” she said. “We call on the Priory, the CCG and local authority to work with ourselves and Patient A’s family to reach an agreement over his care, which the family believe should be in the community as this would give him the best quality of life.” Liverpool city council said it could not comment on individual cases. A spokesperson for the Priory Group said it was committed to “ensuring well-planned transfers to the most appropriate community settings whenever they become available” but said: “Some individuals with highly complex behaviours, and detained under the Mental Health Act, can be difficult to place despite all parties working very hard over a long period of time to find the right setting.” It said care was continually reviewed to ensure the “least restrictive setting possible”. A spokesperson for the Department for Health and Social Care said: “We are determined to continue reducing the number of autistic people and people with a learning disability in mental health hospitals as well as the reliance on inpatient care. That’s why we are investing in community services and supporting discharges with £90m of additional funding this financial year.” NHS Liverpool clinical commissioning group has been contacted for comment.On a day of alarming polling about attitudes to political violence and fears for US democracy, and as the first anniversary of the Capitol attack approached, a Republican member of the House committee investigating the events of 6 January 2021 had a stark warning for her party. “Our party has to choose,” Liz Cheney told CBS’s Face the Nation. “We can either be loyal to Donald Trump or we can be loyal to the constitution, but we cannot be both.” Trump supporters attacked Congress in an attempt to stop certification of his defeat by Joe Biden, which Trump maintains without evidence was the result of electoral fraud. Five people died around a riot in which a mob roamed the Capitol, searching for lawmakers to capture and possibly kill. On Sunday, Cheney and Bennie Thompson of Mississippi, the committee chairman, again discussed the possibility of a criminal referral for Trump over his failure to attempt to stop the riot or for his obstruction of the investigation. Speaking to ABC’s This Week, Cheney said there were “potential criminal statutes at issue here, but I think that there’s absolutely no question that it was a dereliction of duty. And I think one of the things the committee needs to look at is … a legislative purpose, is whether we need enhanced penalties for that kind of dereliction of duty.” Thompson said subpoenas could be served on Republicans in Congress who refuse to comply with information requests of the kind that have led to a charge of criminal contempt of Congress for Steve Bannon, Trump’s former strategist, and a recommendation of such a charge for Mark Meadows, Trump’s chief of staff. The Democrat told NBC’s Meet the Press the committee was examining whether it could issue subpoenas to members of Congress, immediately Jim Jordan of Ohio and Scott Perry of Pennsylvania. “I think there are some questions of whether we have the authority to do it,” Thompson said. “If the authorities are there, there’ll be no reluctance on our part.” Last month, the committee asked Jordan for testimony about conversations with Trump on 6 January. Jordan told Fox News he had “real concerns” about the credibility of the panel. Perry was asked for testimony about attempts to replace Jeffrey Rosen, acting head of the justice department, with Jeffrey Clark, an official who tried to help overturn Trump’s defeat. Perry called the committee “illegitimate, and not duly constituted”. A court has ruled that the panel is legitimate and entitled to see White House records Trump is trying to shield, an argument that has reached the supreme court. Sunday saw a rash of polls marking the anniversary of 6 January. CBS found that 68% of Americans saw the Capitol attack as a sign of increasing political violence, and that 66% thought democracy itself was threatened. When respondents were asked if violence would be justifiable to achieve various political ends, the poll returned an average of about 30%. A survey by the Washington Post and the University of Maryland said more than a third of Americans said violence against the government could be justified. ABC News and Ipsos found that 52% of Republicans said the Capitol rioters were trying to protect democracy. Other polling has shown clear majorities among Republicans in believing Trump’s lie about electoral fraud and distrust of federal elections. On CNN’s State of the Union, Larry Hogan, Maryland governor and a moderate Republican with an eye on the presidential nomination, said: “Frankly, it’s crazy that that many people believe things that simply aren’t true. “There’s been an amazing amount of disinformation that’s been spread over the past year. And many people are consuming that disinformation and believing it as if it’s fact. To think the violent protesters who attacked the Capitol, our seat of democracy, on 6 January was just tourists looking at statues? It’s insane that anyone could watch that on television and believe that’s what happened.” Cheney told CBS the blame lay squarely with her own party. “Far too many Republicans are trying to enable the former president, embrace the former president or look the other way and hope that the former president goes away, or trying to obstruct the activities of this committee, but we won’t be deterred. At the end of the day, the facts matter, the truth matters.” Her host, Margaret Brennan, pointed out that Republicans across the US, some in states where Trump’s attempt to steal the election was repulsed, are changing election laws to their advantage. “We’ve got to be grounded on the rule of law,” Cheney said. “We’ve got to be grounded on fidelity of the constitution … So I think for people all across the country, they need to recognise how important their vote is for their voices. They’ve got to elect serious people who are going to defend the constitution, not simply do the bidding of Donald Trump.” Cheney faces a primary challenger doing Trump’s bidding and enjoying his backing. The other Republican on the 6 January committee, Adam Kinzinger of Illinois, will retire in November rather than fight such a battle of his own. Cheney said she was “confident people of Wyoming will not choose loyalty to one man as dangerous as Donald Trump”, and that she will secure re-election. She also notably did not say no when she was asked if she would run against Trump if he sought the nomination next time. On ABC, Cheney was asked if she agreed with Hillary Clinton, who has said a second Trump presidency could end US democracy. “I do,” Cheney said. “I think it is critically important, given everything we know about the lines that he was willing to cross. “We entrust the survival of our republic into the hands of the chief executive, and when a president refuses to tell the mob to stop, when he refuses to defend any of the co-ordinate branches of government, he cannot be trusted.”My friend Andy Newman, who has died aged 56, was a community leader who built an award-winning public garden on disused land. From those green shoots he and his partner, Karen Clark, galvanised local people in the network of north London roads known as Harringay Gardens to fight back against pollution, traffic and urban blight, bringing greenery and cooperation to our neighbourhood.  In 1996, when Andy and Karen moved to the area, there was on their doorstep a derelict patch of land leading to a railway arch. Once an entrance to the now-demolished Harringay stadium on the other side of the tracks, the land had become a dumping ground for old cars and other rubbish, and a crime hotspot. Andy later recalled meeting an elderly neighbour who had “peered out of her bedroom window as a young girl and watched cows being herded under the railway arch to graze at the local watercress farm ... We had just started a young family and this image gave us the determination to bring the land back into natural use.” That is exactly what Andy and Karen, both keen gardeners, did, with trademark tenacity and wiliness, plus a package of government funding channelled into the wider area, which at the time had seen a startling increase in gang violence. Vital to the garden’s success was the simultaneous formation of a community group, the Gardens Residents Association, which began transforming the streets through the planting of trees, initiatives to curtail fly-tipping and crime, and the reduction of heavy traffic which had long blighted the area. Six roads became what would these days be termed a low traffic neighbourhood, provoking, then as now, polarising and powerful opinions. The effect was instant – without thousands of cars a day cutting through, a shortcut became a community again, almost overnight. In 2002, thanks to Andy, it got a community centre to call its own – albeit one without a roof. The community garden remains a moment of beauty and respite in a dense urban environment, stocked with fabulous plants now in their prime – including several of Andy’s much-favoured giant echium. The garden, which raises all its own funds, hosts outdoor film screenings, Halloween events, egg hunts and Christmas gatherings. It has spawned a successful “play streets” initiative, and many other family- and nature-focused events. It has stretched out its roots into the local streets for two decades; trees, bulbs and shrubs flourish where once there were none.  The garden is open to everyone and will celebrate its 20th anniversary in September. The association has been no less successful, winning more than 40 local and national awards. Both residents’ association and garden were turbo-charged by Andy’s knowledge, hard work and resilience. His legacy is all around his friends and neighbours, and will not be forgotten. Andy was born in Exeter, Devon, the youngest of three sons of Irene (nee Pye), a care assistant, and Lewis, a shoemaker. After leaving Clyst Vale community college, he studied interior design at South Devon College of Arts and Technology, and 3D design at Suffolk College of Higher and Further Education. He was a freelance artist and designer for most of his working life until joining Southwark council in 2013. He is survived by Karen and their children, Amber and Jasper, and by his brother Peter. Another brother, David, predeceased him.One of the architects of the Northern Ireland peace deal has said Boris Johnson and the former Brexit minister Lord Frost have risked “all the work” the previous generation of politicians put into the Belfast Good Friday agreement by putting their hard ideological beliefs ahead of people. Jonathan Powell, Tony Blair’s former chief of staff and chief negotiator on Northern Ireland, said he was concerned that neither the prime minister nor the recently resigned Brexit minister seemed to understand or care about the fragility of the political settlement in Northern Ireland in 1998. He also questioned why Frost had made the issue of the European court of justice a red line in negotiations on the Northern Ireland protocol when it was not responsible for either the practical difficulties in trade or the identity politics that has been heightened by the row over the Irish Sea border. He said it was irresponsible to stoke the fears of one side or another or to fail to calm nerves about British identity after rioting on the streets earlier in 2020. “What worries me is the casual political vandalism. They really don’t seem to care. I mean the damage they are doing to the very fragile political settlements in Northern Ireland, by posturing on things like the European court of justice, which do not matter to voters in Northern Ireland,” he said. “They may matter to Boris Johnson and some supporters [in the government] and the ideological base. “But is it really worth sacrificing all the work that previous generations of politicians put into the Northern Ireland peace process on the ideological altar of the ECJ?” he asked. Lord Frost had repeatedly threatened to suspend parts of the protocol arrangements using its article 16 before he resigned as Brexit minister citing differences over tax policy and Covid restrictions. While the appointment of the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, to succeed Frost was initially read as a reset moment, publicly she is presenting herself as the continuity negotiator. “The UK position has not changed. We need goods to flow freely between Great Britain and Northern Ireland, end the role of the ECJ as the final arbiter of disputes between us, and resolve other issues,” she said before Christmas. Powell warned the institutions of devolved government could collapse unless the British government focused on the practical problems created by the post-Brexit customs and physical checks on goods crossing the Irish Sea. While he doesn’t expect a return to the troubles of the past, he said Brexit created an ongoing issue in Northern Ireland. “You have to face up to the fact that Brexit requires someone to get hurt. “There is nothing you can do about the political issue of identity given the history of two communities in Northern Ireland. But there is going to be a border because of Brexit and it has to be somewhere. No one’s come up with a better idea than in the Irish Sea. If it is there, it affects unionist identity and what you have to do is ameliorate the impact of it,” he said. His comments came after not just the transfer of power from Frost to Truss but a changing political landscape south of the Irish border. “Brexit has put talk of a united Ireland firmly on the agenda south of the border and the government needs to pay attention to this and to understand how that is also fuelling unionist fears about the future of Northern Ireland in the United Kingdom,” he said. “Identity politics is going to keep coming back. Imagine if you have a border poll on a united Ireland and 48% for remaining in the United Kingdom, a bit like the Brexit referendum. “People don’t want to address that problem. I understand. But it’s the fear of that that’s causing the trouble.” In an interview published on Sunday, Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, the DUP leader, said Truss should set a deadline for the talks with the EU over the protocol. He would not say how much longer should be allowed, but he told the Sunday Telegraph: “January is going to be an absolutely crucial month.” And if the deadline passed without a deal acceptable to the UK, the government should trigger article 16, he said. “If we don’t get rapid and decisive progress, and one side or the other is kicking the can down the road, this will have major implications for the stability of the political institutions in Northern Ireland,” he said.A Tory peer has vowed to lead a boycott of Coca-Cola products over the company’s sponsorship of the 2022 Beijing Olympics, saying its bid to profit from an event organised by the Chinese government was shameless. Robert Hayward, who was a founding chairman of the world’s first gay rugby club and a former personnel manager for Coca-Cola Bottlers, said it was unacceptable for firms to help to boost the use of the Winter Games as a propaganda exercise given concerns over the treatment of 1 million Uyghurs and other Muslims in Xinjiang province. Groups such as Human Rights Watch have accused Xi Jinping’s administration of crimes against humanity, growing repression in Hong Kong, tightened control over the media and mass surveillance. The UK parliament passed a motion in April 2021 that said genocide was taking place in north-west China, but Beijing has denied any atrocities and accused western politicians of “lies and disinformation”. Concern grew more recently when the Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai disappeared from public life for almost three months after accusing a senior member of the Communist party of sexual assault. Hayward said he would not buy any Coca-Cola products, which include brands such as Innocent, Schweppes and Fanta, and that he hoped large numbers of people would do the same. “If they are going to take that approach, then they have to understand that there are lots of people in this world, many of whom are probably Muslims in many countries but others who are of different faiths, who just think it’s unacceptable that they should participate,” he said. People should use their personal judgment about whether to buy a product or service, but “there comes a point … where you wish to say ‘no, this is just unacceptable’,” he said. “It is a propaganda event and I am not going to go along with it when so many people are currently suffering and losing their liberty.” Hayward said he was taking the stand specifically against Coca-Cola because it was “dependent on a good image with the public” to sell its goods, though he also voiced concern about Proctor &amp; Gamble, another headline sponsor. He said it was unacceptable for firms to “be trying to gain kudos out of a worldwide sporting event hosted by the Chinese government” given it “has been shown in the last few months to be persecuting the Uyghurs to an extreme extent”. “I’m hoping that it sends a message to all major public companies that there is a benefit and a dis-benefit to associating themselves with major sporting events,” he said, adding he would raise the issue in the House of Lords soon. Drawing on his experience as a former chief executive of the British Soft Drinks Association, Hayward said Coca-Cola should have had a “force majeure” clause in its sponsorship contract with the Olympic organisers that it could activate if necessary, allowing it to pull out over China’s actions. By refusing to buy the products over the next few months, individuals could send a message in a way that would be much better than “the kneejerk reaction of saying the sportsmen and women should boycott the Olympics”, he said. A spokesperson for the International Olympic Committee said sponsors “provide valuable financial resources that support the development of sport at all levels around the world”, helping it to redistribute the equivalent of about $3.4m (£2.5m) a day to athletes and sports organisations at all levels. They said sponsors played no role in the selection of the host country for each Games. Coca-Cola did not respond to a request for comment, but the company said on its website it is “the longest-running, continuous sponsor” of both the summer and winter Olympics. “We believe the Olympic movement is a force for good, bringing people and countries together, and we’re proud to use our name to raise its profile and support the world’s most watched and revered international sporting event,” it said.I envy Laura Snapes’ list of clothiers (Ditching fast fashion has been easier and more fun than I ever imagined, 29 December). As a child I was dressed in my older siblings’ hand-me-downs, then I clothed myself from charity shops during decades as a zero-hours university tutor and the early years of home purchase. When the 15% mortgage rates began to fall I progressed to dress agencies and now, having paid off the house, I can buy new at sales. Rosalind Garton Cupar, Fife • I’m a huge fan of the Feast supplement, despite being non-vegan and living somewhere free from 95% of Ottolenghi’s ingredients. However, I’m baffled by the inclusion in the most recent issue of instructions for turning leftover wine into homemade vinegar. Could you please explain the concept of “leftover wine”? Anne Cowper Bishopston, Swansea • I am reminded of the old story from the 1960s when the mass began to be celebrated in English (Letters, 30 December). After the service, confused parishioners asked the priest about the animal he’d mentioned – apparently he had invited them to “pray in the words of the prairie tortoise”. Rev Canon Chris Oxley Foxton, Leicestershire • The weather has been so mild here recently that I cut the lawn on 31 December, beating my previous final mowing of the year by 25 days. Robin Britcher Birchington, Kent • Well, he’ll be sweating now (Giuffre lawyers seek details on Prince Andrew’s claimed inability to sweat, 31 December). Scott Poynting Sydney, Australia • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.In 1974 I celebrated my 21st birthday in April Ashley’s Knightsbridge restaurant, April and Desmond’s (April Ashley, model, actor and transgender activist, dies aged 86, 28 December). I had gone down to London from Manchester to find my way in the world and was living with a group of beautiful young dancers from the London Contemporary Dance School at The Place, one of whom April had taken under her wing. April swept through the restaurant with the grace and poise of a classical ballerina, many layers of chiffon swirling about her elegant frame, a sparkling choker at her throat and her signature glass of champagne in her hand. At the end of the meal, a spectacular cake was brought to the table and the waiters were summoned to sing Happy Birthday. As I blew out the candles, April looked at me and said “21 and still a virgin?”, thereby outing me to my friends and blowing apart my attempts at urbane sophistication in one fell swoop. In spite of the humiliation, I am still thrilled to have met such an important and trailblazing icon. Trish Kelly Manchester • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Liverpool is undoubtedly the most fitting place for a permanent national memorial to the victims of slavery, as a city shaped by the slave trade more than any other in the country. However, I have not seen any evidence to suggest that there were any purpose-built “slave pens” in the town (Letters, 13 December). An advert for the sale of “One Negro Man and Two Boys” in Liverpool that took place in 1767 refers to the individuals being “brought up to the place of sale to be viewed”, possibly indicating that they were being kept in a cellar, but currently we can only speculate as to how these people were confined while waiting to be sold as human chattel. In Liverpool, as in other places around the country, the sales of the enslaved usually took place in the coffee houses, taverns and offices of the town’s merchants and brokers. Laurence Westgaph Historian in residence, National Museums Liverpool • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The environmental damage caused by the All England Lawn Tennis Club’s proposed development would perhaps be irreparable (Epic match beckons as Wimbledon locals take on tennis club expansion, I January). Eight years of work will disturb all the many birds and mammals that thrive there, including some protected species such as badgers and bats. Lost trees will be replaced with saplings; the grassland with seed from the common nearby. Work to the lake will remove tons of silt and introduce humans to all the waterside edges. These provide homes for insects on which the birds feed, quiet nesting sites and more. There is no better sight here than the heron sweeping gracefully over our roof, or the darting bats at nightfall. Will they ever return? Dr Margaret Coombe London • Of course they should not build over Capability Brown’s wonderful handiwork at Wimbledon – but have they thought of moving the whole thing to somewhere like the Hull area? That would be a massive step towards “levelling up”. David Jones Spalding, Lincolnshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Simon Hattenstone and Daniel Lavelle call for Boris Johnson to support a policy of Housing First, an effort to provide people with housing and only later try to address any other needs, such as addiction (Johnson has a chance to end homelessness now – if he dares to seize it, 28 December). This policy is common sense, but there are good grounds to be sceptical of how it might be implemented. Prof Nicholas Pleace from the University of York has shown how support for Housing First from some corners of our political debate can reflect very different agendas. For example, the Centre for Social Justice – founded by Iain Duncan Smith – supports Housing First, but in ways very different from what Hattenstone and Lavelle have in mind. For this side of the political debate, Housing First can sit with denying the social causes of homelessness and the dysfunctional housing system. Housing First is widely applauded and increasingly evidenced, but also contested. Johnson and his government could leap in support of what could be labelled Housing First, while still taking no systemic action on access to housing, funding for mental health services or the availability of drug and alcohol services. We should seek Johnson’s attention to Housing First, but also make sure that a chaperone keeps watch on what happens later. Andy Guise Senior lecturer in social science and health, King’s College London • The article on homelesseness unearthed disturbing memories. In 1990, I went to the Royal Opera House and parked somewhere near Lincoln’s Inn Fields. Surrounded by lawyers’ offices and fine houses, the green square in the middle was a tented camp for homeless people. When Tony Blair came into office in 1997, homelessness did significantly decrease through the rough sleepers unit. On a rainy evening in 2017, I came out of a theatre in Shaftesbury Avenue. The homeless people were back. Doorways, damp sleeping bags and cardboard again sufficed for shelter. There may be many reasons why people are homeless, but the actions of governments over the last three decades have been the main reason: no building to replace sold council houses; the bedroom tax; the introduction of punitive universal credit; the two-children-only benefit; lack of secure work; rent rises; austerity to make up for lax banking controls. “Everyone in” may be part of the answer, but it is pitiful against the real causes created by successive governments: poverty and lack of affordable decent houses to rent. Karen Wynyard Whitstable, Kent • The searing article on the growth in homelessness under Boris Johnson makes comparisons with humane and effective policies on homelessness in the US and Finland. But within the UK, Scotland has effective policies – as set out in its government’s 2021 Ending Homelessness Together report. Under these policies, Scottish night shelters are kept closed by providing better-quality emergency accommodation; 100,000 genuinely affordable homes were brought on stream. The temporary ban on the enforcement of eviction orders was extended, to provide renters with safe homes during the pandemic. Hardship schemes were introduced to support those struggling to pay their rent and people with no recourse to public funds were helped to avoid destitution. Most importantly, legislation was amended so that no homeless household has to stay in unsuitable accommodation for more than seven days. Kate Macintosh Winchester • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Ben Stokes has thrown his full support behind Joe Root and Chris Silverwood, insisting any blame for England’s Ashes defeat should be shared around the tour party. The all-rounder has also stated that he has no designs on the Test captaincy himself. Stokes is arguably the only viable candidate to replace Root should a change of leadership occur after a one-sided series which Australia lead 3-0 going into the fourth Test starting on Wednesday in Sydney. With a fifth Test in Hobart still to come – not a given as Covid-19 continues to loom over proceedings – others are simply playing for their spots. But while Root has now overseen 59 Tests, the point where a jaded Alastair Cook ended his record stint in charge in early 2017, Stokes is not expecting a similar outcome yet. He also had words of encouragement for Silverwood that were doubtless welcome after it was confirmed the head coach has the virus and will not return until next week. “I don’t sense that at all with Joe,” Stokes said. “He’s brought this team a long way. He’s done some great things. Obviously this series hasn’t gone too well. Not from a captaincy point of view but from a team and results point of view. Unfortunately, the captain and coach bear the scrutiny for that but there are 10 other guys out there in the field beside the captain. “At the end of the day, the most important people’s opinions are those guys in the dressing room and [Root and Silverwood] have our thorough support. “Captaincy is more than about setting fields, picking the team, making decisions out in the middle. A captain is someone you play for. Joe Root is someone I always want to play for. Chris Silverwood is exactly the same. He’s a real players’ coach. He stands up for you as individuals and players as well.” Asked if he fancied stepping up should Root decide he has run his race, Stokes, the vice-captain, replied: “I’ve said I’ve never really had an ambition to be a captain. That’s totally Joe’s decision. He shouldn’t be forced into doing it. I’m sure Cooky felt the same way. He did it for so long. When he knew his time was up, his time was up. Those discussions haven’t even entered anywhere near Joe yet.” Root’s commitment was in evidence when England returned to training on Sunday and the captain found himself using the slinger to help his teammates bat in the nets. The coaching staff is now threadbare, Silverwood having tested positive while already isolating with his family in Melbourne, and following on from Jon Lewis (the seam bowling coach), Jeetan Patel (spin coach) and Darren Veness (fitness) last week. To sum things up, the former captain Adam Hollioake drove down from Queensland to Sydney over the weekend after being asked to help out by Graham Thorpe, the acting head coach, only to discover he was a close contact of a positive case and needed to immediately isolate. Soon after, the local net bowlers were forced out of England’s session midway through after one of them received a positive result. “You almost go back to club cricket where you have to do your own stuff,” Stokes said, regarding the farcical situation. “The next couple of days are about getting what you can out of the resources we have available. It’s not ideal but it’s also Sydney at new year, so you’ve got to look for the positives – in a non‑Covid sense.” Among these is simply a return to the international arena for Stokes, the 30-year-old having taken four months out in the summer to address a finger injury and his mental health. By his own admission his output so far – 101 runs with the bat at 16, four wickets with the ball at 62 – has been “pretty average”. To continue a theme of England’s recent press interactions, he too now wants to put “pride back into the badge”. There was also an acceptance that Australia have been outstanding with the ball, never more so than the second evening in Melbourne when Mitchell Starc reduced England to 31 for four in the final hour and Stokes found himself walking out in front of 49,000 baying home fans after Jack Leach’s appearance as nightwatchman lasted two balls. Stokes, who admitted to delaying his entrance in the hope of shaving off an over before stumps, said: “When I look back at that hour, with Pat Cummins and Mitch Starc bowling, even I was watching that going, ‘I don’t know what I would do to counteract that’. That was some of the highest quality bowling I think I’ve seen in a Test match. “I said to some of the guys the next morning, it’s the first time I’ve actually been taken aback by the atmosphere in a cricket ground. Although we were on the receiving end of that, it was pretty special to feel that at the MCG.” Though England’s resources are reduced, they appear unlikely to call on any players featuring in the Big Bash League. On Sunday those in the Twenty20 squad who will face West Indies this month – Sam Billings, Saqib Mahmood, Tymal Mills, James Vince, Reece Topley and George Garton – were told to return to the UK by 7 January. Reported initially as if it was a Dunkirk-style evacuation in response to the rising number of Covid cases in Australia, this was always their intended departure in order to begin “safe living guidelines and Covid-19 protocols” before the squad’s flight to Barbados.Liz Truss, the current favourite to succeed Boris Johnson as leader of the Conservatives among party members, hosted a lunch at an expensive private club owned by a Tory donor after overruling civil service advice to look for a cheaper venue. Leaked correspondence has revealed the foreign secretary “refused to consider anywhere else” and asked that public funds should pay for a £3,000 event with Joe Biden’s trade representative. Civil servants were so concerned at the cost and the venue’s close links to the Tories that the proposal was referred to the most senior official at the Department for International Trade. According to the correspondence, Truss, then the trade secretary, “explicitly asked that we book 5 Hertford Street”, which is owned by Robin Birley, a £20,000 donor to Boris Johnson’s leadership campaign and the half-brother of Zac Goldsmith, the environment minister. The venue agreed to reduce the bill to £1,400, but on condition of immediate payment – which meant civil servants had to use an emergency process to pay up straight away. The correspondence, disclosed by the Sunday Times, comes as Truss’s supporters conduct a campaign for her to succeed the prime minister should he be toppled by Tory MPs. Truss and her companions drank two measures of dry gin; three bottles of Pazo Barrantes Albariño, a Spanish white wine, costing a total of £153; and two bottles of the French red Coudoulet de Beaucastel, costing a total of £130, it was reported. Before attending the event with US trade representatives, a civil servant described the club as “obviously incredibly expensive and more than I understand we’d usually expect to pay for such a venue”. “[Truss] is hosting [the US trade representataive] Katherine Tai tomorrow for dinner,” an email read. “She wishes to do so in a private dining room. “[Her special adviser] is insisting it takes place at a private members’ club called 5 Hertford Street. She’s recommended this based on having been there before – her argument is that it’s of the appropriate size and standing. “To my knowledge we haven’t hosted anyone there before as a department.” The email, sent on 15 June, said officials had suggested another option, Quo Vadis in Soho, which “costs only £1,000”. This was refused on behalf of Truss, because she was “insisting we book 5 Hertford Street” and Quo Vadis would be “inappropriate”. The email continued: “Something we’ve just discovered is the owner … is Robin Birley, a donor of the PM, Conservative party and Ukip. “I understand the venue hosts party events, which is presumably how [Truss and her special adviser] know it.” Civil servants subsequently entered negotiations with the venue regarding the price, leading to its events manager agreeing to waive hire fees and reduce the overall bill to £1,400 on the agreement it was paid immediately after the meeting. The condition left civil servants having to use an emergency process to sanction the payment. The permanent secretary, John Alty, said he was “content” with the agreement. The disclosure has led to calls for further disclosures over the event. The Department of Trade in November told the Mail on Sunday that the venue was chosen due to availability at short notice, not because Truss had insisted upon it. The lunch was condemned by Labour MPs. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, said: “It is shameful to see Liz Truss pushing against official advice to book a luxury lunch that brings in thousands of pounds of business to a Tory donor. “Without a US trade deal in sight, the sheer incompetence of wasting taxpayer money is truly jarring. Whilst working people see their household budgets squeezed, Conservative ministers always manage to find ways to line their mates’ pockets.” Emily Thornberry, the shadow attorney general, wrote on Twitter that Truss has previously faced questions over her “expensive tastes”, and raised an example of the former international trade secretary’s decision to take three staff members to Vietnam and Singapore in December 2020. Truss was forced to correct a parliamentary question about the south-east Asia trip and disclose that the cost to the taxpayer included £20,296 on flights, £3,980 on accommodation and £4,034 – or £250 a day for each person – on expenses. Thornberry wrote that this “won’t be the last time Liz Truss gets in trouble asking the taxpayer to foot the bill for her expensive tastes”. “This is about character, and if Truss’s natural instinct is to hide the truth and hope no one asks questions when it comes to small things, don’t be surprised when she does it about big things.” Often considered to be London’s most exclusive club, 5 Hertford Street hosted Prince Harry’s first date with Meghan, but posted six-figure losses last year. Truss is reported to have previously used it to host “fizz with Liz” dinners with MPs and “biz for Liz” receptions with potential donors, in preparation for a likely leadership bid. A DIT spokesperson said: “This was a diplomatic working dinner attended by the previous international trade secretary, senior UK officials, and US counterparts from our largest single trading partner.” • This article was amended on 3 and 4 January 2022 to correct details of the drinks reportedly ordered at 5 Hertford Street.Though at times it can feel hard to believe – especially in recent weeks, perhaps – this pandemic will not last for ever. With more than 5 million dead and huge economic and social costs, its toll has been immense, and unnecessarily so. Secrecy in China, complacency in Europe, reckless and callous rightwing populism in the US and Brazil, and the inequity in vaccine distribution have all contributed. Yet if we learn its lessons, we will be better prepared next time. For there will be a next time. Covid is not a once-in-a-century crisis – an idea encouraged by its arrival 101 years after the last major pandemic, the “Spanish” flu, which killed at least 50 million. The mega-flu outbreak that many experts had seen as the next great threat is no less likely to arrive because Covid got here first. A pandemic of similar scale is likely within the next six decades, and could happen at any point in that timespan, according to research published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS) in August; others have put the risk of a comparable crisis within the next decade at around one in four. And as Prof Dame Sarah Gilbert, the creator of the Oxford/AstraZeneca jab, warned recently: “The next one could be worse. It could be more contagious, or more lethal, or both.” The price we pay then will depend on what we do now, using Covid’s lessons. We have seen international scientific collaboration, incredible dedication by researchers and healthcare staff, and the ability and willingness of local and national communities to pull together. Richer nations will be less likely to take health security for granted. Covid-19 has also shown that the right decisions at the right time can make a profound difference. With a dozen direct flights from Wuhan each week, Taiwan was heavily exposed to risk. But, driven by the experience of the 2002-03 Sars epidemic, it rapidly introduced health screening for arrivals, border controls, effective contact tracing and mask-wearing, and gave its citizens clear and consistent messages. Fewer than 900 of its 22 million-strong population have died. Wishful thinking Yet the global response has too often looked like a triumph of science and a failure of politics. The wishful thinking seen in the first wave has been repeated again and again. And the way we live is increasing the risks of another major pandemic. The aforementioned research published in August in PNAS estimated that the probability of novel disease outbreaks will grow threefold in the next few decades. International trade and travel allow diseases to spread far more quickly. Some scientists argue that we have already entered another great pandemic: a wave of antimicrobial resistance that could see tens of millions die from currently treatable diseases, coming gradually, but ultimately proving far more punishing than the sudden Covid crisis. The overuse of antibiotics to treat humans and livestock is endangering us all. Both the frequency and severity of “spillover” events, where diseases jump from animals to humans, have increased as we encroach on and destroy animal habitats. Zoonotic diseases, transmitted from animals, represent around three-quarters of newly emerging diseases. And research suggests that, as many species become extinct, those that thrive are more likely to be ones known to host pathogens dangerous to humans. Though all this is frequently presented as a developing-world issue, the global north is responsible too. Deforestation is often driven by the cultivation of crops for export. The focus on the perils of “bush meat” and “wet markets” has not been matched by attention to the risks posed by intensive, industrialised farming. Humans will come into even closer contact with nature as global heating reduces available land, and will be pushed into denser habitation and forced to move en masse. Existing diseases such as chikungunya may spread, as warmer temperatures allow their insect carriers to move into new areas. Covid would have been far worse without the pandemic preparations that countries had been making for years, however inadequate they proved. Many of the proposals now are essentially for more (or a better version) of the same, focusing on data collection and analysis, improvements to public health communication and exploratory work that could accelerate the development of vaccines and treatments. Above all, experts warn that there needs to be a massive expansion of surveillance to detect novel pathogens. Prioritising public health An expert panel convened by the G20 has called for a doubling of international financing to tackle major weaknesses in surveillance and other pandemic preparedness requirements, to $15bn a year. The price tag is tiny set beside the cost of Covid, but many fear that even now our leaders are reluctant to spend enough. Specific preparations to fend off or tackle another pandemic could mean everything from better protective gear for abattoir workers to rethinking the ventilation requirements of buildings. But protecting ourselves also requires far more fundamental reassessments. Beyond addressing the climate crisis, it means prioritising public health and acting on what the pandemic has demonstrated so graphically: that inequality – both within and between nations – kills; and it kills mostly, but not solely, the poor. Covid (and especially the Omicron variant) has shown that we cannot isolate ourselves from the physical or economic effects of disease elsewhere. By hogging vaccines and opposing patent waivers, wealthier nations have imperilled their own citizens too. They should think again, and make amends by helping to improve regional manufacturing capacity for tests, vaccines and treatments. Since global solutions are needed, it is positive that the World Health Assembly has agreed that work should begin on a pandemic accord covering prevention, preparedness and response, even if its parameters fall short of the tougher treaty that many hoped for. Finally, we must address questions of trust, and tackle the fissures in our societies – in many ways deepened by Covid. The challenge is truly daunting. But so is the alternative: “What we are going through is also a crisis of meanings,” Elif Shafak has written. “Do we want to go back to the way things were before the pandemic? Was that really normal?” The risk is to our bodily health as well as our wellbeing in the broader sense that Shafak describes. Covid has reminded us that disease is a social as well as a physical phenomenon, produced and shaped by the ways we live. Will we do what is needed to protect ourselves?Everton paraded an expensive recruit before kick-off and Dominic Calvert-Lewin for the first time in four months but any sense of a fresh start for Rafael Benítez was obliterated by Brighton’s maiden victory at Goodison Park. Errors continue to litter Everton performances, from players and manager alike. Graham Potter celebrated a landmark win and hugely rewarding week with unrestrained glee. Two fine goals from Alexis Mac Allister sandwiched a Dan Burn header to give Brighton a richly deserved triumph and seven points from a demanding festive sequence against Everton, Chelsea and Brentford. Potter’s side squandered leads regularly last season but underlined their progress by withstanding an Anthony Gordon-inspired recovery and sealing victory through Mac Allister’s stunning long‑range strike beyond Jordan Pickford. “It’s a great start to the new year and a great end to a really big week for us,” the Brighton manager said. “Historically this is not a good place for us to come as a club. I thought we played well first half and then the goal we didn’t want changed the atmosphere in the ground. We had to see that out and we did it really well.” Everton had not played for 17 days as a result of three consecutive postponements because of Covid outbreaks. According to Benítez’s programme notes: “We have used the time without matches to prepare as intensively as possible for the challenges Brighton present. This means understanding how to make it difficult for them to impose their style and, equally importantly, knowing how to create the chances to win the game.” His words appeared ludicrous given what unfolded in the first half. Brighton were the more coherent, composed and dangerous side from the outset. They were aided and abetted by dismal defending from an Everton team that created little plus the approach adopted by Benítez himself. The Everton manager started the first home game of the new year with a five-man defence that featured Seamus Coleman at left wing back. The France international left-back Lucas Digne was available but, having been ostracised by Benítez and seen the club purchase Vitaliy Mykolenko for an initial £17.9m from Dynamo Kiev, he was left on the bench throughout. Digne received a warm reception from the Goodison crowd when he sprinted along the touchline in the 40th minute and handed his shirt to a young Evertonian after the final whistle. Benítez said pointedly: “The most important thing for me is to have players on the pitch who want to be there and want to fight for the club.” Potter’s team swept into an early lead when exploiting the gaps that Everton’s shape was designed to eradicate. Joel Veltman picked out Neal Maupay with a cross from the right that the unmarked striker headed over Michael Keane towards Mac Allister. The midfielder, also meeting no resistance as he arrived in the penalty area, placed a volley inside Pickford’s bottom right‑hand corner. Everton’s defence was found wanting again when Brighton doubled their advantage. Mac Allister turned provider when he drilled a corner to the near post where Enock Mwepu connected with a glancing header. Dan Burn, all alone at the back post having peeled away from Keane, headed home from close range. The hosts were handed a route back into the contest almost immediately when Mwepu was penalised for barging into Gordon just inside the Brighton area. The referee, John Brooks, dismissed Everton appeals for a penalty but changed his mind when directed to the pitch-side monitor by VAR. Calvert-Lewin stepped up to announce his long-awaited return to the team in style but, after a short run-up, blazed the spot-kick over the bar. A first half to forget for Everton ended with a predictable chorus of boos. Benítez’s often-stated belief in a stronger second half to the season is based largely on the availability of Calvert-Lewin. The centre-forward’s physical presence, movement and finishing have been sorely missed since August and he will need time not only to recapture match sharpness but to establish a rapport with those around him. Gordon and Demarai Gray worked tirelessly and were central to Everton’s second‑half improvement, albeit as individuals rather than an effective unit. Gordon brought Everton hope shortly after the restart with his first goal for his boyhood club. Receiving Allan’s pass, the 20-year-old cut inside Marc Cucurella and Mac Allister before unleashing a left-footed drive that deflected off Adam Lallana and sailed beyond a wrong-footed Robert Sánchez. Gray and Allan both went close to equalising before Brighton re-established their two-goal lead through Mac Allister. Everton appeared to have dealt with a counterattack when Mason Holgate denied Maupay as the forward raced through on goal. But Keane put his team under renewed pressure with a poor clearance straight to Burn. The defender found Leandro Trossard and his low cross was flicked on to Mac Allister by Enock Mwepu. Brighton’s match-winner connected perfectly with the bouncing ball and Pickford was left grasping at thin air as the midfielder’s shot found the top corner from distance. The highly impressive Gordon pulled another goal back when rounding off a flowing move involving Calvert-Lewin and Jonjoe Kenny. Benítez introduced Salomón Rondón – to yet more boos – and, although the substitute created a decent chance for Gordon’s hat‑trick and volleyed over from André Gomes’s cross, there was no reprieve for Everton nor their troubled manager.Eric Adams’s first two days in office would resonate with any weary New York commuter: a subway ride featuring a brawl requiring the attendance of police, then the challenge of negotiating Manhattan traffic on a rented bike. “This is an amazing city,” the new mayor told ABC on Sunday. “You know, riding a city bike in, taking the train in, interacting with New Yorkers: generals don’t lead their troops from the back. “They lead their troops from the front. I’m going to lead my city into this victory from the front. And people tell me this is a difficult job. Darn it, I want it to be a difficult job.” Significant challenges await the newly sworn-in leader of the most populous US city, a Democrat who trounced the Guardian Angels founder Curtis Sliwa in November to become New York’s second Black mayor after David Dinkins, who was in office from 1990 to 1993. “New York can and should be the center of the universe again,” said Adams in an inaugural address themed largely around getting to grips with an Omicron-fueled coronavirus surge that has slowed parts of the city to a crawl. The police and fire departments are reporting sickness rates of around 20% and three subway lines have been suspended because of staff shortages. Adams succeeds as mayor Bill de Blasio, another Democrat who despite becoming hugely unpopular has signalled a run for governor. The city, the new mayor said, had endured “two years of continuous crisis, and that insults our very nature as New Yorkers”. On Saturday, hours after his midnight swearing-in ceremony in Times Square, the 61-year-old rode the subway to work, greeting residents and calling 911 to report a brawl between three men. By the time officers arrived, the fight – witnessed by reporters accompanying the mayor – was over. Adams, a cop himself for 22 years, said he wished police had stuck around longer. On Sunday he was up early again, cycling to City Hall and an appearance on ABC’s This Week in which he called on New Yorkers to get vaccinated and boosted. “It’s going to prevent you from dying,” he said. “It’s going to alleviate the possibility of you being hospitalised and going on a ventilator. “To those who are not vaccinated: ‘Stop it. It’s time to get vaccinated. It’s time to have the booster shots. You’re endangering yourself and you’re endangering the public and your family as well’.” Adams, who is keeping de Blasio’s vaccine mandate for private employers, said consideration of a booster mandate for city employees including cops, firefighters and sanitation workers was “our next move and decision”. His host, George Stephanopoulos, challenged Adams on his campaign pledge to tackle soaring crime rates, especially gun violence. “The balance is not just heavy-handed policing, it’s public safety and justice,” Adams said. “We’re going to go after gangs, we’re going to take down some of the large gangs in our city. We’re going to zero in on gangs. We’re going to reinstitute a plainclothes anti-gun unit and zero in on those guns.”A crunch week in Prince Andrew’s fight to avoid a public trial over claims he sexually assaulted a 17-year-old trafficked by the convicted child sex offender Jeffrey Epstein begins on Monday, when a New York court unseals a confidential 2009 deal between Epstein and the alleged victim. Lawyers for the Duke of York, who “unequivocally denies” the claims made by Virginia Giuffre, believe her agreement with Epstein could shield him from her civil lawsuit accusing him of sexual abuse in 2001. Epstein, a former friend of the Duke of York, was convicted of sex offences in 2008 and killed himself while in jail in 2019 awaiting trial on further sex trafficking charges. His close associate, Ghislaine Maxwell, 60, also a former friend of Prince Andrew, was last week convicted of sex trafficking in a federal court in New York and faces up to 65 years in prison. After the unsealing of the deal, lawyers for Prince Andrew will argue to Judge Lewis A Kaplan, sitting at the US district court in the southern district of New York in lower Manhattan, that the agreement between Giuffre and Epstein means she cannot take action against their client. Lawyers for Giuffre, known as Virginia Roberts when she claims she was introduced to the prince, have dismissed the attempts to halt the civil case as “just another in a series of tired attempts by Prince Andrew to duck and dodge the legal merits of the case”. But Prince Andrew’s lawyers have told the court that Giuffre is pursuing a “baseless lawsuit against Prince Andrew to achieve another payday at his expense” and that “sensationalism and innuendo have prevailed over the truth”. They claim his “sullied reputation” is collateral damage of the Epstein scandal. At stake is not just Prince Andrew’s future and Giuffre’s pursuit of justice, but the international reputation of the British royal family. Buckingham Palace on Sunday denied as “uninformed speculation” reports that courtiers may have to ask Prince Andrew to stop using his title if he loses the lawsuit brought by Giuffre. It said it would not comment on ongoing legal matters and also played down reports he would have to step back from his role as colonel-in-chief of nine military regiments, units and corps. In other developments, Ghislaine Maxwell’s brother Ian Maxwell, 65, said she maintained her innocence and had no plans to cut a deal with prosecutors to provide evidence against other people who were involved in her and Epstein’s sexual abuse. “Prosecution confirmed no plea bargain offers were made or received” before the trial, he told the Sunday Times. “I expect that position to be maintained.” He also said his sister was not a suicide risk as she awaits sentencing. It also emerged Giuffre could be permitted to deliver a victim impact statement at Maxwell’s sentencing. Sigrid McCawley, a lawyer for Giuffre, told the Daily Telegraph that she anticipates the court will hear from “many, many other women who were not able to be heard at the trial”. And Giuffre’s lawyer, David Boies, told the Mail on Sunday that there are “four, five, six witnesses” capable of placing Giuffre together with Prince Andrew. The Duke told the BBC in 2019 that he had “no recollection of ever meeting this lady, none whatsoever”. Prince Andrew’s lawyer, Andrew Brettler, has told the court that Giuffre’s agreement with Epstein provided “a general release of all claims against him and numerous other individuals and entities” and that Prince Andrew is “axiomatically among the releasees”. The same agreement was the basis for Giuffre agreeing to dismiss a battery claim against the lawyer Alan Dershowitz earlier this year, Brettler said. He will also argue that the case should be thrown out because Giuffre, a US citizen, no longer lives in the US. If the judge orders the case to continue, Prince Andrew could ultimately face a trial involving him making a statement under oath. Prince Andrew claimed in a 2019 BBC Newsnight interview that he was at a Pizza Express in Woking on the day in 2001 that Giuffre claims she was with him at the Tramp nightclub. He also addressed her claims that he was sweaty at the nightclub by saying he was incapable of sweating at that time because of an “overdose of adrenaline in the Falklands war”. But asked for evidence of both things by Giuffre’s legal team, his lawyers have as yet put nothing forward, according to court documents.It had been tempting to fixate on Thomas Tuchel’s decision to drop Romelu Lukaku from the Chelsea squad after that interview. But it was a measure of what followed during 90 pulsating minutes that the club’s record signing – and all the drama around him – came to feel like a footnote. Tuchel said he did not select Lukaku because his situation had represented too much of a distraction on the eve of the game – what with him saying he was unhappy at the club and questioning the manager’s system. Not for the first time Chelsea coped pretty well without him. During a thrilling first half they rallied from two goals down, restoring parity through a Mateo Kovacic wonder strike and a tidy finish from Christian Pulisic. When Chelsea can summon this sort of surge, it makes a mockery of their recent Premier League form, which now shows only four wins out of nine. Liverpool played a full part in an entertaining spectacle, their goals coming from Sadio Mané and Mohamed Salah; the former snapping a nine-match scoring drought, the latter continuing his red-hot touch. Salah’s goal was the latest gem in his collection and the way that he froze Marcos Alonso with a shake of the hips to open up the chance from a tight angle was one of the game’s many memorable moments. Mané and Salah now depart for the Africa Cup of Nations and so does the Chelsea goalkeeper, Edouard Mendy, who was excellent here – providing further curveballs for their clubs in a season that has been full of them. The second half did not quite live up to the excitement and tempo of the first, both teams coming to look leggy in the closing stages, even if there were chances at either end and, when the dust had settled, there was one manager who was the happiest of all. It was not Tuchel or Jürgen Klopp, who did not travel after he tested positive for Covid. It was Manchester City’s Pep Guardiola, who can see a 10‑point lead over Chelsea and 11 over Liverpool, albeit the latter club have a game in hand. The title race is not yet over but it feels increasingly close to it. Liverpool had been undermined by the losses of the Covid positives Alisson, Joel Matip and Roberto Firmino and, if it was strange not to see Klopp on the touchline, it was easy to imagine him charging around back on Merseyside when Mané scored the opening goal. Trevoh Chalobah got himself into a tangle, electing to stoop and head clear when Diogo Jota played the ball forward, even though it was there for the volley, and he succeeded only in ushering in Mané, who sliced inside Mendy and slammed past César Azpilicueta on the line. The big question was whether Mané should have been on the field. He had chased a high ball forward from the opening kick-off, raising his forearm and going into Azpilicueta with it, the Chelsea captain crumpling to the ground. “A clear red,” Azpilicueta said, and Tuchel agreed. What saved Mané was that he did not swing the arm. It was yellow rather than red. Tuchel raged in his technical area. Salah shimmered with menace and he went close in the sixth minute after Chalobah’s loose header to Mané, who ran and crossed. Antonio Rudiger jumped into the saving challenge, sending the ball back towards his own goal, where Mendy saved smartly. Salah’s goal was a beauty, starting with the touch to kill a Trent Alexander-Arnold pass up the right. Once he had seen off Alonso, he opened up his body and a range of options. He chose the whipped shot for the near corner, which was too much for Mendy. Chelsea had started to feel more and more aggrieved with the referee, Anthony Taylor – not a popular figure in these parts – and they needed an important slide tackle from Chalobah to stop the breaking Salah on 36 minutes. At that point the notion that Chelsea would be level at the interval was outlandish. But they got there after Kovacic’s volley from the edge of the area. Caoimhin Kelleher, who deputised impressively for Alisson, punched clear from Alonso’s free‑kick and Kovacic set himself as the ball dropped, placing it with the laces of his right boot up and in off the far post. Pulisic’s day had begun badly when he blew a gilt-edged one‑on‑one with Kelleher in the seventh minute, after Kai Havertz, who led the line in Lukaku’s absence, charged down an Alexander-Arnold clearance. Pulisic would atone. With Stamford Bridge in a frenzy, Rudiger stepped up to rob Salah and, when N’Golo Kanté helped the ball on, Pulisic once again had only Kelleher to beat. This time he did so and there would still be time before half-time for Mason Mount to stab past the far post for Chelsea. Liverpool ran through Chelsea on a number of occasions before seeing belatedly raised offside flags and, if Mendy did not get the credit he deserved for saving in those situations, he would do on others. His stop to beat away a Salah lob in the 57th minute was of the highest order and he was alert to deny Mané moments later. Alonso had shot wastefully high after the second-half restart while Chelsea could also point to a close‑range Pulisic effort on the hour from Alonso’s cross that drew a fine save out of Kelleher.Here’s Jacob Steinberg’s player ratings from Stamford Bridge: That’s it for today’s blog - thanks for your company and emails. Goodnight! And here’s Virgil van Dijk “For the outside world, it was quite a good game to watch. But we came here for three points and we didn’t get them. They have an amazing team, so have we; we were under pressure at times but we defended well and I always had the feeling we could win 3-2. It didn’t happen. “I’m quite a big fan of Caoimhin Kelleher. He’s learning from the best in my opinion. His presence is good, he’s confident on the ball, and we need him right now. “It’s City’s title to lose but anything can happen. It happened to us [in 2018-19] when we had a lead and unfortunately lost it. We have to focus on ourselves and win games.” It wasn’t actually an elbow from Mane, he caught Azpilicueta with a forearm smash. That said, it looks worse every time you see it, and on reflection I think he should have been sent off. Anyway. Apparently VAR said it was “reckless rather than violent”. The thoughts of Cesar Azpilicueta “We fought hard to come back from 2-0 down but we wanted more. We thought we could push for the winner in the second half but it didn’t quite happen. “[On Mane’s forearm smash] It’s a clear red. I don’t care if it’s five seconds into the game – he doesn’t look for the ball, he just wants to hit me with the elbow. I don’t understand. We are getting a lot of decisions against us. “We started really well in the game – we pressed a lot, they couldn’t make two passes, and we had chances. Then suddenly in two actions we were 2-0 down. We know they have a lot of quality and we cannot give them any opportunities. “In the second half we tried our best. We left everything on the pitch but it was not enough. We are lacking a bit of freshness that could have given us a bit more. “City are top and the more points we leave behind, the happier they will be. They have set the standard really high and we need to raise on our level. We are on our way but we have not managed the level of consistency we needed to stay at the top.” Here’s the updated Premier League table. Fuggedabowdit. Chelsea and Liverpool’s title hopes have gone down in a blaze of glory. That was wonderful entertainment, a sophisticated bar-room brawl of a match. It was The pace was demented throughout, and there were a couple of extraordinary goals from Mo Salah and Mateo Kovacic. And after all that, the winner is... football. (And Manchester City.) 90+2 min “What’s the opposite,” says Mike Gibbons, “of shit on a stick?” 90+1 min The tireless Tsimikas wriggles away from Mount on the left wing and pokes a cross that is cleared by Thiago and then sliced behind by somebody else. Tsimikas’s corner is poor and headed way by Hudson-Odoi. 90 min Manchester City are four minutes away from the title. 90 min Curtis Jones replaces Sadio Mane, who set the tone for a furious match by elbowing Cesar Azpilicueta in the kisser after precisely six seconds. 89 min Alonso’s corner is headed away and Liverpool break four on two, but Oxlade-Chamberlain can’t control a difficult ball on the stretch. 88 min Pulisic’s teasing cross just evades Hudson-Odoi and is volleyed away by Alexander-Arnold. Chelsea look the likelier winners, and moments later Pulisic’s cutback is put behind by Tsimikas. 87 min Mount’s corner is glanced wide by Rudiger, who had to run away from goal to meet the ball. 86 min Chelsea have been much better since switching back to 3-4-3, and Hudson-Odoi has won another corner off Alexander-Arnold. The second half has flown by. 85 min “I agree, Rob,” says Nora. “Kelleher is a composed young goalkeeper and he is Irish.” With Kelleher and Gavin Bazunu, Ireland should be okay in that department for the next, gulp, 15-20 years. 83 min Konate is booked for fouling Hudson-Odoi. 82 min Mount’s free-kick hits the wall. The ball comes back to Mount, who cracks a good follow-up shot that is well held to his right by Kelleher. It was a save you’d expect him to make, but again he made it with an impressive lack of fuss. 81 min Kovacic is fouled 22 yards from goal by Keita. The free-kick is to the left of centre, a great position for someone like Mason Mount. 81 min In fact Chelsea have gone back to 3-4-3: Kovacic left, Mount right, Hudson-Odoi up front. 80 min “Hi Rob,” says Simon McMahon. “Do you reckon Pep has the full pipe, slippers, and smoking jacket on already, glass of vintage Buckfast in hand, or will he be waiting until full time..?” 79 min While Konate continues to receive treatment, Chelsea bring on Callum Hudson-Odoi to replace Havertz. That’s a smart move - Chelsea need more pace up front, especially now they are playing largely on the break. 78 min Konate goes down holding his face and slapping the ground after an aerial challenge with Havertz. He did take a stiff arm to the coupon, though it wasn’t comparable to Mane’s in the first minute. Konate is still down, though. 75 min For the first time all day Liverpool are really dominating possession. Chelsea’s makeshift front two of Havertz and Mount, aka #Haunt, have umpteen qualities but blistering pace isn’t one of them. What Thomas Tuchel would give for Timo Werner now. 72 min Pulisic cracks a rising drive over the bar from 22 yards. It was a decent effort but Kelleher was comfortable that it was going over. 70 min Looks like Liverpool are playing with Oxlade-Chamberlain as their false nine. 69 min And Chelsea are bringing on Jorginho for Trevoh Chalobah, which means a rejig: Azpilicueta to centre-back, Pulisic to wing-back, Chelsea to 3-5-2 I guess. 69 min A double change for Liverpool: Naby Keita and Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain replace Diogo Jota and James Milner. 67 min “Football turns us into idiots,” says Liverpool fan Matt Dony. “This is gloriously unhinged, magnificent stuff. As entertaining as sport can possibly be. And I hate every second.” 66 min Alexander-Arnold’s corner clears everyone in the middle and comes to Salah on the far side. He feeds it back to the edge of the area for Tsimikas, who drags a cross shot wide of the far post. I think it took a slight touch off Thiago but a goalkick was given. More pertinently, Mane was behind Thiago and might have had an open goal had he been in Ron Atkinson’s wide-awake club. 64 min All this entertainment, and so far the only winners are Manchester City (and neutrals). 62 min: Good save from Kelleher! Alonso clips a cross towards Pulisic, whose snapshot from six yards is pushed away by Kelleher. It was close enough to Kelleher but he moved smartly across his line to get into position. I was just about to say that, amid the maelstrom, Kelleher has been admirably composed for a young goalkeeper. 59 min “Salah, Mendy, oh my...” says Mary Waltz. “I don’t have the words to describe the noises I made on that play.” You’re thinking of the singer. 58 min Another good save from Mendy, who falls to his right to push a rising drive from Mane round the post. The pace of this game is absurd. 57 min: Great save from Mendy! This game is a disgrace. Liverpool broke from a Chelsea corner, with Salah picking up a loose ball 40 yards from goal. Mendy was in an iffy position, too far out and too far to the left, so Salah shaped an extravagant curler towards the top-left corner. It was going in until Mendy threw himself to the right to push it behind. 55 min Now Fabinho pokes a through ball towards Mane, who knows he’s offside even though play is allowed to continue. He faffs on the edge of the area and loses the ball to the considerable chagrin of Salah, who was onside and might have been through on goal had Mane left the ball. 54 min Jota plays a very dangerous through ball towards Salah, but the last defender is Kante so that’s the end of that. 52 min: Good save from Mendy! Jota smashes a bouncing ball towards goal from the left of the area, and Mendy flies to his left to make a spectacular save. The flag went up subsequently against Jota, but it was really tight so had he scored the goal may well have stood. 51 min: Chance for Chelsea! Kante scurries away from Fabinho and Henderson before shaping a brilliant pass inside Alexander-Arnold to find Alonso. He moves into the area, dummies Alexander-Arnold neatly, cuts inside on his right foot... and then blazes a shot high and wide. 50 min A draw’s no good, lads, so more of the same please. 48 min Mount comes this close to nicking the ball off Fabinho on the edge of the D. Had he done so he’d have been in, but Fabinho managed to wriggle out of trouble. 47 min “Cracking game, but some tragic defending,” says Jonathan McKinley. “Trent nearly gives it away, Chalobah does, Rudiger lets Mo have a free run for his goal and then the Liverpool defenders just amble towards Kovacic after a punch that stays in the air longer than a Ben Stokes slice. Even Big Virge looks more like a not very Reliant Robin than a Rolls Royce. Still, they all look decent going forward, which makes for a cracking game, and repeat.” 46 min Peep peep! Chelsea begin the second half. “WOW,” says Mary Waltz. “Amazing how stunning football can erase any memories about, what is his name, lu. lu, lu something?” You’re thinking of the singer. The Guardian is funded by readers like you. We are entirely independent – there is no billionaire owner or proprietor who can censor what we write about. We are also free from a paywall, and everything we publish is open and available for all, regardless of means or status. But we rely on contributions from readers like you to power our journalism. If you’d like to support our work, from as little as £1, you can do so here. Chelsea are roared off after a stirring comeback. It was the most brilliant 45 minutes, a high-class slugfest, and I’m not even going to attempt to summarise it. Just scroll down to 1 min and then scroll back up. 45+2 min There are four minutes of added time. Salah almost gets in at one end, then Mount volleys just wide at the other! Rudiger beat Salah to a bouncing ball on the halfway line and poked it forward to Kante. He lobbed it through to Pulisic, who chested it down on the run and forced it high into the net with his left foot. The noise when that goal went in was incredible. This is insane! 45 min This is tremendous entertainment. There was a VAR check for offside against Rudiger, who was in an offside position but nowhere near Kelleher’s eyeline. Had they disallowed that goal we might as well have cancelled football for ever. This is quite stunning. Alonso cracked the free-kick into the six-yard box, where Kelleher got in front of Rudiger to punch clear. The ball dropped towards Kovacic on the edge of the D. He backpedalled daintily to get into position, a feat in itself, and then pinged a swerving, dipping volley that roared into the net off the inside of the post. Mateo Kovacic has seen Mo Salah’s goal and raised it! 41 min Milner commits a needless foul on Havertz just outside the area on the right... 40 min A frustrated Havertz leaves a bit on van Dijk and is a little fortunate not to be booked. Chelsea started so well but their heads have gone down since the second goal. 39 min Here’s the Premier League table as things stand. Draws are the new defeats (© Sid Lowe). 36 min Alexander-Arnold feeds a smart pass into Salah, 40 yards from goal, and suddenly Liverpool have a three-on-one (O-N-E) attack. The one, Chalobah, makes a brilliant sliding tackle on Salah, and then holds Salah up until support arrives. Eventually Salah has a shot blocked by Thiago (I think). 33 min Jota cracks a lovely ball that flashes across the six-yard box. He needed himself in the middle to finish that off. 32 min Mount tried to run inside Tsimikas, who blocked him. They both fell over; then, as they got up, Mount dragged his leg into Tsimikas’s body. It wasn’t a kick so much as a drag, and VAR decides there’s nothing for Anthony Taylor to see. 31 min Tsimikas goes down after an off-the-ball incident with Mount. Hmm. Mount could be in trouble here. 29 min Mo Salah, bloody hell. The scoreline is ever so harsh on Chelsea but that was a moment of savage brilliance. Alexander-Arnold received the ball just inside the Chelsea half in the inside-right channel. He flipped a nonchalant ball over the top to Salah, who took it down on the stretch at the right corner of the area. Then he slowed down, drawing Alonso towards him, before suddenly stabbing the ball past the flat-footed Alonso on the outside. That put him through on Mendy, who was set for the typical Salah shot to the far corner. Salah did open his body as usual, but only to dummy Mendy before sweeping the ball past him at the near post. A wonderful goal, and yet another demonstration of Salah’s instinctive genius. Mo Salah scores another majestic goal! 25 min Tsimikias’s corner is headed away to Alexander-Arnold on the edge of the D. He mistimes a shot that loops awkwardly towards a packed six-yard box, and Mendy does well to punch clear. 24 min Alexander-Arnold’s shot deflects behind for a corner. Liverpool are starting to come into the game, which I appreciate is an odd thing to say about a team that is 1-0 up. 22 min Mendy makes a fine one-on-one save from Salah, though it wouldn’t have counted as Salah was subsequently given offside. That doesn’t diminish the quality of the save, mind. 20 min Azpilicueta makes a vital, acrobatic interception to stop Jota putting Mane through on goal. 19 min Mount’s deliberately deep cross is smashed wide on the volley by Alonso. He should have cushioned it back across to Havertz, who was unmarked eight yards out. 18 min “I think that if the Mane challenge was mid-game, he’d have been sent off,” says Stephen Holliday. There’s probably something in that. I’m not sure he would definitely have gone, but there would have been a greater chance of a red card had it been after 60 minutes rather than six seconds. (The elbow was after six seconds, the card came out after 14 or 15.) 17 min The sliding Pulisic wins a loose ball but then follows through into Jota. He’s booked. 16 min Mount’s shot is blocked by Milner. The goal aside, Chelsea have started brilliantly here. 14 min Thiago Silva flips a ball over the top towards Alonso, who just fails to control it on the stretch. This is thrilling stuff. 11 min Chelsea, of course, will argue that Mane shouldn’t be on the field. The ball did dip in front of Chalobah, but he knows he should have cleared it with his feet. Either that or he needed to summon a Vialli-style sliding header. Dear me, what a start. Henderson put in a nothing cross from the right that dipped awkwardly in front of Chalobah on the edge of the D. He tried to head the ball instead of using his feet and could only nod it straight into the ground. Mane collected the loose ball, swerved away from Mendy and cracked the ball past Azpilicueta on the line. And now Mane scores after a mistake from Chalobah! 7 min: Fine save from Kelleher! This is pulsating stuff. Alexander-Arnold made a rank howler, hitting a clearance straight at Havertz. The ball ricocheted square to Pulisic, who was one on one with Kelleher. He tried to dance round Kelleher, who dived at his feet to push the ball away. That’s terrific goalkeeping, Alisson-esque in fact. 6 min: Mendy saves from Rudiger! They’ve found it now. Mane breaks into space down the left and crosses low towards Salah. The last man Rudiger gets there first (I think) and screws the ball towards his own goal, forcing Mendy to dive to his right to make a decent save. 4 min Lots of early possession for Chelsea, with Liverpool yet to find their pass-and-move groove, or its heavy metal equivalent. 3 min “As a Chelsea fan, I’m disappointed that Lukaku isn’t playing but I trust Tuchel,” says Joe Balfour. “I’ve looked at the interview to see where he could have been misunderstood, but he actually said it all. Still hasn’t publicly apologised either. You’re right about ‘player power’ with us. This is different though. Lukaku went after the club itself, Roman won’t be happy and will back Tuchel. How long that remains? I don’t know.” I thought that Tuchel interview before kick-off was extremely impressive. Ultimately, he is – or should be - far more valuable to Chelsea than Lukaku. 2 min It’s been a really fast start to the game. Tuchel isn’t happy with that Mane elbow, thinking it should have been a red card. Mane does have form for such accidents, though my first impression is that it was more overzealous than malevolent. An orange card maybe, but not a red one. 1 min Mane is booked for elbowing Azpilicueta in the face after 14 seconds. 1 min Peep peep! Amid a pulsating atmosphere, Liverpool kick off from left to right. The teams are ready for action. In two hours’ time, at least one of them will be out of the title race. May the best team win and, more importantly, may VAR have bugger all to do with it. “Rudi is going to be busy today, Alonso is a great winger but a fairly average full back,” says Kim Crawley. “As for Lukaku, he is acting as though he had scored loads of important goals and is vital to the team. He has not and is not. Hope it’s not 0-0.” In which Thomas Tuchel answers questions about Romelu Lukaku “The thing got too big. It got too noisy so close to the match, and I decided to protect the preparation for the match. That’s why he’s out. Of course we have spoken. We’ve spoken twice and I also spoke to the main players. We have a big match to play and we need full focus - that’s hard to get even with this decision, but in my opinion it’s easier if he’s not in the squad. For sure it’s a difficult decision to take, but in my opinion it’s the correct one. “I cannot really tell you [how fit and strong the team is]. It’s always a bit of a gamble what we do right now: we come from injuries, we come from Covid. I think we are pretty strong to start, and let’s see how much fuel we have. We need good energy in the stadium - we need momentum and support in every single minute because it’s a big match against a tough opponent. “It’s never a must-win game, but we go for the win no matter what. This is what we do. We accept and respect the quality of the opponent. It’s a must to give everything and to leave our heart out there, and to do this together as a team. Then we have a chance of a result.” “Hope this is a good one,” says Ruth Purdue. “Will be interesting where the spaces will be found for Liverpool. Will they sit and wait for Chelsea or go at them devastatingly. Tactical battle is always interesting - especially if it is a draw.” I can’t see Liverpool sitting back. I’d need to check to be sure, but I think I’m right in saying they’ve had at least 48.3 per cent possession in every Premier League game this season, with an overall average of 63.2 per cent rising to 63.8 per cent in away games. Jordan Henderson speaks “[Jurgen Klopp] will be a big miss, he’s our leader. But we’ve got great leaders and experienced people in the dressing-room, so for us it’s business as usual. Hopefully we can put on a performance to make the gaffer feel a bit better at home.” The pre-match thoughts of Liverpool’s assistant manager Pep Lijnders “Jurgen has mild symptoms – but Jurgen is Jurgen, he gives everyone positive vibes and gives us all energy, even from home. We don’t come here with excuses [because of all the absentees]. We are here to attack the game; we come here with hunger, with the idea to create a final. We want to make it a special game.” The transfer window is open again! It’s more exciting than the actual football, you know. “As ever, I’m scared,” says Matt Dony. “I mean, sure. Liverpool don’t actually need a talismanic manager, one of the world’s best goalkeepers, a consistently elegant defender, an attacker who has so often knitted everything together, or The Best Left Back Ever (don’t @ me). This is all fine. It does seem like any title hopes are mostly dead. And there’s a big difference between mostly dead, and all dead. But that difference might just be a defeat to Chelsea.” Or a draw. If I were you - and I’m not, and how lucky at least one of us is that that’s the case - I’d divert my attention to number seven. “Benching Lukaku for an extremely important match for complaining to the press seems petulant to me,” says Zach Neeley. “If I was one of his teammates, I would be very frustrated that he wasn’t just fined and the best team put out. (Benching may be an American term that makes less sense when a place on the bench is something of value.)” Well, there’s a decent argument that leaving him out improves the team, given his atrocious big-game record, but he’s not even on the bench so it’s clearly a punishment. I think it’s the right decision; that interview was preposterous. If you just fine him it’s likely to be the thin end of the wedge, and Chelsea managers are vulnerable enough to player power at the best of times. (That’s just, like, my opinion, man.) Team views Where to start with all that? Thiago Silva is fit to start for Chelsea, which is such a boost for Thomas Tuchel. Mateo Kovacic is preferred to Jorginho in midfield and the ghostly Kai Havertz returns up front. In all there are five changes from the 1-1 draw with Brighton on Wednesday: Thiago, Trevoh Chalobah, N’Golo Kante, Marcos Alonso and Havertz replace Andreas Christensen, Reece James, Jorginho, Callum Hudson-Odoi and Romelu Lukaku. Caoimhin Kelleher replaces Alisson in goal for Liverpool, and Ibrahima Konate covers for Joel Matip. The only other change is in midfield, where James Milner is preferred to Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain. Chelsea (3-4-3) Mendy; Chalobah, Thiago, Rudiger; Azpilicueta, Kante, Kovacic, Alonso; Mount, Havertz, Pulisic. Substitutes: Kepa, Sarr, Jorginho, Barkley, Saul, Ziyech, Vale, Hall, Hudson-Odoi. Liverpool (4-3-3) Kelleher; Alexander-Arnold, Konate, van Dijk, Tsimikas; Henderson, Fabinho, Milner; Salah, Jota, Mane. Substitutes: Pitaluga, Adrian, Beck, Gomez, N Williams, Morton, Keita, Oxlade-Chamberlain, Jones. Referee Mr Anthony Taylor. “Happy new year!” says Ryan Grubb. “Been on the champagne here in the States since the sun came up. Might as well enjoy the pain. I for some foolish reason believe that the winner here will still give us some semblance of a title race. Up until they both lose at the Etihad anyway. Here’s to avoiding a draw at all costs!” I do hope, if it’s level going into injury time, both teams switch to the emergency 0-0-11 formation. We all thought Alisson’s goal at West Brom last season was a JFK moment; wait till Caoimhín Kelleher roofs one from 35 yards today. Big Rom’s big-game woes have taken a new twist Hello and welcome to live, unbiased coverage of Chelsea v Liverpool at Stamford Bridge. There are two conflicting sales pitches for this game. Depending on your perspective, and possibly your allegiance, it’s either a title-race eliminator or a glorified second-place playoff. Chelsea are 11 points behind the leaders Manchester City with this game in hand; Liverpool are 12 adrift with two in hand. A draw is no use to anyone except the bookies and the Abu Dhabi United Group for Development and Investment (ADUG), so this should be a lively affair with a whiff of desperation. That desperation is likely to be compounded by the ill health of both squads. Chelsea manager Thomas Tuchel is without Reece James, Ben Chilwell and possibly Thiago Silva from his best XI. Romelu Lukaku is also absent with a mouth problem. Liverpool manager Jurgen Klopp will be without Jurgen Klopp, who has Covid, as well as Andy Robertson, Thiago Alcantara and possibly Alisson. He and Roberto Firmino missed training on Thursday, triggering speculation that they have also tested positive for Covid. All will be revealed when the teams are announced at 3.30pm. It’s more exciting than the actual football, you know. Kick off 4.30pm.Ministers have told headteachers in England to start preparing for staff shortages by using support staff to fill in gaps, combining classes or using hybrid learning, with some classes taught remotely and some face-to-face. In an email sent to schools on Sunday, the Department for Education (DfE) advised them to deal with staff shortages by combining classes into larger groups. The email said: “You may wish to use existing teaching, temporary and support staff more flexibly where required to ensure your setting remains open, while ensuring that you continue to have appropriate support in place for pupils with [special education needs and disabilities]. “As pupils do not need to be kept in consistent groups, you may wish to consider combining classes.” The new advice came as the government announced that 137,583 new Covid cases had been recorded in England and Wales. That is the lowest daily figure since 27 December, when figures may also have been depressed by the festivities, but the total number of new cases over the past seven days is still up 43.1% on the previous week. Ministers have not yet ruled out introducing further Covid restrictions for England, but the health minister Edward Argar said on Sunday that he was seeing “nothing at the moment in the data” to suggest they would be needed. Nadhim Zahawi told school leaders in an open letter posted on Sunday that staff absences would be a “possible challenge” in keeping students in classrooms. The education secretary said: “If operational challenges caused by workforce shortages in your setting make delivery of face-to-face teaching impossible, I would encourage you to consider ways to implement a flexible approach to learning. “Flexible delivery involves utilising all your available teaching and non-teaching workforce to maximise on-site education for as many pupils as possible while you flexibly deliver provision either on-site or remotely to some pupils,” Zahawi said. In a Twitter thread addressed to a wider audience, Zahawi said face-to-face teaching would “continue to be the expected norm” in the new term, which will start for many pupils on Tuesday. He particularly praised former teachers who have agreed to fill vacancies this term, saying: “It’s this Blitz spirit that will be essential in turning the tide on Covid.” Zahawi sought to reassure parents after Labour and unions said last-minute moves to tackle the spread of the Omicron Covid variant in schools, colleges and universities in England would not be enough to avoid disruption or stop large-scale absences among staff and students. The DfE announced that masks should be worn indoors in education settings in England, including in classrooms, libraries and corridors, from the start of the new term until the end of January. It also said it had ordered 7,000 air purification units for nurseries, schools and colleges, “for areas where quick fixes to improve ventilation are not possible, such as being able to open a window”. But the units will not be delivered until next month. For a classroom to qualify for a government air purifier, the DfE says it must show a “sustained” CO2 reading of 1,500 particles per million or higher for a week when occupied, as well as requiring building work to improve its ventilation. The shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, said 7,000 units were “nowhere near enough” because they would only cover around one in four schools in England. “I’m afraid it looks a little bit like a rushed last-minute announcement to give the appearance of doing something on a big issue where they should have taken action a lot sooner,” he said. Data from the Office for National Statistics shows children have been among the most likely to be infected, with one in 15 children aged two to Year 6, and one in 20 for Years 7-11, testing positive for Covid for the week ending 23 December in England. The joint general secretary of the National Education Union, Mary Bousted, said the order of 7,000 purifiers would be “completely inadequate” for providing clean air. “The fact that the government have provided the extra purifiers shows that it recognises the problem but with over 300,000 classrooms in England they have failed to provide an effective solution,” Bousted said. Ofsted, the schools inspectorate for England, will not inspect secondary schools or colleges in the first week of term. Current school leaders who also act as Ofsted inspectors will not be asked to carry out inspections, while schools affected by Covid staff absences should request deferrals of inspection visits. The DfE said the mask advice for students in year 7 and above would remain until 26 January, when it would be reviewed alongside other mitigation measures. The advice also applies to further and higher education providers such as colleges and universities. The Conservative chair of the Commons education committee, Robert Halfon, told Times Radio he was worried that mask-wearing would have a negative effect on pupils. “The children’s minister came to my committee and said there was very limited evidence as to the efficacy of masks in educational settings,” he said. “Jonathan Van-Tam, hugely respected, the deputy chief medical officer, said that they could be quite inhibitory to the natural expressions of learning in children, the national Children’s Deaf Society has tweeted out their big reservations about mask policy, and what I worry about is the effect that masks have on children’s wellbeing, mental health and anxiety.” Bousted, however, disagreed. She said secondary school pupils in Scotland and Wales had been wearing masks in class without that causing problems. “Even in secondary only just under half the pupils have been vaccinated. And we know that mask-wearing does have an effect of suppressing transmission,” she said. In a sign of lessons heeded from the tragic case of the murdered six-year-old Arthur Labinjo-Hughes, the DfE has updated its list of “vulnerable” children to be given priority for face-to-face teaching in the event of school or nursery closures. The list now includes children who have been known to social care services because of “domestic abuse, parental offending, adult mental health issues, and drug and alcohol addiction”.Nothing beats the New Zealand bush. The writer Ashleigh Young once tweeted: “Sometimes NZ writers say ‘the forest’ instead of ‘the bush’ (and they definitely mean ‘the bush’) because they are nervous about saying ‘the bush’. Bring back the bush. If everyone does it, we will be fine.” So here I am, proclaiming, “I love the bush!” Perhaps this is my opinion as an outdoor enthusiast and bisexual, but “bush” is the more accurate descriptor for the native flora of Aotearoa. Our bush is dense and scratchy, inured to the trample of boots. Our bush is thick and lush all year round, as few native plant species are deciduous. Our bush is not some wan forest: it is wild and overgrown, it does not encourage easy passage. As my family were neither middle class nor Pākehā (white European), I didn’t venture into the bush until I was an adult. It’s now been 10 years since my first foray into the bush but I’ll never forget that first experience. A friend, who grew up with the bush, convinced me to come on a two-day tramp. I had no idea what I was getting into. Surely a tramp was just a long walk. How difficult could a walk in the bush possibly be? I lacked outdoor gear but my friend sorted me with her spares, save for tramping boots as our feet were not the same size. “Maybe I’ll get into tramping,” I decided, buying the cheapest pair of boots I could find. The route was up Avalanche Peak, the only poled summit in Arthur’s Pass, a national park famous for its bush of silver, red and mountain tawhai (beech) trees. I did not appreciate the bush on the way up. Instead, I cursed the 1,100m ascent that left my lungs burning and back saturated with sweat. I envied my friend’s fitness that allowed her to walk ahead and find features of the bush to show me: the peat floor carpeted with prickly shield fern, the sponge moss and lace lichen, and the understorey of snow totara, bearing edible cashew apple-shaped berries. I thought the uphill would be the hardest part but then I discovered what happens once you leave the bush. Past the bushline, the tall trees were replaced by stout, hardy shrubs. Some people refer to this as alpine scrub but I think you could equally call it alpine bush. This alpine bush featured plants I had never seen before, like the Mount Cook lily, with bristly white petals and leaves as tough as leather. This bush was patchy and uneven to walk on, and somehow I was as slow on the flat as I was uphill. Soon, the alpine bush too disappeared, and the only vegetation was the moss and lichen that grew on the rock and shingle we crunched underfoot. My friend pointed out a fan of broken rock, ranging from palm-sized to head-sized, that dropped down into an open plain. We had to get down that scree slope to get to our accommodation for the night. There’s an art to running down scree slopes, which my friend demonstrated, where one “surfs” along the surface of the debris. She pulled away like a motor boat from a jetty, generating a clattering wave of cascading rock, leaving me to tread cautiously in her wake. I tried to replicate her movements but I fell repeatedly until I gave up. I sat on my bum and thought back to earlier in the day. I never fell in the bush. The bush was sheltered, the bush was safe. I wished I was back in the bush. I ended up bum-shuffling my way down the slope, tearing up the seat of my cotton shorts in the process. Thankfully that first trip didn’t put me off tramping and since then I’ve visited bush all around the country. There’s the bush of Kahurangi national park, which looks blue from a distance, and the goblin forests of Taranaki, named for the gnarled trees and the mosses that hang off them. I can now enjoy the cool, crisp air of the bush around me and look forward to where it may take me. Rose Lu is a writer, software developer and cable car owner from Wellington. Her essay collection All Who Live on Islands is out now What’s your favourite wild place? If you would like to contribute to the series tell us about it in 200 words and send it to newzealand@theguardian.com“Same old Sarries, always cheating,” came the chant from a Northampton supporter in the crowd. It is unclear whether he was moaning about the legality of some of their defensive work or perhaps making reference to how their salary-cap scandal has been referenced a lot of late, but he got one thing spot-on: this was without question the same old Saracens. The Northampton director of rugby, Chris Boyd, bristled at the idea that a win such as this for Saracens was inevitable when Northampton found themselves camped in their opponents’ 22 for large spells of the first half, only to go in at the interval at 6-6. We have seen it so many times before, however, that there was little surprising about the manner in which Saracens weathered the storm and, with Alex Lozowski finishing with 20 points, pulled clear. This sort of performance, particularly on their travels, has been the hallmark of Saracens’ return to the Premiership. They have the defensive resilience to soak up prolonged periods of pressure before edging in front and delivering the telling blow as their opponents get increasingly desperate. Here it was Lozowski’s try early in the second half and Tom Woolstencroft’s score from a driving maul that ensured victory for Saracens – Maro Itoje’s late effort making for a thoroughly demoralising afternoon for Northampton. It might have been different had Northampton managed to convert one of their chances in the first half – Boyd was adamant that repeatedly opting against kicking at goal was the right approach – and their supporters certainly felt that the referee Adam Leal ought to have shown a yellow card following a flurry of Saracens penalties. He did not, however, and after Northampton again opted for a scrum under the posts he penalised the home side – much to Boyd’s frustration. Boyd said: “He didn’t have enough nuts, did he? I mean it was a clear hinge. There was only one side under pressure in that series of scrums. At the end of the day we only got six points and they got 30. We had half a dozen opportunities in the first half, they had three and scored three tries. That’s the difference between the two sides.” Northampton can regroup, at least safe in the knowledge they are not the only side to suffer this kind of defeat against Saracens. Bristol were also kept tryless at home in September but they probably ought to have played the conditions better. They were not without positives – George Furbank was excellent at full‑back – but just as was the case last time out against Harlequins at Twickenham, a touch more pragmatism could make all the difference when the heavens open. Saracens, meanwhile, have cemented their grip on second spot. Jamie George made a successful return to the side from a knee injury – perhaps his most valuable asset was the manner in which he communicated with Leal when his side were under the pump – and Alex Goode again showed his class at fly‑half, standing in for the injured Owen Farrell, who was in the coaches’ box, barking out instructions to his side. In a further boost for club and country the Saracens director of rugby, Mark McCall, revealed Farrell could make his comeback on 23 January, two weeks before England’s Six Nations opener. Lozowski and Dan Biggar traded a pair of penalties in a first half notable for Northampton’s ambition despite the torrential rain and Saracens’ ability to hold firm in the trenches. Furbank in particular was a threat with the ball in hand, but Saracens were resilient with their backs to the wall. Given Saracens reached double figures in penalties against inside the first half, however, maybe Northampton’s grievances were not without foundation. Saracens then struck with the first try four minutes after the restart. Goode was the architect, straightening through half a gap before offloading to Lozowski, who slid for the line early and had just enough momentum to get there. He converted for good measure for a seven-point lead. There was no little endeavour from Northampton but as the half wore on there was increasingly an inevitability to the Woolstencroft try that broke Saints’ spirit. It occurred moments after the Saints replacement Conor Carey had been sent to the sin-bin and before Itoje splashed over for good measure. “When you’re under the pump, in front of a great crowd as Northampton have, in your 22 as often as we were you need your senior players to step up and I thought across the board ours did,” McCall said. “I thought we showed a lot of fight, grit and resolve. Just a really good hard-fought away win.”Chelsea 3-4-2-1 Édouard Mendy Powerless when Liverpool swept into a 2-0 lead, but he still made some stunning saves. 8 Trevoh Chalobah Did well to settle down after giving away Liverpool’s opener. Had made a nervy start. 5 Thiago Silva The Brazilian veteran initially looked uneasy after returning from injury, but he gradually took control. 6 Antonio Rüdiger Left exposed by Alonso, he got tighter to Salah and sparked the move for Chelsea’s equaliser. 7 César Azpilicueta Nowhere near as attacking as Reece James in this role, but his effort was admirable. 6 N’Golo Kanté At times it seemed he was holding Chelsea’s midfield together on his own. Created Pulisic’s goal. 8 Mateo Kovacic Dragged Chelsea back into it with an astonishing volley. Why doesn’t the Croatian shoot more? 8 Marcos Alonso The absence of Ben Chilwell was felt again. Salah gleefully exposed Alonso’s lack of pace. 5 Mason Mount Bright and energetic, he kept looking for an opening. Almost scored with a hooked volley. 7 Christian Pulisic Tentative with an early chance, but he was ruthless when he ran through to equalise. 7 Kai Havertz Replaced Romelu Lukaku and pressed well. Could not get into goalscoring positions though. 6 Substitutes: Jorginho (for Chalobah 69) 6; Callum Hudson-Odoi (for Havertz 80) 6. Liverpool 4-3-3 Caoimhín Kelleher Alisson’s deputy could do nothing about Chelsea’s goals. He did not let anyone down. 7 Trent Alexander-Arnold As contradictory as ever. A beautiful assist for Salah was accompanied by some ropey defending. 6 Virgil van Dijk He has not looked the same since his injury. He was vulnerable against Chelsea’s speed. 5 Ibrahima Konaté Did not impress after stepping in for Joël Matip. Liverpool’s defence lacked poise under pressure. 5 Kostas Tsimikas Threatened on the overlap, but he had his hands full as the game wore on. 6 Fabinho Liverpool needed him to provide security when the game became chaotic. Good battle with Mount. 7 Jordan Henderson The Liverpool captain was often unconvincing in possession. Lacked control but offered plenty of running. 6 James Milner Gave away the free-kick that led to Kovacic’s goal. Off the pace before going off. 5 Mohamed Salah His goal underlined how much Liverpool will miss him while he is away with Egypt. 9 Diogo Jota His pass led to Mané’s goal and Chelsea struggled to track his movement. A menace. 7 Sadio Mané Got away with a booking for elbowing Azpilicueta and took advantage by punishing Chalobah’s error. 8 Substitutes: Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain (for Jota 69) 6; Naby Keïta (for Milner 69) 6; Curtis Jones (for Mané 90) 6.Good morning and happy new year! It’s nice to be back in your inbox and we hope you stayed safe and had a lovely festive season. The year is off to a tumultuous start with many states reporting record Covid infections and growing hospitalisations, compounded by concerns about the availability of tests. But there is some hope, with new studies indicating the Omicron variant currently spreading around the world is less severe than its predecessors. Australia recorded 32,000 new Covid cases on Sunday, and the positivity rate reached 20.3%, meaning one in five people tested had Covid. The figure is well above the 5% the WHO says is needed to keep the spread of Covid under control. So what does a 20% rate mean for Australia? Here’s our explainer. There were 1,066 people in hospital with Covid on Sunday – an 18% increase a day after the number had already doubled between Boxing Day and New Year’s Eve. The number of PCR tests in NSW dropped by almost 30,000 in 24 hours after the government encouraged people not to line up unless they had symptoms or were a close contact. Victoria’s health minister is expected to make an announcement in the coming days on widening access to rapid antigen tests after extreme heat caused the closure of eight of the state’s testing sites on Saturday, blowing out queues and test result wait times. In some much-needed positive Covid news – there’s more research suggesting the Omicron variant is less severe than other variants. New studies suggest the variant is more likely to infect the throat than the lungs, which scientists believe may explain why it appears to be more infectious but less deadly than other versions of the virus. Some research has suggested that lateral flow tests detect Omicron better when the throat is swabbed rather than the nose. US politician Liz Cheney, a Republican member of the House committee investigating the attack on the US Capitol, says her party must choose between Donald Trump and the truth. “We can either be loyal to Donald Trump or we can be loyal to the constitution, but we cannot be both,” she told CBS’s Face the Nation. On Sunday, Cheney and Bennie Thompson of Mississippi, the committee chairman, again discussed the possibility of a criminal referral for Trump over his failure to attempt to stop the riot or for his obstruction of the investigation. Australia Our gut’s microbiome has a far greater effect on health than anyone previously imagined, according to emerging science, which is leading to stool transplants and designer gut bacteria. Researchers in Adelaide are harnessing the power of “super poo” in new treatments for the increasing number of people who are turning to faecal transplants for the health benefits. It was a horror weekend in the water across the country after three men and a seven-year-old boy died in separate drowning incidents. A number of people were also rescued from the water in other incidents, which has prompted authorities to plead with the public to take care while swimming and fishing. The world A whistleblower in Canada has warned that a progressive neurological illness that has baffled experts appears to be affecting a growing number of young people. Young adults with no prior health triggers are developing troubling symptoms, including rapid weight loss, insomnia, hallucinations and limited mobility. The Covid crisis has left Sri Lanka on the brink of bankruptcy and facing a deepening humanitarian crisis as inflation rises to record levels, food prices rocket and its coffers run dry. Half a million people have sunk into poverty since the pandemic struck, with rising costs forcing many to cut back on food. Russia is “very likely” to invade Ukraine and might only be deterred by “enormous sanctions”, the chair of the US House intelligence committee said on Sunday, adding an invasion could backfire on Moscow by drawing more countries into the Nato military alliance. Oxfam India has said its work in the country will be imperilled by the government’s refusal to renew a licence that permits it to receive funds from abroad. Recommended reads The last couple of years have surely reminded us that nobody can predict the future and nobody knows what’s coming around the corner. We can safely assume, however, that whatever troubles befall us, artists will struggle on, fighting the good fight, telling stories and taking us to places of imagination and illumination. As always, the new year offers a range of Australian films to look forward to. Hugo Weaving, Rose Byrne and Zac Efron star in some of 2022’s big movie releases, with directors George Miller, Ivan Sen, Baz Luhrmann and Gracie Otto at the helm. For Benjamin Giles, running 2,000km in 2021 was the first resolution he’d kept longer than two weeks. But it wasn’t easy – it took an app, a long lockdown and pushing through injury to reach his self-imposed target. But most of all, it took obsession. “I was way behind the schedule. But I was also obsessed, and it was mathematically possible that by running 11km a day for six weeks, with one rest day a week, I could reach my target on Christmas Eve.” Pruning is usually a technique applied to roses in winter, but more recently the gardening term has been cropping up whenever sociologists talk about our social lives. People have been pruning friends amid Covid – becoming “more insular and bonding-oriented”, and now many aren’t sure how to start rebuilding their social lives. Listen One of our best Full Story episodes from 2021 was this Guardian investigation into a scheme allowing foreign nationals to purchase citizenship in Vanuatu, or “golden passports” – and with it, visa-free access to the EU and UK. Pacific editor Kate Lyons and freelance reporter Euan Ward speak to Laura Murphy-Oates about how this passport scheme works and how it could be exploited. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Former Australian rugby league player Blake Ferguson has been arrested in Japan after alleged drug possession. Ferguson’s future in Japan’s rugby union competition is now in severe doubt given how seriously drug possession is viewed in the country. Australian Open boss Craig Tiley says there is “quite a bit to play out” before the saga around Novak Djokovic’s appearance at Melbourne Park is sorted. The World No 1 has continually refused to reveal if he is vaccinated against Covid-19, a requirement to work in Victoria. Media roundup Northern Territory police have commenced a “major investigation” into the death of a child under five years old in remote Central Australia on New Year’s Day, according to the ABC. A 99-year-old former Manly ferry has sunk in Sydney Harbour after a decades-long push for the dilapidated vessel to be restored, reports the Sydney Morning Herald. Coming up Labor is expected to announce a policy to establish a strategic fleet of supply ships. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.Sport is politics. There is no question about that at the beginning of the year when the Winter Olympics are taking place in Beijing and the World Cup in Qatar. You only have to open the newspaper these days. The Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, the Guardian, the Polish Gazeta Wyborcza and other quality media, which gather many voices to report on the world, deal on their sports pages with the diplomatic boycott of the Olympics by the USA, Great Britain and other countries, the “quiet diplomacy” of the International Olympic Committee and workers’ rights in Qatar. One news item received particular attention worldwide. Out of concern for the life of Peng Shuai, the former world No 1 in doubles, the WTA has suspended all tournaments in China. In total, about 30% of the WTA’s revenue comes from China, with the annual finals in Shenzhen paying out the equivalent of about €12m (£10m), more than any other event in women’s tennis. But the players are now saying: we’ll do without. Taking a strong stance is a tradition in women’s tennis, whose history is marked by personalities. In the 1960s, the WTA founder and multiple grand slam winner Billie Jean King campaigned for equal treatment and pay for the genders. Later, the multiple Wimbledon winner Martina Navratilova campaigned for gay rights. The supposedly weaker sex actually dominates the fighting mode. Female athletes have turned their federation into an independent institution. The WTA’s consistent decisions send a signal: you can say no in sport. Negotiations require an interplay – approaching each other, but also withdrawing from time to time. Countries in which human rights are not universal also invest in football. These countries are part of global sport and offer so much money that many find it difficult to refuse. The German television broadcaster ZDF recently ran a hidden-camera investigation. The reporter spoke to workers from Nepal, Pakistan and Bangladesh who build stadiums and roads in Qatar. Eight of them lived in one room; they earn €300 a month each but have been waiting months for their salaries. The report also featured attractive match scenes from the 2021 Arab Cup and all eight new stadiums. In a country with 2.9 million inhabitants there are now eight of the most modern, expensive and beautiful stadiums in the world, less than an hour’s drive apart. The ZDF report was in anticipation of the dilemma facing the 2022 World Cup: people know about the situation in Qatar but they enjoy watching the spectacular pictures and the best teams. When the 1978 World Cup took place under the direction of the Argentinian military regime, many players had no answer to questions about human rights. Today, the world can no longer be viewed so naively. Everyone involved knows better than before about what is going on in faraway continents. Most footballers also have more time to deal with such issues, due to advanced professionalisation. Public figures like them are also expected to inform themselves of matters outside their bubble. Now that the world has become a village, everyone knows the conditions in Qatar. Some footballers are stepping in and calling for human rights to be respected. “I think more attention needs to be paid to this kind of thing in the future when awarding contracts,” the Germany international Leon Goretzka has said. Finland’s captain, Tim Sparv, wrote in an open letter: “We woke up too late, I woke up too late.” Sparv called on players, media and fans to talk about working conditions in Qatar. On a small scale, this argument is already bearing fruit. When a black player was racially insulted by a spectator during the third division match between MSV Duisburg and VfL Osnabrück in Germany in December, the teams forced a stop. All parties quickly agreed that they wanted to set an example: players, both clubs, referees, the association and fans from both camps. The individual is not powerless; people can make a difference. Small is where you start, big is where it can end. Greta Thunberg was 15 when she stood alone on a street in Stockholm to draw attention to climate change. Many joined in, and Fridays for Future has since put the environment on the global agenda. This has changed politics. Football too: the 2024 European Championship in Germany can be judged a success only if it takes ecological aspects into account. Our preparations are under way. I consider myself lucky to have been born into a democracy. It was not long ago that the conditions in my home country were different. Three decades ago Germany was divided, the eastern part a dictatorship. Other nations in Europe were also going through a change. The 1964 European Championship took place in a fascist state, and Spain’s team won its home tournament in front of General Franco. He was still in power when the 1982 World Cup was awarded to Spain. By the time it took place, Spain was a democracy. Major sporting events, especially in football, generate enormous attention. Nowadays, European Championships and World Cups require everyone who takes part to deal with working conditions and human rights. At Euro 2024 in Germany, too, Europe will negotiate with each other how we want to live together. • Philipp Lahm’s column appears regularly in the Guardian. It is produced in partnership with Oliver Fritsch at Zeit Online, the German online magazine, and is being published in several European countries.Well, there goes the league title. Happy new year everyone! But hey, what a way to go. For the second time in two-and-a-half weeks Liverpool came to London and played out a wild, impossibly moreish 2-2 draw against occasionally brilliant, occasionally flawed opponents. This was no doubt an agonising watch for Jürgen Klopp in self‑isolation; just as it was 90 minutes of full-body torture for Thomas Tuchel, who spent the afternoon leaping up like a furious clockwork woodpecker, combination-punching invisible demons, and at one point hurling a bottle of orange energy drink thrillingly into an advertisement hoarding. For Liverpool a 2-2 draw at Stamford Bridge follows the 2-2 draw at the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium. And so the ledger will report four points dropped: the kind of matches where title races are lost, seasons bookended. And yet it didn’t feel like a day for regrets. A five-month extended victory lap for the reigning champions presents a problem for the Premier League and its broadcast partners. It might well reopen the question of exactly how City have managed to build this extraordinary position of strength, a squad with no weaknesses. Some will point to questions the Premier League feel have yet to be answered over resources and expenditure, questions that are designed, at bottom, to preserve competitiveness. City’s fans might reply by rolling their eyes and pointing to Chelsea’s own absent £100m striker. One thing is clear. Flawed teams produce brilliant games. Those spaces, the mis-steps, it’s where the oxygen gets in. And this was a game where amazing things just kept happening. On 56 minutes Liverpool’s defence cleared a corner high into the night sky, Diogo Jota took the ball as it bounced, scrabbled back to his feet under pressure, and laid the bail off to Mohamed Salah. From 35 yards Salah produced something hilariously good, a driven chip-shot that drew, in turn, an outstanding stretching leaping save from Édouard Mendy. In that moment this didn’t feel like a football match, more a kind of display, a trick-shot bonus feature, Evel Knievel leaping a row of municipal buses. In reality the idea that this match represented a title-race eliminator was always fanciful. Chelsea haven’t looked like contenders since the start of November. Liverpool had won six of their last eight, but will now be losing their first-choice attackers. And in the end, it’s not you: it’s them. It’s the unwavering excellence of Manchester City, a team that continue to make something very difficult look very easy indeed. Stamford Bridge was a noisy, gusty place at kick-off. With Romelu Lukaku at home watching Real Madrid, Thomas Tuchel went with that infamous “other system” also known as the shape that won Chelsea the Champions League: seven primarily defensive players, plus three in attack to press and cover. The early exchanges were hilariously error-prone, culminating in Trevoh Chalobah stooping to head clear Diogo Jota’s pass and ending up with his nose grazing the turf, somehow, in defiance of all physical laws, heading the ball off his own shoelaces. The ball broke to Sadio Mané. He buried it. If anything captures Liverpool’s edge of brittleness and brilliance it is the interaction between Trent Alexander-Arnold and Salah, arguably the outstanding single attacking combination in English football over the past decade. It was from there that Liverpool made it 2-0 with a startling moment of synchronised movement and passing physics. Salah started the move, funnelling the ball back to Alexander-Arnold. As Chelsea’s defenders slackened a little, Salah had already begun to sprint, sniffing out a sliver of space, a fault in the stitching. Alexander-Arnold released a wonderfully weighted, backspun pass straight into that same corridor. At which point Salah produced another perfect little miniature. His first touch stunned the ball into his stride. The second wasn’t a touch at all, but a feint, an opening of the hips that transformed Marcos Alonso into a kind of goal-doorman, dipping a knee, scrolling his hand, formally inviting Salah into the Chelsea six-yard box. The finish was effortless, a lifted dink-prod on the run. Mateo Kovacic pulled one back with another stunner. Everyone who has ever kicked a ball has caught one like this just the once – leaning back, adjusting his feet, punting it up and then back down in a perfect parabola to clank in off the far post. But not, perhaps, in a brutally tight Premier League game in front of the watching millions, with just one shot, one moment to catch the sun. Chelsea’s equaliser moments later came down that same Liverpool right flank. Frankly, it all seemed a little too easy. Salah lost possession. Alexander‑Arnold was caught dawdling in a half space. N’Golo Kanté was able to help the ball on for Christian Pulisic who conjured a fine finish of his own, arcing the ball over Caoimhin Kelleher with a perfectly lobbed instep touch. And the fact is neither of these teams is at the level of City, whose football has a kind of light around it right now, something clean and perfectly ordered, who have won 11 games in a row by passing and moving their opponents into a state of exhausted impotence. It would be absurd to denigrate a team this good for being, in effect too good, for winning games in a way that is so beautifully planned and drilled it seems to creep ever closer to a place where variables are removed and the result is, in effect, inevitable. City are a thing of beauty, too. And on the ragged, thrilling evidence of Stamford Bridge, just too good for the rest.The personal Twitter account of the Georgia Republican congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene has been permanently suspended, for violating policies on Covid misinformation. The action against Greene on Sunday came under the “strike” system Twitter launched last March, which uses artificial intelligence to identify posts about the coronavirus misleading enough to cause harm. Two or three strikes earn a 12-hour account lock, four strikes prompt a weeklong suspension and five or more can get an account permanently removed. Twitter had previously suspended Greene’s account for periods ranging from 12 hours to a week. She was issued a “fourth strike” this summer, for saying vaccines were failing. “We’ve been clear that … we will permanently suspend accounts for repeated violations of the policy,” a Twitter spokeswoman said on Sunday. The congresswoman’s official account remains active. The Republican is a determined controversialist and extremist who courts controversy and confrontation. On social media, she has voiced support for racist views, QAnon conspiracy theories such as the lie that the 2020 election was stolen, and calls for violence against Democrats including the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi. Last February, the Republican leader in the Senate, Mitch McConnell, called Greene’s embrace of conspiracy theories and “loony lies” a “cancer for the Republican party”. The Democratic-led House ejected her from committee assignments. In July, Twitter suspended Greene for a week after Joe Biden urged tech companies to take stronger action against bogus vaccine claims that the president said were “killing people”. Twitter has said it has removed thousands of tweets and challenged millions of accounts. Greene has regularly been fined for refusing to follow Covid guidelines in Congress, including mask-wearing on the House floor. In a statement on the Telegram app on Sunday, she called Twitter “an enemy to America” and said it could not “handle the truth”. She also accused Twitter of seeking “a communist revolution” and said: “Social media platforms can’t stop the truth from being spread far and wide. Big tech can’t stop the truth. Communist Democrats can’t stop the truth. I stand with the truth and the people. We will overcome.” Greene said her account was suspended after she tweeted statistics from the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System, a government database which includes raw data. Among Greene’s final tweets was one that falsely referenced “extremely high amounts of Covid vaccine deaths”, according to her Telegram account, which appears to mirror her now-banned Twitter feed. More than 825,000 people have died of Covid-19 in the US, out of a caseload of nearly 55m. Many states are experiencing a surge of cases and disruption to everyday life caused by the highly infectious Omicron variant. On Sunday, Biden’s top medical adviser, Dr Anthony Fauci, said the US had been seeing almost a “vertical increase” of cases, now averaging 400,000 a day, with hospitalisations up too. Resistance to vaccinations and other public health measures has driven the pandemic and inflamed political tensions. Last week, Greene boasted on Twitter about talking to Donald Trump by phone. She said she had received the former president’s permission to clarify his stance that he is against vaccine mandates though he encourages people to get the shot and booster. Trump was booed by some audience members in Dallas on 19 December, when he said he had received a booster shot.Thomas Tuchel refused to guarantee that Romelu Lukaku will be given his place back after the striker was dropped for Chelsea’s 2-2 draw with Liverpool at Stamford Bridge on Sunday. Chelsea host Tottenham in the first leg of their Carabao Cup semi-final on Wednesday and Tuchel will decide whether to bring Lukaku back into the fold only after holding further talks with him on Monday. The manager was left fuming after the £97.5m forward went public with his unhappiness at Stamford Bridge in an unauthorised interview last week and he hinted that he could leave the Belgian out again against Spurs. “He’s our player, he will stay our player, we will always protect our player,” Tuchel said. “First we need to evaluate the situations, not listen to media or pressure, understand what he said and why he said it. “Then we will take the decision if he is good to go for Wednesday. I cannot tell you right now because we need to talk and understand the situation more and on we go. Once the situation is clear he will stay our player and we protect our player.” Lukaku had caused a storm by questioning Tuchel’s system and saying he wants to return to Internazionale one day. The comments went down badly at Chelsea and it is understood Tuchel, who held talks with senior players before picking his team, had the backing of the dressing room after omitting the club’s record signing. “I don’t take decisions in my office,” Tuchel said. “I have players to listen to and hear their opinions about what they think and I make my decisions once I hear them out. It’s their club and their team. It’s not a personal thing for me.” Tuchel, who would not say what he wants from the meeting on Monday, was asked if he had intended to make a stand against Lukaku’s behaviour. “It’s not Chelsea like but it’s also not the worst thing in the world,” he said. “I don’t feel personally attacked. On Saturday new statements appeared and it got too big, too much noise, and we lost the focus of the match. “We wanted to protect Romelu from a rash decision because we need to speak with him, read the full interview and stay calm. It was simply the decision to protect the match like this. It was too much noise. This was clear that he will not be in the squad.” The result dealt a major blow to Chelsea’s and Liverpool’s hopes of catching Manchester City. Liverpool appeared to have revived their title prospects after goals from Sadio Mané and Mohamed Salah put them 2-0 up but Chelsea levelled through Mateo Kovacic and Christian Pulisic before the break. Chelsea were aggrieved that Mané was still on the pitch to score the opener after the Liverpool forward escaped with a booking for an elbow on César Azpilicueta in the first minute. “It’s a clear red,” Azpilicueta said. “I don’t care if it’s five seconds into the game – he doesn’t look for the ball, he just wants to hit me with the elbow. I don’t understand. We are getting a lot of decisions against us.” City are 10 points above Chelsea and 11 clear of Liverpool, who have a game in hand. However Pep Lijnders, who stood in for Jürgen Klopp after Liverpool’s manager tested positive for Covid-19, refused to admit that the race is over. “We never look at others,” Klopp’s assistant said. “The title race is only decided on the last match. We have to focus on ourselves. That’s how we always did it. We only focus on the next game. This is how we became champions and won the Champions League.”• An article was headlined “Welsh government fears new mine will skirt round local opposition” (24 December, p16) and the introduction referred to a “new underground mine”. To clarify, the proposal is to extend an existing site at Aberpergwm. • We wrongly credited two TV reviews to Lucy Mangan: Ghosts was reviewed by Chitra Ramaswamy (24 December, G2, p10) and Around the World in 80 Days by Rebecca Nicholson (27 December, G2, p10). • Other recently amended articles include: The 25 must-see TV shows of 2022 United Airlines promises sustainable flying – but experts aren’t convinced Home-seekers despair as affordable property vanishes from UK hotspots UK lender allows homebuyers to borrow seven times salary Long Covid is the elephant in the room, but it seems invisible to Australian politicians America got more expensive in 2021. Who is really paying the price? – a visual explainer NHS leaders alarmed by rise in hospital admissions as Covid cases hit record ‘Like putting a lithium mine on Arlington cemetery’ Large Roman fort built by Caligula discovered near Amsterdam TV tonight: it’s the Insecure finale – and no one expects a happy ending Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.The celebrated Kenyan conservationist and fossil hunter Richard Leakey, whose groundbreaking discoveries helped prove that humankind evolved in Africa, has died aged 77. The president of Kenya, Uhuru Kenyatta, announced Leakey’s death with “deep sorrow”. The famed palaeoanthropologist had remained energetic into his 70s, despite bouts of skin cancer and kidney and liver disease. Posting on Twitter, the Leakey Foundation wrote of its “deep sadness” at his death, adding: “He was a visionary whose great contributions to human origins and wildlife conservation will never be forgotten.” Leakey was born in Nairobi on 19 December 1944 – and it was perhaps inevitable that he would become a fossil hunter given his parents were Louis and Mary Leakey, perhaps the world’s most famous discoverers of ancestral hominids. Although Leakey initially tried his hand at safari guiding, aged 23 – and with having no formal archaeological training – he won a research grant to dig on the shores of northern Kenya’s Lake Turkana. During the 1970s he led expeditions that shed new light on the scientific understanding of human evolution, with the discovery of the skulls of Homo habilis (1.9m years old) in 1972 and Homo erectus (1.6m years old) in 1975. He made the cover of Time magazine posing with a Homo habilis mock-up, under the headline How Man Became Man. But it was in 1981, when he fronted the landmark seven-part BBC TV series The Making of Mankind, that he gained wider fame. Just a few years later, in 1984, he would enjoy his most famous fossil find: the uncovering of a near-complete Homo erectus skeleton during one of his digs. Nicknamed Turkana Boy, it dated from approximately 1.5m years ago and is the most complete fossil skeleton of a human ancestor ever found. During this decade Leakey became one of the world’s leading voices against the then legal global ivory trade. In 1989 the Kenyan president Daniel arap Moi appointed him to lead the national wildlife agency, which became the Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS). Softly spoken and seemingly devoid of personal vanity, Leakey’s campaigning methods could nevertheless be eye-catching. He masterminded a spectacular publicity stunt of burning a pyre of ivory by setting fire to 12 tonnes of tusks – making the point that once removed from elephants they had no value. He also held his nerve when implementing a shoot-to-kill order against armed poachers. Leakey’s illustrious career, however, was beset with health challenges. In 1969 he was diagnosed with terminal kidney disease. Ten years later and seriously ill he received a kidney transplant from his brother, Philip, and recovered to full health. Then in 1993 his small Cessna plane crashed in the Rift Valley. He survived but lost both legs. Sabotage was suspected but never proved. He told the Financial Times that he endured “regular threats” and lived with armed guards, adding: “But I made the decision not to be a dramatist and say: ‘They tried to kill me.’ I chose to get on with life.” Leakey was eventually forced out of KWS and began a career as a prominent opposition politician, joining the voices against Moi’s corrupt regime. His political career met with less success, and in 1998 he was appointed by Moi to head Kenya’s civil service in charge of fighting official corruption. The task proved impossible, however, and he resigned after just two years. In 2015, as another elephant-poaching crisis gripped Africa, Kenyatta invited Leakey back to KWS, this time as chairman of the board, a position he would hold for three years. Dr Paula Kahumbu, the head of Wildlife Direct, a conservation group founded by Leakey, paid tribute on Twitter, saying: “Richard was a very good friend and a true loyal Kenyan. May he Rest In Peace.”Antonio Brown was apparently frustrated and angry. So he walked away. From the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. And possibly his NFL career. The mercurial wide receiver was kicked off the Buccaneers after a bizarre, shirtless exit from the field before Tom Brady coolly led the Bucs on a 93-yard drive in the final minutes for a 28-24 victory over the New York Jets on Sunday. Coach Bruce Arians said after the game Brown was off the team. “He is no longer a Buc,” Arians said. “All right? That’s the end of the story. Let’s talk about the guys who went out there and won the game.” Brown’s mid-game meltdown came late in the third quarter with Tampa Bay trailing 24-10. He appeared animated while talking to Mike Evans, who tried to calm his teammate. But Brown stripped off his pads, jersey, gloves and T-shirt – tossing the gloves and T-shirt into the stands – and then walked bare-chested down the sideline and into the end zone. He then waved to fans as jogged through the end zone and into the tunnel at MetLife Stadium. It appeared to be a show of frustration by Brown, who had three catches for 26 yards. “I’m not talking about it,” Arians said. “He’s not part of the Bucs.” Brown was suspended last month for three games for violating the league’s Covid-19 protocols. He also has a history of personal conduct issues and bizarre behavior. “It’s a difficult situation,” Brady said. “Everybody should do what they can to help him in ways that he really needs it. We all love him. We care about him deeply. We want to see him be at his best. Unfortunately, it won’t be with our team. ... I think everyone should be very compassionate and empathetic toward some very difficult things that are happening.” Brady connected with Cameron Brate for a touchdown on fourth-and-goal from the four shortly after Brown’s exit, and the QB finished the Bucs’ rally with a 33-yard touchdown pass to Cyril Grayson with 15 seconds left. The Bucs stuffed Jets QB Zach Wilson on fourth-and-2 at the seven for no gain with New York trying to seal the victory. New York coach Robert Saleh said the play should’ve been a reverse to wide receiver Braxton Berrios, but Wilson had the option to sneak it based on the look. “We did a very poor job of communicating that,” Saleh said, adding that ”it just makes you sick” because a handoff to Berrios would’ve likely been a first down. Instead, it gave Brady and the Bucs the ball back with 2:12 left. And that was more than enough time. Brady marched the Buccaneers (12-4) down the field on nine plays, zipping a pass to Grayson – who was elevated from the practice squad – for the go-ahead score. It was Brady’s third TD pass of the game and 40th of the season, joining him with Drew Brees as the only players to throw for 40 touchdowns in consecutive seasons. He finished 34 of 50 for 410 yards, the three TDs and an interception for Tampa Bay, which had Arians back after he tested positive for the coronavirus earlier in the week. Le’Veon Bell ran in the two-point conversion against his former team, forcing New York to need a touchdown. But the Jets (4-12) ran out of time. “We’ve been in some crazy situations before,” Arians said, “but this was a very special one to come back and win that game.” Kansas City Chiefs 31-34 Cincinnati Bengals Evan McPherson kicked a 20-yard field goal as time ran out, and the Cincinnati Bengals earned their first AFC North title and postseason appearance in six years with a wild 34-31 win over the Kansas City Chiefs on Sunday. Rookie Ja’Marr Chase had a franchise-record 266 yards receiving and three touchdowns on 11 catches, Joe Burrow threw for 466 yards and four scores while outdueling Patrick Mahomes, and the Bengals rallied from three 14-point deficits against the AFC West champs. The Bengals’ winning drive was filled with drama. On fourth-and-inches with under a minute left, the Bengals (10-6) decided to go for a touchdown instead of calling on McPherson for a field goal and giving the Chiefs the ball back with a chance to win. Burrow threw incomplete in the end zone, but Chiefs cornerback L’Jarius Sneed was flagged for illegal use of hands, giving the Bengals a fresh set of downs. Backup quarterback Brandon Allen was called on to kneel twice before McPherson came on for the game-winner. Burrow was outstanding again, completing 30 of 39 attempts. He was sacked four times and hit at least six more times but was as accurate as ever, and Chase caught everything that was thrown near him. Mahomes looked as if he had the game under control early. He threw two first-quarter touchdown passes to give the Chiefs the early lead, but he didn’t get another one. The Chiefs (11-5) led 14-0, 21-7 and 28-14 in the first half. They were ahead 28-17 at halftime before the Bengals began the latest of several second-half surges this season. Jacksonville Jaguars 10-50 New England Patriots New England returned to the playoffs when rookie quarterback Mac Jones threw three touchdown passes and Damien Harris and Rhamondre Stevenson rushed for two scores apiece in their 50-10 win over the Jacksonville Jaguars on Sunday. The victory by the Patriots (10-6) snapped a two-game losing streak and gave Bill Belichick his 20th 10-win season as a head coach, tying Don Shula for the most in NFL history. A loss by Miami at Tennessee secured New England’s first trip to the postseason since Tom Brady left for Tampa Bay following the 2019 season. The Jaguars (2-14) have lost eight consecutive games, including three straight since firing coach Urban Meyer. It was their 17th consecutive loss on the road, the longest streak in the league. Jones finished 22 of 30 for 227 yards and set a franchise record for touchdown passes by a rookie with 21. Stevenson had 107 yards on 19 carries. Harris rushed nine times for 35 yards before leaving in the second half with a hamstring injury. Patriots receiver Kristian Wilkerson had two touchdown catches – the first of his career – after being elevated from the practice squad for the second consecutive week. He pulled in a six-yard TD to put the Patriots up 21-3 in the second quarter. His second came on a 20-yard pass on their opening possession of the second half that stretched the lead to 34-3. New England’s defense also bounced back from a rough outing against Buffalo, holding the Jaguars to 253 yards and 3 of 9 on third downs. Myles Bryant, JC Jackson and Kyle Dugger all had interceptions. Miami Dolphins 3-34 Tennessee Titans Ryan Tannehill threw two touchdown passes as the Tennessee Titans clinched their second straight AFC South title Sunday, snapping the Miami Dolphins’ seven-game winning streak with a 34-3 win. The Titans (11-5) won their second straight overall and third in four games to clinch their first back-to-back division titles since the start of the AFL when this franchise was the Houston Oilers and won three straight Eastern Division championships. They also won 11 games for a second consecutive season for the first time since 2002-03 – and currently are the AFC’s top seed after Kansas City lost at Cincinnati. Miami came in as the first team in NFL history to win seven straight after a seven-game skid. That surge helped push the Dolphins into the third and final wild-card spot in the AFC, but this loss seriously damaged their playoff hopes. On a cold and rainy day, the Titans ran more than they threw. Tannehill was 13 of 18 for 120 yards and a 127.1 passer rating against the team that drafted him eighth overall in 2012 before trading him to Tennessee in March 2019. Tannehill is 31-15 as the Titans’ starter with his third straight playoff berth clinched. D’Onta Foreman ran for 132 yards and a TD. Dontrell Hilliard ran for a 39-yard TD as the Titans scored 10 points off a pair of turnovers by Tua Tagovailoa. Philadelphia Eagles 20-16 Washington Football Team Jalen Hurts scrambled out of trouble while showing no ill effects from a recent ankle injury, Boston Scott rushed for two touchdowns, and the Philadelphia Eagles held on to beat Washington 20-16 Sunday to move one step closer to the playoffs. Hurts ran six times for 45 yards and was 17 of 26 passing for 214 yards in leading the Eagles to a fourth consecutive victory. Pending other results around the NFL, they could have an NFC wild-card spot locked up by the end of the night. Philadelphia (9-7) started slowly yet again, and its league-leading rushing attack was held to a season-low 3.4 yards a carry with Miles Sanders out because of a broken left hand. Twelve days after racking up 238 yards on the ground against Washington (6-10), the Eagles had 119 yards rushing. But the defense finally got to Taylor Heinicke, and the Eagles wore down a banged-up opponent, erasing a 16-7 deficit. Jake Elliott connected on field goals of 42 and 41 yards in the fourth quarter, and Rodney McLeod picked off Heinicke in the end zone with 24 seconds remaining to seal it. Philadelphia made the postseason for the first time since 2019 with Minnesota’s loss at Green Bay and San Francisco’s win over Houston later Sunday. Las Vegas Raiders 23-20 Indianapolis Colts Derek Carr directed Las Vegas to Daniel Carlson’s winning 33-yard field goal as time expired, and the Raiders beat Jonathan Taylor and the Indianapolis Colts 23-20 on Sunday to move one step closer to an AFC wild card. After Michael Badgley kicked a tying 41-yard field goal for Indianapolis with 1:56 left, Carr and the Raiders got the ball back at their 25 after a touchback. Carr found Hunter Renfrow for 24 yards on third-and-10 in the final minute, setting the stage for Carlson’s third field goal of the game. Carr passed for 255 yards and a touchdown for Las Vegas (9-7), and Zay Jones had eight receptions for 120 yards. Rallying after an embarrassing email scandal that led to coach Jon Gruden’s resignation, the Raiders can wrap up an improbable playoff spot with a victory over the Los Angeles Chargers next weekend. Indianapolis (9-7) had won three straight and eight of 10 to move one win away from a postseason berth. But it couldn’t hold a second-half lead against Las Vegas. New York Giants 3-29 Chicago Bears Robert Quinn broke Hall of Famer Richard Dent’s franchise single-season record with his 18th sack, and the Chicago Bears pounded the New York Giants 29-3 on Sunday. Trevis Gipson added a career-high two sacks, and the Bears joined Green Bay as the only franchises with 800 victories counting the postseason. They also gave the embattled Matt Nagy a win in what might have been his final home game as their coach. Quinn broke Dent’s mark of 17 and a half set in 1984 when he took down Mike Glennon in the fourth quarter. By then, the Bears (6-10) were well on their way. Gipson had a strip-sack on the game’s first play from scrimmage and Tashaun Gipson picked off Glennon on the next possession. The two takeaways led to a scoring run by David Montgomery and touchdown catch by Darnell Mooney, making it 14-0 and sending the Monsters of the Midway to their second straight win after losing eight of nine. The Giants (4-12), who could also be in for changes, lost their fifth straight game. They set a season low in yards for the second week in a row, finishing with 151 after being held to 192 against Philadelphia. Los Angeles Rams 20-19 Baltimore Ravens Matthew Stafford shook off three turnovers to guide a fourth-quarter rally Sunday that carried the Los Angeles Rams to their fifth straight victory, 20-19 over the short-handed but stubborn Baltimore Ravens. Stafford threw a seven-yard touchdown pass to Odell Beckham Jr with 57 seconds left immediately after completing a five-yarder to Beckham on a fourth-and-5. After Los Angeles failed on a two-point conversion, the Ravens – playing a third straight game without injured quarterback Lamar Jackson – never got close enough for a field-goal try. The victory pushed the Rams (12-4) to the cusp of their second straight NFC West title. Arizona needed to beat Dallas later Sunday to avoid elimination. At one point this season, Baltimore was 8-3 and the top seed in the AFC. The Ravens (8-8) have since lost five straight, their longest skid since a nine-game run in 2007 under Brian Billick paved the way for current coach John Harbaugh to take over in 2008. Four of those defeats during this slump have come by a total of five points. The loss ousted Baltimore from the AFC North title hunt. The Ravens were not officially eliminated from the playoff chase, but to get in as a wild card they’ll need a win next week and a whole lot of help. Atlanta Falcons 15-29 Buffalo Bills Buffalo clinched a playoff berth when Devin Singletary scored two touchdowns rushing in the second half to make up for Josh Allen’s sloppiness in a 29-15 victory over Atlanta that eliminated the Falcons from contention. The AFC East-leading Bills rallied to clinch their third consecutive playoff spot. Buffalo (10-6) did so by beating the Falcons, coupled with the Baltimore Ravens’ 20-19 loss to the Los Angeles Rams. The Falcons (7-9) went down swinging in being eliminated from the NFC race to extend their postseason drought to a fourth year in their first season under coach Arthur Smith. The Falcons forced four turnovers, with an injury and Covid-19-depleted secondary intercepting Allen on three consecutive possessions spanning halftime. Allen did a much better job running than throwing by scoring two touchdowns rushing on a snow-dusted field, and with temperatures in the low 20s. Buffalo won their third straight and needs only to beat the New York Jets in its finale next weekend to clinch its second consecutive division title – and assure the Bills home-field advantage for the wild-card playoff round. Houston Texans 7-23 San Francisco 49ers Rookie Trey Lance threw two touchdown passes in the second half of his second career start, and the San Francisco 49ers closed in on a playoff berth with a 23-7 victory over the Houston Texans on Sunday. Lance got the nod for the 49ers (9-7) for the first time since Week 5 with Jimmy Garoppolo sidelined by a thumb injury and overcame an interception in the first half to lead San Francisco to the win. The Niners can clinch their second playoff berth in five seasons under coach Kyle Shanahan with one loss by New Orleans or a win next week against the Rams. The Texans (4-12) struggled to get much of anything going offensively and failed in their attempt at their first three-game winning streak since 2018. Davis Mills went 21 for 32 for 163 yards, one touchdown and one interception, and Houston was held to 222 yards on offense. Detroit Lions 29-51 Seattle Seahawks Rashaad Penny rushed for a career-high 170 yards and two touchdowns, Russell Wilson threw three of his four TD passes to DK Metcalf, and the Seattle Seahawks routed the Detroit Lions 51-29 on Sunday. Seattle (6-10) closed out its home schedule with its most impressive offensive showing of the season, raising questions about where those fireworks have been for most of the disappointing year. Penny rumbled for 144 yards in the first half, while Wilson threw TD passes to Metcalf and Tyler Lockett as Seattle built a 31-7 halftime lead. Wilson added a third TD to Metcalf on the third play of the second half. Wilson finished 20 of 29 for 236 yards, while Metcalf had a career-high three touchdown catches. Metcalf has 12 TD catches this season, also a career best. It was the fifth 50-point game in franchise history and first since 2012 when Seattle beat Buffalo 50-17 in a game played in Toronto. Arizona Cardinals 25-22 Dallas Cowboys Kyler Murray threw two touchdown passes to Antoine Wesley and the Arizona Cardinals held on to beat the Dallas Cowboys 25-22 in a matchup of playoff-bound teams Sunday. The outcome didn’t do much to change the races for the NFC’s No. 1 seed or the NFC West, but the Cardinals ended a three-game skid a week after backing into the postseason while stopping the NFC East champion’s four-game winning streak. Murray improved to 8-0 as a starter at the home of the Cowboys. Most of those victories were as a Texas high school playoff star, but the past two have been as a pro after last season’s 38-10 rout. The Cardinals (11-5) are still a game behind the Los Angeles Rams in their division with LA rallying to beat Baltimore 20-19. Denver Broncos 13-34 Los Angeles Chargers Justin Herbert threw for two touchdowns and set the franchise single-season record, Andre Roberts returned a kick 101 yards for a score, and the Los Angeles Chargers moved back into an AFC playoff spot with a 34-13 victory over the Denver Broncos on Sunday. Los Angeles (9-7) are in the final wild-card spot but need a win at Las Vegas next week to wrap up their first postseason berth since 2018. The Colts, Chargers and Raiders all have the same record, but the Chargers currently hold the tiebreaker over Las Vegas after their 28-14 victory on 4 October. Denver (7-9) have lost four of its last five, was eliminated from playoff contention and is assured of its fifth straight losing season. Herbert, the AFC starter for the Pro Bowl, has 35 touchdown passes this season, surpassing Philip Rivers’ 2008 mark of 34. Herbert tied it with 14 seconds remaining in the first half on an 8-yard throw to Keenan Allen to give the Bolts a 17-0 lead. He set the mark early in the fourth quarter on a 45-yard TD to Mike Williams, which put the Chargers up 34-6. Herbert completed 22 of 31 passes for 237 yards. He became the fastest player to reach 800 career completions (31 games) and at 23 years, 298 days is the second-youngest player in league history to get to 65 TD passes Carolina Panthers 10-18 New Orleans Saints Alvin Kamara turned a short pass into New Orleans’ first touchdown in more than 11 quarters, Brett Maher kicked four field goals, and the Saints beat the reeling Carolina Panthers 18-10 on Sunday. The third victory in four games for the Saints (8-8) – just their second triumph in the Superdome in their regular-season home finale – assured New Orleans would head into the final week of the regular season still in the hunt for an NFC wild-card spot. Taysom Hill completed 17 of 28 passes for 222 yards and also led the Saints in rushing with 45 yards while playing behind an offensive line missing four season-opening starters. Marquez Callaway caught six passes for 97 yards and Kamara had five catches for 68 yards, including his 12-yard TD in the fourth quarter. New Orleans’ defense did the rest, sacking Sam Darnold seven times. Cameron Jordan had 3 1/2 sacks, his third straight game with at least two. CJ Gardner Johnson sealed it with an interception in the final minute, dooming the Panthers (5-11) to a sixth straight loss. New Orleans finished the game with Hill triumphantly taking a knee as fans belted out chants of, “Who-dat say they gonna’ beat them Saints!” Darnold, who resumed the starting role he held earlier this season after Cam Newton had started in Carolina’s previous five losses, completed 17 of 26 passes for 132 yards. Minnesota Vikings 10-37 Green Bay Packers Aaron Rodgers threw two touchdown passes, AJ Dillon ran for two more scores and the Green Bay Packers routed the Minnesota Vikings 37-10 on Sunday night to wrap up the NFC’s No 1 playoff seed. Green Bay’s victory, coupled with Philadelphia’s 20-16 triumph at Washington earlier in the day, dropped the Vikings (7-9) from postseason contention and gave the Eagles a playoff berth. The Vikings were playing without quarterback Kirk Cousins after he was placed on the reserve/Covid-19 list Friday. The Packers (13-3) are the lone NFL team with an unbeaten home record and have a chance to reach the Super Bowl without leaving Lambeau Field. Sunday night’s game exemplified the potential advantage the Packers have playing home games in January, as the temperature was 11 degrees with a wind chill of 1F just before kickoff. Green Bay have won 13 straight regular-season home games, but lost 31-26 at home to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in last season’s NFC championship game. The Packers haven’t reached the Super Bowl since their 2010 title and have lost in the conference championship game four of the last seven seasons. Rodgers went 29 of 38 for 288 yards with a 20-yard touchdown pass to Allen Lazard and an 11-yarder to Davante Adams, who had 11 catches for 136 yards. Adams has 117 receptions to break the Packers’ season record he set last year.More than half of black children in the UK are now growing up in poverty, a new analysis of official data has revealed. Black children are also now more than twice as likely to be growing up poor as white children, according to the Labour party research, which was based on government figures for households that have a “relative low income” – defined as being below 60% of the median, the standard definition for poverty. And over the last decade the total number of black children in poor households more than doubled – although that increase is partly explained by the overall size of the cohort increasing too. The proportion of black children living in poverty went up from 42% in 2010-11 to 53% in 2019-20, the most recent year for which the data is available. The figures were released to the Guardian by the Labour party, which described them as evidence of “Conservative incompetence and denialism about the existence of structural racism”. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, has already committed the party to passing a new race equality act, if elected, to tackle structural racism. Further details of what this would entail are expected to be fleshed out in 2022. The party produced its figures by cross-referencing data from the Department for Work and Pensions’ reports on households below average income with population statistics. In 2019-20 4.3 million children (defined as people under 16, or aged 16 to 19 and in full-time education) were living in households in poverty. They accounted for 31% of the UK’s 14 million children. But there was a wide variation among ethnic groups. The Labour research covered nine categories and it said Bangladeshi children are the poorest, with 61% of them living in a poor household. The figures for the other groups were: Pakistani children (55%); black African or Caribbean or black British (53%); other ethnicity (51%); other Asian (50%); mixed ethnicity (32%); Indian (27%); white (26%); and Chinese (12%). There are 2.9 million white children living in poverty, making them by far the largest ethnic cohort, comprising 68% of all children living in poverty. Black children are the next biggest group: with more than 400,000 living in poverty, they comprise 10% of the child poverty total. The Labour figures show that, among some ethnic groups, children are just as likely now to be living in poverty as they were a decade ago. In 2010-11, 61% of Bangladeshi children were living in poor households – exactly the same figure as at the end of the decade. For Indian children, the chances of living in a poor household have fallen from 34% a decade ago to 27%. For Chinese children, the figure has fallen from 47% to 12%. But for white children, the figure has risen from 24% to 26%; for Pakistani children, it has gone up from 50% to 55%; and for black children it has increased from 42% to 53%. Overall, 27% of all children were living in poor households in 2010-11; the latest figure is 31%. Anneliese Dodds, the shadow secretary of state for women and equalities, whose office produced the figures, said the Conservatives should be ashamed of what they revealed. “There is little wonder that child poverty has skyrocketed over the last decade when Conservative ministers have done so little to tackle the structural inequalities driving it,” she said. “Conservative incompetence and denialism about the existence of structural racism are driving black children into poverty. Labour has a plan to lift them out of it, with a new race equality act to tackle structural racial inequality at source.” Labour announced its commitment to a race equality act as it published a review last year by Doreen Lawrence, the peer, into the disproportionate impact of Covid on minority ethnic communities. The party has not said exactly what its act would contain, but the Lawrence recommendations, which the party has accepted, would shape its contents. Although much of the Lawrence report focused on Covid-specific issues, it also said the virus had “thrived on structural inequalities that have long scarred British society”. Its recommendations included forcing large employers to publish data on ethnicity pay gaps, having clear targets to close the attainment gap for children and implementing a race equality strategy that has the support of minority ethnic communities. Halima Begum, chief executive at the Runnymede Trust, the race equality thinktank, said the Labour figures, although not surprising, were nevertheless “cause for considerable concern”. She said: “These are not cyclical inequalities that are being flagged, but systemic shortcomings that must be reversed quickly. “But the problems are nuanced. Black children face racism and poverty. But poverty is not defined exclusively by race. So, for more than a decade, the Runnymede Trust has argued that you can’t simply solve the issue of racial inequality without also addressing socio-economic disparities.” In response to Labour claims that the figures were an indictment of its record, a government spokesperson highlighted separate figures showing that in 2019-20 there were 300,000 fewer children living in absolute low income, after housing costs, than there were in 2010. Absolute low income is defined as below the figure for 60% of median income for 2010, adjusted for inflation. People can fall out of absolute low income if their incomes rise by more than inflation, but can remain in relative low income – the more commonly used benchmark – if other people’s incomes rise by proportionally more. The spokesperson said: “The latest official figures show there were 300,000 fewer children of all backgrounds in poverty after housing costs than in 2010 and we continue to provide extensive support to reduce this number further. “This includes putting £1,000 more per year on average into the pockets of the lowest earners through changes to universal credit, increasing the minimum wage next April to £9.50 per hour and helping with the cost of fuel bills.”Good morning, happy new year, and welcome to Five Great Reads, a weekday summer story round-up selected by me – Alyx Gorman – lifestyle editor of Guardian Australia. If you’re not getting this as an email, you could be by signing up in the box below. If you are getting this as an email, there will be no box. Perhaps you could pass this on to a friend who isn’t subscribed, but might like to, so they can tell you what the box looks like. NSW has come into 2022 swinging, with the highest positive Covid-test rate in the world (haha, I am terrified). What does “positive test rate” mean? Here’s a handy explainer from Michael McGowan. You can follow all the day’s Covid developments, along with other breaking news on our live blog. And in world news, the chair of the US house intelligence committee is saying Russia is “very likely” to invade Ukraine, and proposing “enormous sanctions” to deter them. Now, onto the reads, which to give you a nice break are resolution themed today. 1. If you resolved to read less Covid-content, but crave high stakes medical reporting Read about the mysterious cluster of neurological illness affecting younger people in New Brunswick, Canada. Notable quote: “I’m truly concerned about these cases because they seem to evolve so fast,” said the whistleblower, who revealed the cluster and is speaking under the condition of anonymity for fear of reprisal. “I’m worried for them and we owe them some kind of explanation.” How long will it take to read? About three minutes. Bonus read: If that’s a bit grim for this morning, perhaps you’ll find Tory Shepherd on super poo, designer gut bacteria and the quest to develop a poo pellet you can swallow a bit more, ah, palatable? 2. If you resolved to improve your focus Read Johann Hari on how your attention was stolen from you, and critically, how to get it back again. Who stole it? Who else? Big tech. But there are other villains too. Notable quote: Here’s James Williams, a Google engineer turned philosopher of attention, on why switching your phone off is “not the solution”: “For the same reason that wearing a gas mask for two days a week outside isn’t the answer to pollution.” How long will it take to read? About eight minutes. Go on, you can do it! 3. If you resolved to make more money this year Read what happens when you let out your house as a production set, from blood splatter that never fully fades, to “riches … for literally just being out of the house for a day” (it was $300, and the film was X-rated). Have I seen any of the houses? If you’ve seen Animal Kingdom, Mr Inbetween or ABC’s Hardball, then yes. Do you get to meet celebrities? Also yes! If you’re really lucky, Ben Mendelsohn will feed bacon to your dog. 4. If you’ve resolved to broaden your social horizons Here’s Sophie Black on how the pandemic normalised friendship “pruning”: whether by accident or design, and whether connection can get back to normal. Thought to ponder: “It helps to start by asking ourselves exactly what friends are for.” How long will it take me to read? About five minutes, much quicker than the estimated 90 hours it takes to make a new close friend. 5. If resolutions are too bloody hard How about an easy win instead? Like writing a not-to-do list. Tell me more? No, you can read the whole story in under a minute, but I will tell you about two other easy wins: slightly extending your commute; and reaching out to an old friend. Is this a thing now? Yes, Guardian Australia’s team will be writing about a new easy, achievable goal every day this January. I just want to binge-read them: Well you can’t, but here’s a UK piece in a similar vein – 100 ways to slightly improve your life without really trying.‘I lost my boy. Kevin Williams. I’m his mum. Anne.” Episode one of Anne, ITV’s measured bio-drama about the Hillsborough campaigner Anne Williams, ends with a small moment that carries the most profound significance. For an hour we’ve watched Williams (Maxine Peake), whose 15-year-old son Kevin was one of the 97 Liverpool fans killed by a terrace crush at the FA Cup semi-final in Sheffield on 15 April 1989, being battered and swayed by the loss of her child and the agony of not knowing exactly how and why Kevin died. At times she has hidden, sitting smoking late into the night or spending hopeless mornings in bed. But not now. Now, at her first meeting of the Hillsborough Family Support Group, she has stood up to say Kevin’s name and her own out loud. A life’s mission has begun. Future episodes will document how Williams spent nearly a quarter of a century before her death in 2013 challenging official narratives around the disaster, specifically the claim that Kevin could not have been alive beyond 3.15pm on the day of the match, and therefore could not have been saved. The story is one of solidarity in the face of injustice, unending parental love and the confounding ways in which grief can be an inspiration as well as a burden. First, though, the series has to perform faithful groundwork. Opening instalments of dramas like this are difficult. They have to show the life before, that we know is to be ripped apart, without the dramatic ironies becoming heavy. They must show us how events turn an ordinary person into our extraordinary protagonist, but not foreshadow their destiny too blatantly. Anne avoids these traps with assurance. The quick sketch of Kevin (Campbell Wallace) railroading Williams and her husband Steve into letting him go to the game, is all the more affecting for how unremarkable it is: every parent of a teenager knows how it feels to weigh up demands to let them go here or there, never sure if those things are safe. That point is made with minimal fuss, an approach also taken to another potential cliche of the genre – the moment when the catastrophe has a mystical effect on those who cannot know about it yet. On the afternoon of 15 April, Kevin’s sister is playing in the garden. At 3.05pm, just as the match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest is abandoned, the sun goes in and the air turns cold. From there, the episode is a tapestry of awful incidents tenderly observed, a study of the bewildering eeriness of bereavement. Death means strangers coming to the house; trips to meet other strangers in unfamiliar buildings must be made. For Anne and Steve Williams, that oddness is intensely magnified. The day after the game, they enter the ad hoc system set up in Sheffield to name victims and find loved ones. They move, stunned, through musty halls full of trestle tables, clipboard-wielding volunteers and anxious or already bereft parents, before an appalling scene in a tiny room. Grotesque Polaroids of the unidentified dead are on a noticeboard, numbered. Anne is desperate not to admit it, so Steve (Stephen Walters) has to step forward and say it: Kevin is number fifty-one. Walters and Peake convey the raw horror of the moment with an almost unwatchable intensity. As for strangers at the house, those people include a tabloid reporter posing as a delivery man before taunting the Williamses with The Sun’s despicable THE TRUTH edition and trying to steal a framed family photograph. The programme is careful to acknowledge the heinous behaviour of the press, but the key scene is a visit in 1991 by an Inspector of the West Midlands Police, played with patrician chicanery by Mark Dexter. Ignore the testimonies at the inquest that Kevin was seen alive after 3.15pm, the Inspector says. Those witnesses have realised their mistake and changed their story. Don’t worry about it. The man is instructing Anne Williams, after two years of intense pain and no clear answers, to deny her instincts and accept what she is told. That this is something Anne is not wired to do is what makes Peake, an apparently pale, frail presence with fire beneath her skin, ideal casting. She does the hard yards first, showing us the times when Williams is confused and fallible and nearly beaten by sadness. But by the end of episode one she’s ready to unleash the righteous strength of a working-class woman who has been wronged. In both modes, Peake embodies the role in life that Anne Williams would fulfil with the highest possible distinction: Kevin’s mum.Russia is “very likely” to invade Ukraine and might only be deterred by “enormous sanctions”, the chair of the US House intelligence committee said on Sunday. Adam Schiff also said an invasion could backfire on Moscow, by drawing more countries into the Nato military alliance. “I also think that a powerful deterrent is the understanding that if they do invade, it is going to bring Nato closer to Russia, not push it farther away,” he said. After the California Democrat spoke, the White House said Joe Biden had spoken to the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, said in a statement: “President Biden made clear that the United States and its allies and partners will respond decisively if Russia further invades Ukraine.” On Twitter, Zelenskiy said: “The first international talk of the year with [Biden] proves the special nature of our relations.” He also said the joint actions of Ukraine, the US “and partners in keeping peace in Europe, preventing further escalation, reforms, deoligarchisation were discussed. We appreciate the unwavering support of Ukraine.” Russia has amassed around 100,000 troops near its border with Ukraine. Earlier this week, Biden told Vladimir Putin the US would impose serious sanctions if Russia attacked. Talks are scheduled for Geneva on 9 and 10 January. But amid tensions heightened by both sides’ possession of nuclear weapons, Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said that if “the west continues its aggressive line, Russia will be forced to take all necessary measures to ensure strategic balance and eliminate unacceptable threats to our security”. Russia has for years complained about Nato encroachment. Ukraine is not a member of the alliance, which guarantees collective defence, but Nato has expanded eastwards since the fall of the Soviet Union and Kiev urgently seeks admission. Russia invaded Ukrainian territory in 2014, annexing Crimea. The US has supplied “small” arms to Ukraine. On CBS’s Face the Nation, Schiff was asked what would stop Putin ordering an invasion. “I think that it would require enormous sanctions on Russia to deter what appears to be a very likely Russian invasion of Ukraine again,” Schiff said. “And I think our allies need to be solidly on board with it. Russia needs to understand we are united in this.” An invasion, Schiff said, would see “more Nato assets closer to Russia. [It] will have the opposite impact of what Putin is trying to achieve”. Schiff said he had “no problem” with “going after Putin personally”, but thought “sector-sized sanctions will be the most important”. Asked if he thought scheduled talks had any chance of averting an invasion, he said: “I fear that Putin is very likely to invade. I still frankly don’t understand the full motivation for why now he’s doing this, but he certainly appears intent on it unless we can persuade him otherwise. “And I think nothing other than a level of sanctions that Russia has never seen will deter him, and that’s exactly what we need to do with our allies.” Reuters contributed to this reportLuuk de Jong’s first-half header and a stunning stoppage-time save by Marc-André ter Stegen gave Barcelona a 1-0 win at Mallorca in a match where Xavi’s side were missing 14 players due to Covid-19, injuries and suspensions. It was vindication time for striker De Jong after several media reports that Barça want to move him on this month. He got his second goal since arriving from Sevilla in the close season – his first for more than three months. The Dutchman was Barca’s best player on Sunday as he also hit the post twice in the first half, once with a bicycle kick. The goal came just before the break when he headed home from close range after a cross by Óscar Mingueza. Barça dominated the game until the final minutes when Mallorca started pressing for an equaliser and almost got it. Ter Stegen saved Barca in added time with an unbelievable handball-style reflex save with his right arm, denying Jaume Costa whose close-range strike looked like a sure goal. “It was an historic win for us, I’m not exaggerating,” Xavi said. “Missing so many players, to go back home with a win – it’s three points worth their weight in gold. The young players showed up and Ter Stegen made a stop for the ages. I’m thrilled that we managed to win.” Earlier on Sunday Getafe had ended Real Madrid’s 15-game unbeaten streak with a 1-0 victory in the capital derby. Enes Unal got the hosts’ winner in the ninth minute after he stole the ball from Éder Militão and beat Thibaut Courtois. Luka Modric hit the crossbar while Eden Hazard and Marcelo came on as half-time substitutions but Getafe dug in to earn their first victory over their star-studded crosstown rivals since August 2012. “We can’t get carried away by this loss,” Ancelotti said, after his side looked slack on the return from La Liga’s winter break. “We are still leaders and are excited about what is to come. A player who normally stands out for his defensive play gifted them their goal. There is not much more to say, except that it looked like we thought we were still on vacation.” Ángel Correa scored twice as Atlético Madrid beat Rayo Vallecano 2-0 to end their worst losing run since Diego Simeone took over the club a decade ago. The defending champions had not lost more than two league games in a row under Simeone but finished 2021 with consecutive defeats to Mallorca, Madrid, Sevilla and Granada. Atlético leapfrogged Rayo to reclaim fourth place, the last spot that will earn a Champions League berth.