The Guardian’s racing correspondent, Greg Wood, was the UK’s leading newspaper tipster in 2021, finishing several lengths clear of the opposition in the Racing Post’s annual National Press Challenge in his first year as our lead tipster. Wood went to the top of the table in June and maintained a clear lead for the second half of the year, in a contest based on the total return to a notional £1 stake at starting price on all selections. The Guardian’s picks over the course of 2021 had the highest strike-rate of any tipster at 27.6%, and showed a return of just under 92% on turnover, nearly 2% higher than the runner-up. In addition to individual winners at prices up to 28-1 during 2021, Wood’s selections at Royal Ascot in June showed a profit of £53.10 to a £1 level stake, including Perotto (Britannia Handicap) at 18-1, Lola Showgirl (Kensington Palace Stakes) at 12-1, two more winners at 10-1 and Subjectivist (13-2) in the Gold Cup, the feature event of the meeting. Other big-race winners included Commanche Falls (10-1) in the Stewards’ Cup at Goodwood in July and Midnight Shadow (9-1) in the Paddy Power Gold Cup at Cheltenham in November. Guardian sport Greg’s TV tips for Saturday Cheltenham is preparing to welcome as many as 30,000 racegoers to its traditional New Year’s Day card and many will look no further than the course specialist Coole Cody when it comes to the feature race, a handicap chase over two-and-a-half miles. The two courses at Cheltenham come alike to Evan Williams’s 11-year-old, whose three wins at this track include the Paddy Power Gold Cup in November 2020 and the valuable handicap at the December meeting three weeks ago. That form looks like the strongest on offer, but a 4lb higher mark makes life more difficult for Coole Cody and while his bold, front-running style makes him tough to pass, Zanza (2.00), who was two lengths behind him in second last time, could be worth an interest to turn the tables. That was Zanza’s second big run at Cheltenham in a row after finishing sixth in the Paddy Power, he is 2lb better off with the winner here and also runs in cheekpieces for the first time. That is another positive given that he comes from a yard which shows a level-stakes profit from more than 100 runners in first-time cheekpieces over the last 10 years. Cheltenham 1.25: L’Homme Presse has made a flawless start to his chasing career and still had plenty left in the tank when he finished 13 lengths clear at Ascot last time. This is a significant step up in grade but he has only six starts to his name in all and should bridge the gap with something to spare. Musselburgh 1.40: Stoner’s Choice remains on a fair mark based on his win at Kempton in November and the drop back in trip here should also be in his favour. Musselburgh 2.10: First Impression unseated his rider before halfway over track and trip last time but has a big chance on his winning form at Wetherby in November. Tramore 2.20: The dual Gold Cup winner Al Boum Photo has had his Festival warm-up in this race for the last three seasons and should make it four in a row with a minimum of fuss. Cheltenham 2.35: It takes a fair leap of faith to back Spiritofthegames here, even at around 16-1, as his 18-race losing streak stretches back to November 2018. He rarely runs a bad race at this track, however, reverts to hurdling off a competitive mark and should get the strong pace he needs to show his best. Musselburgh 2.50: A small field but all five runners have a fair chance on their best form. Amour De Nuit is back below his last winning mark over fences and looks like the safest option. Cheltenham 3.10: A fascinating renewal of the Relkeel Hurdle, with McFabulous marginally preferred to likely favourite Brewin’upastorm as he returns to action after a wind op. He has gone well fresh in the past and anything close to his winning form when this race was switched to Kempton last year could well be sufficient.Britain’s small businesses should expect trade with the EU to be “permanently damaged” from 1 January, the refrigerated supply chain trade body has said, after new customs checks take effect that it says will make imports from the bloc “more expensive, less flexible and much slower”. Amid growing public dismay at the negative impact of Brexit, the Cold Chain Federation said speciality food imports could face the same 70% decline that affected exports of food by small businesses this year after Britain quit the EU single market and customs union. Extra costs that amount to £300 to £400 for each consignment will mean sales of food to EU countries in small batches could become uneconomic, said the CCF, which lobbies on behalf of firms that transport frozen and chilled goods. “The big casualty of these trade barriers is the business that needs to import small and frequent quantities across borders – a pallet load of speciality cheeses or boxes of onion powder. This is the sort of trade that is going to suffer,” said Shane Brennan, the federation’s chief executive. Business groups have called on the government to soften its stance in negotiations with the EU to prevent a collapse in trade with the 27-member bloc. But while ministers have agreed to extend the deadline for veterinary checks on food crossing the border, there has been little progress on cutting red tape. Mike Cherry, the chair of the Federation of Small Businesses, said a survey in the autumn showed only a quarter of firms were prepared for the introduction of full import checks. “We don’t have any indication that the level of preparedness has improved, especially as the festive trading season has been so disrupted yet again,” he said, adding that one in five small firms that do business internationally had given up selling to clients in the EU since the transition period on exports ended. Rising food prices have played a large part in the increase in inflation over the past six months, and economists fear higher import charges will push up prices further, forcing the Bank of England to increase interest rates at a faster pace than anticipated. The consumer prices index reached 5.2% in November and is expected to rise above 6% in the spring as higher food import costs and an increase in gas prices push up the cost of living. This week Simon Spurrell, a co-founder of the Cheshire Cheese Company, said the hard Brexit pushed through by Boris Johnson was the “biggest disaster that any government has ever negotiated in the history of trade negotiations”. Cheese makers are among the sub-sectors of the food and drink industry to be hardest hit by new trade barriers. UK food and drink exports to the EU fell by 24% in the first nine months of 2021, according to figures from the Food and Drink Federation, which said the slump helped knock the sector’s exports by £2.7bn between January and September compared with pre-pandemic levels. Brennan said exports that occupy only a fraction of a container had suffered the most from extra customs checks on exports, and that was likely to be repeated when checks also apply to imports. He said importers would need to satisfy safety rules, provide customer declarations and have the necessary paperwork to ensure goods move through ports. “And all these must be synchronised to prevent things being even slower,” he said. Cherry said: “Unless the government steps in with more support, the situation is set to worsen.” The Institute of Directors said its economic confidence index had tumbled from -6 in November to -17 this month, a sign of nervousness among business owners about the UK’s economic prospects. It said three-quarters of company directors expected costs to rise in the next 12 months, and most said they would raise prices to either fully or partially offset the rise in costs. The Trades Union Congress said new checks on goods coming into the UK would damage the UK’s position as an important trading nation and the drive to create high-paying employment. The TUC general secretary, Frances O’Grady, said: “With goods coming into the UK facing new paperwork, we could see further supply chain chaos, potentially hitting jobs in affected sectors. Government must invest in the infrastructure and jobs we need now to prevent further disruption.”The year ahead will be dominated by efforts to fight inflation along with climate change, while global economic growth will be reasonably strong and stock markets weak, according to an economic forecaster. The world starts the year with economies held back by a supply chain crisis and the rapid spread of the Omicron coronavirus variant, but the global economy is still expected to grow by about 4% in 2022, compared with an estimated 5.1% in 2021, according to the Centre for Economics and Business Research (CEBR), a UK thinktank. Douglas McWilliams, the founder and executive deputy chairman of the CEBR, said the group had been forecasting 6.7% growth for the UK in 2021 but reduced it to 6.6% after a weak December. “We estimate £3bn or so of lost GDP from people staying at home and not spending, plus the impact of the restrictions in Wales and Scotland.” Similarly, the 2021 forecast for global growth was cut by 0.1 percentage points to 5.1%. The new year will start slowly for the UK, but as supply issues get resolved and with unspent savings burning holes in people’s pockets, GDP is forecast to grow by at least 4% in 2022. The biggest issue facing policymakers around the world, especially in the US and the UK, is likely to be inflation, the thinktank said. The Bank of England unexpectedly lifted interest rates in December after a rise in inflation to a decade high of 5.1% and signalled that more rate rises will follow in 2022 as soaring energy costs are expected to push inflation to 6% in the spring. The US Federal Reserve has pencilled in three rate hikes next year and accelerated the rate at which it cuts spending on government bonds in the face of what one official called “alarmingly high inflation”. The CEBR said inflation could jump beyond 6% in the UK and to more than 7% in the US, where it reached a 39-year high of 6.8% in November. While wages will also rise amid a tight labour market with declining unemployment and growing numbers of vacancies, soaring inflation will lead to a cost-of-living squeeze in the UK. The Resolution Foundation thinktank has warned that UK households are facing a “cost-of-living catastrophe” because of stalling wages, and rising tax and energy bills. In the face of higher interest rates and the rolling back of quantitative easing, global bond, equity and property markets are expected to fall around the world, with declines ranging from 10% to 25%, and some of the impact to last into 2023, the CEBR forecast. While 2021 was the year when environmental concerns went mainstream and the business sector took a more aggressive stance than governments, 2022 will be one “where policy has changed [and] pledges have been made but the technology is still in its early stages”, the CEBR said.China has opened an embassy in Nicaragua for the first time since 1990, less than a month after the central American country cut ties with Taiwan. The Nicaraguan foreign minister, Denis Moncada, said there was an “ideological affinity” between the two countries and thanked China for donating 1m doses of the Sinopharm coronavirus vaccine. Nicaragua’s president, Daniel Ortega, established relations with China in 1985, but after he lost the election in 1990, Nicaragua recognised Taiwan. Ortega returned to power in 2007 and in won re-election in November. In December, Nicaragua broke off relations with Taiwan and last week it seized the island’s former embassy and diplomatic offices, saying they belong to China. However, China’s new embassy is located elsewhere, and it is unclear what China will do with the Taiwan building. Before departing a week ago, Taiwanese diplomats tried to donate the properties to the Roman Catholic archdiocese of Managua. But Ortega’s government said that any such donation would be invalid. Taiwan’s foreign relations ministry condemned the “gravely illegal actions of the Ortega regime”, saying the Nicaraguan government violated standard procedures by giving Taiwanese diplomats just two weeks to get out of the country. It said Taiwan “also condemns the arbitrary obstruction by the Nicaraguan government of the symbolic sale of its property to the Nicaraguan Catholic church”. Monsignor Carlos Avilés, the vicar of the archdiocese of Managua, told the newspaper La Prensa that a Taiwanese diplomat had offered the property to the church, but added: “I told him there was no problem, but the transfer was still in the legal process.” Nicaragua’s move to cut ties with Taiwan increased the island’s diplomatic isolation on the international stage. The most recent transfers of recognition from Taipei to Beijing were by Solomon Islands and Kiribati, in September 2019. El Salvador and the Dominican Republic switched in 2018, and Panama in 2017, after which it received waves of Chinese investment. Just 14 governments, primarily in the Pacific and Latin American regions, maintain formal ties with Taiwan. After Nicaragua, many eyes are now on Honduras and its newly elected president, Xiomara Castro. With Associated Press1 January France assumes European Council presidency. The Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), the world’s largest trade deal, comes into force. Full border controls on UK imports from the EU to be introduced. Germany takes over the G7 presidency. France brings in ban on plastic packaging for many fruits and vegetables 4 January National Security and Investment Act comes into force in UK. 9 January – 6 February Africa Cup of Nations in Cameroon. 9 January Golden Globes ceremony. 17 January Davos World Economic Forum was scheduled to start, but has now been postponed to the summer because of the Omicron variant of Covid 19 20 January – 6 February Celtic Connections in Glasgow. 27 January Holocaust Memorial Day. 17 – 30 January Australian Open tennis in Melbourne. 27 January – 19 February Women’s Ashes. 30 January Portuguese parliamentary election. 30 January Bloody Sunday 50th anniversary. 31 January Grammys ceremony. February (date TBC) Joe Biden’s first state of the union. Nasa to send an uncrewed flight around the moon. 1 February Lunar new year. The year of the tiger begins. 3 February UK monetary policy committee holds first interest rate meeting of the year, after hiking rates in December amid concerns over rising inflation. 4 – 20 February Beijing Winter Olympics. 5 February Six Nations Championship begins. 6 February The Queen celebrates her platinum jubilee, marking 70 years on the throne. 8 February Brit awards. 13 February Super Bowl LVI, in Inglewood, California. 21 February Latest IPCC working group report due on impact of climate crisis. 25 February – 5 March Rio carnival. 28 February Egypt celebrates 100 years of independence from the UK. March (through October) Unboxed, a new British cultural festival. 4 – 13 March Beijing Winter Paralympics. 4 March – 3 April Women’s Cricket World Cup in New Zealand. 8 March International Women’s Day. 9 March South Korea presidential election. 10-13 March Crufts dog show. 13 March Bafta awards. 27 March The Oscars. 27 March Hong Kong chief executive election. April (date TBC) Hungary parliamentary elections. NASA due to launch SuperBIT next-generation space telescope 1 April UK’s “national living wage” rises to £9.50. National insurance contributions to rise by 1.25% to fund social care costs. 1 April Introduction of plastic packaging tax in UK 6 April UK makes calorie labelling mandatory on all food and drink that is prepared and sold for immediate consumption. Divorce, Dissolution and Separation Act 2020 comes into force allowing no-fault divorce. 7 – 10 April 2022 Masters golf at Augusta. 9 April Grand National at Aintree. 16 April – 2 May World Snooker Championship. 10 April France presidential election first round. 22 April Earth Day. 23 April – 27 November Venice Biennale. 24 April Second round of France presidential election. 25 April – 8 May UN biodiversity conference in Kunming, China. May (date TBC) UK city of culture 2025 announced Russia scheduled to launch Luna 25 mission to the moon 3 May World Press Freedom Day. 5 May UK local elections, Northern Ireland assembly elections, and seven mayoral elections in England. 9 May The Philippines presidential and parliamentary elections. 10 May The Bob Dylan Centre in Tulsa, Oklahoma, opens its doors. 14 May FA Cup final at Wembley. 14 May Eurovision song contest in Turin. 22 May 100th anniversary of the Guardian women’s page. 24 – 28 May Chelsea flower show. 22 May – 5 June French Open tennis. 26 May – 5 June Hay festival. 27 May Abba concerts begin at London’s Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park. 28 May Champions League final, St Petersburg. 29 May Colombia presidential election. June (date TBC) London to stage the first global conference on lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender rights, to coincide with 50th anniversary of the first pride marches. US supreme court expected to rule on abortion case. 1 June The sale of single-use plastic straws, cutlery and polystyrene cups is banned in Scotland. 2 June Queen’s birthday and trooping the colour. 5 June World Environment Day. 12 and 19 June French parliamentary elections. 22 – 26 June Glastonbury festival. 27 June – 10 July Wimbledon tennis championships. July (date TBC) Germany begins returning Benin Bronzes to Nigeria. 1 July – 24 July Tour de France, which this year starts in Copenhagen. 6 – 31 July Women’s Euro 2022. 7 – 17 July World Games. 15 -24 July World Athletics Championships. 14 – 17 July The Open golf at St Andrews. 24 – 31 July Tour de France Femmes. 28 July – 8 August Commonwealth Games. 6 – 28 August Edinburgh festival. 9 August Kenya general election. 14 August Pakistan celebrates 75 years of independence. 15 August India celebrates 75 years of independence. 26 August – 4 September World Para Athletics Championships. 28 – 29 August Notting Hill carnival. 29 August – 11 September US Open tennis. 31 August 25th anniversary of the death of Diana, Princess of Wales. 7 September Brazil celebrates 200 years of independence. 10 – 25 September Asian Games. 11 September Sweden parliamentary election. 13 – 17 September British Science festival. October (date TBC) 20th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party: Xi Jinping expected to seek third term as president. 1 – 31 October Black History Month (UK). 2 October Brazil presidential and parliamentary elections. London Marathon. 7 October Nobel peace prize winner announced. 15 October – 19 November Rugby League World Cup. 18 October 100th anniversary of the founding of the BBC. 7 November Cop27 climate summit in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, begins. 8 November US midterm elections. 17 – 20 November Kendal mountain festival. 21 November World Cup in Qatar begins. 6 December Centenary of the establishment of the Irish free state. 18 December World Cup final.Residents of a town in north-west Spain have banded together to try to track down a convicted murderer – nicknamed the “Galician Rambo” for his multiple jailbreaks and extensive knowledge of survival techniques – who is believed to be living in a nearby wooded area. Alfredo Sánchez Chacón has been on the run since March when he failed to return to prison after being allowed out on a day pass. News that the 63-year-old was missing probably surprised few: Sánchez Chacón, who is due to be in prison until 2025 for a murder in 1996, was already notorious across Spain for slipping out of prison twice. His first escape was in 1999 when he reportedly strung together a series of sheets to shimmy down the walls of the Pontevedra prison as other inmates distracted the guards. For more than two years he remained on the run, using his training as a former member of the Spanish Legion to hide out in the dense brush of northern Spain. In 2001 he managed to again break out of prison but his taste of freedom lasted just 25 minutes before he was caught, according to the newspaper La Voz de Galicia. This time around it was months before alarm bells began to sound in the small town of Pontedeume, in Galicia, about 65 miles (105km) from the prison. At the end of summer, the municipality’s 7,900 residents began trading stories of items that had mysteriously gone missing from their kitchens: packages of biscuits, cans of beer and cold cuts. Others had closer calls: one person recounted how he had stumbled across a man in his kitchen, peering into an open fridge, in the middle of the night. Suspicions that it could be Sánchez Chacón intensified last week after a hunter stumbled upon a man who matched the fugitive’s description living in a makeshift camp in the dense woods of the Fragas do Eume park near the town. Desperate residents soon came together, with eight of them announcing a patrol capable of combing the area for traces of Sánchez Chacón. “It’s outrageous that we’re caught in this,” one resident told La Voz de Galicia, while another hinted that this might not be the residents’ first brush with the Galician Rambo. “He was already hiding in the Fragas do Eume [park] more than 20 years ago, in another of his famous escapes.”Six years ago on New Year’s Day, an Iranian-Austrian IT businessman said goodbye to his wife and three children and boarded a flight from Vienna to Tehran via Istanbul. Kamran Ghaderi was due to return five to six days later, but instead, on 2 January 2016, he was arrested and has now spent six years in Evin prison in Tehran. In October 2016, he was sentenced to 10 years for spying for a foreign country at a trial in which neither he nor his lawyer were able to say more than two words. His sentencing was based on a confession he gave under what his wife, Harika, says was torture, in the belief she might be in danger. No written judgment has ever been given to his family. “The effect on our three children – that is the most painful aspect of this story,” says Harika in an interview. “I cannot comfort them. My daughters were nine and 12 years old. Now they are 15 and 18. Our boy was two years old and now he is eight. He does not remember his father and he was asking every day, ‘where is my father?’ I showed photos with him when he was a baby, but he thought his father was dead. When he was four years old, he asked whether his father was in prison. “The older children were scared they might be arrested too. They are still careful to see if anyone is following them.” Harika lost weight until she became “a skeleton”, and despite taking pills found it difficult to sleep for more than two hours at a stretch. On this harrowing anniversary she recalls every aspect of his disappearance. In advance of his visit, there had been no reason to be wary. Ghaderi – who had left Iran in 1983 to study electrical engineering in Vienna – was not a political activist. He had been on many business trips across the Middle East as an IT consultant, and in 2015, after the Iran nuclear deal, he went on an official Austrian business delegation to Tehran led by the then Austrian president Heinz Fischer. Relations were on the up. Normally on his trips to Tehran he stayed with his elderly mother. Harika says: “On the first day I do not usually call him because he has a lot of meetings so I normally wait a day. This time when I spoke with his mother she said, ‘No, he is not here’, so that was a big shock. “I first thought he might have had a heart attack on the plane. It was not a direct flight but there was a transit in Istanbul, so I rang the airport in Istanbul and asked if he could be in a hospital. The airport said they had no such information. All I knew was that he had been onboard the flight from Vienna. It was a Sunday and all the travel agencies were closed so I drove to the airport, and said I have to know whether he was on the flight from Istanbul or Tehran or not. They said they would not give information to a third party, and I was screaming and shouting. I was not myself. “Next I thought a taxi driver had attacked him for his money – all kinds of things were in my mind, but I never ever had the thought that he had been arrested by the government. The next day his brother went to Tehran airport and he was told he had been arrested and taken from there. We did not know who had arrested him, or for what reason. One and a half months after his arrest, the IRGC [the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, a branch of the Iranian armed forces] allowed him to call me, and he was allowed to say, ‘I am alive. Take care of yourself and the children.’ I asked him what had happened and – he was crying – he said he was not allowed to tell me. “Three months later his mother received a call and was told she could visit him. That visit so affected her that she had to be driven to hospital with high blood pressure. He had lost 16 kilos and he told her under pressure he had signed two confessions.” Ghaderi finds it painful that her husband is still in jail, innocent, and cut off from his family, save a daily phone call, while the Austrian foreign ministry has hosted since April an Iranian government delegation in Vienna to discuss the future of the country’s nuclear deal. It is perhaps not a coincidence that French, German, British and US dual nationals are held by Iran, their countries being among the signatories to the stalled nuclear deal, but the detention of Ghaderi and another dual national Massud Mossaheb, the secretary of the Austro-Iranian Society, is a puzzle. Ghaderi explains: “I have come to realise this was a business for Iran, so my question to the Austrian ministry was ‘why him, what do they want in return for Kamran?’ It may not be something directly from Austria but from the EU.” Either way, the Austrian government has taken the softest of approaches to his plight, insisting quiet diplomacy is the best solution. In an open letter to the ministry in April, the two families begged to differ: “You do not publicly request their release, nor do you publicly acknowledge the injustice, torture and illegality of their imprisonment. After years of continuing to rely on ‘silent diplomacy’, we interpret this either as a sign of resignation, a lack of commitment or a lack of will to consider alternative strategies.” Looking through the public comments of the Austrian foreign ministry, it is hard to know that two of its citizens have been arbitrarily detained. The foreign minister, Alexander Schallenberg, has met Harika only once, when he was, she says, very kind, but meetings between the hostage families and the ministry are rare. The greatest irony is that Iran is mounting a campaign asking Iranian citizens abroad to return to their country to work. Perhaps, looking at Ghaderi’s family, few in the diaspora will be rushing for a flight back to Tehran.Doctors say a decision to exempt health workers in New South Wales from self-isolating if they are close contacts reflects an “extremely desperate situation”, with warnings the policy change will increase the Covid risk to hospital patients. NSW Health announced late on Friday night that in “exceptional circumstances”, frontline workers who are asymptomatic close contacts will be exempt from having to self-isolate for seven days, to avoid disruption to key services. The exemption “allows these close contacts to leave self-isolation to attend their workplace, provided they have been identified by their employer as critical to the service and cannot work from home.” Dr Chris Moy, the vice-president of the Australian Medical Association, said the policy change was indicative of the “enormous stress” the NSW health system was under “because of the increasing number of cases … Just as much, it’s because of the number of staff who are having to be furloughed.” Covid hospitalisations in NSW were currently lower than at the peak of the Delta wave, but had more than doubled in the last week. On Saturday, there were 901 people in the state hospitalised with the virus, compared to 388 on Christmas Day. The state now had one of the highest rates of Covid in the world. “It’s not just about the number of beds [taken], it’s about the number of staff to be able to safely provide healthcare,” Moy told Guardian Australia. “We’re having entire teams getting wiped out, essentially.” As of 30 December, 2,510 health workers across the state were self-isolating, NSW Health confirmed to Guardian Australia. On Friday, a leaked memo revealed St George hospital in Sydney’s south was already planning to fly in nurses in an attempt to deal with staffing shortages and surging Covid cases. Moy said that among medical professionals there was “a level of desperation which is not reflected in comments that the health system is holding up well”. Prof Nick Talley, a physician and editor-in-chief of the Medical Journal of Australia, agreed. “Obviously, we’re in a very difficult, perilous situation arguably, despite all the assurances that the hospital system was robust and everything was going to be fine,” he said. Talley said the policy change was a means to “urgently deal with a major staffing matter which doesn’t seem to be fillable any other way”. “People will suffer or even die if we don’t have people caring for them in hospital, but of course it will have some negative downsides that could be very serious as well,” he said. The self-isolation exemption would “put not only hospital workers at more risk from their colleagues, but also patients in hospital will be at higher risk of catching Covid,” Talley said. “It’s a dreadful situation to have ended up in and it was potentially preventable if we hadn’t let go so early.” A senior doctor working in Sydney, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, described the situation in his health district as “at crisis point”. “Things are absolutely terrible, with a combination of high numbers of patients and staff being off, furloughed or sick,” he said, adding there were high presentations to the emergency department and “ramping” – patients having to wait in ambulances because the department was full. He said though there were less Covid patients in the intensive care unit compared to the peak of the Delta wave, staffing shortages meant the service had to “significantly cut back” on bed capacity. Omicron is linked to a substantially reduced risk of hospitalisation and admission into intensive care, but experts said the variant’s transmissibility could still threaten to overwhelm the health system. “As cases rise massively, there are still some people … who will need hospitalisation,” Talley said. “If you’ve got a huge number of people infected, that’s a very significant load.” Moy said: “A large number [of people] are ending up in hospital at the same time, but also a large number of staff are getting infected at the same time, and they’ve been taken out of play.” To reduce the peak, Moy said it was necessary to reconsider restrictions, and to maximise TTIQ – test, trace, isolate, quarantine. “The problem at the moment is that [the testing system] is barely functioning. “What you’re trying to do is buy time … to get boosters in arms,” he said. NSW Health said in a statement that “staff furloughed because they’ve been a close contact with a Covid-19 case are not necessarily ill or presenting symptoms when they’re placed into isolation.” “If these workers develop any Covid-19 symptoms they must immediately seek a PCR test and not attend the workplace until a negative result is received. They are also required to comply with risk-management strategies put in place by their employer. “The safety of staff working at NSW Health is of the utmost importance.”It’s time to think of a bag as more than just a receptacle for your stuff – it should be seen as part of your outfit, like everything else you wear. A backpack worn on both shoulders is a kinder choice for your back. It also works on a bike and is roomy enough for a day at the office followed by a trip to the supermarket. Go for a bright print for extra cheer, or a dark colour to ensure your bag goes with anything. Singer Harry Styles and footballer Dominic Calvert-Lewin have recently carried handbags. You can explore this fashion-forward trend by renting Loewe’s Puzzle, a modern classic whatever your gender. Shopping secondhand for bags means getting a label like Off-White for less. An army surplus satchel fits into the camo trend and is also a great way to carry home the shopping. Lauren Cochrane *** Buy Padded backpack, £95, eastpak x aries, brownsfashion.com Lift an all-black outfit with a bold graphic print. Recycled nylon tote, £39, arket.com This versatile bag folds up into a handy pouch. Vegan-friendly rucksack, £175, allycapellino.co.uk Stash your laptop in style in this water-repellent commuter bag. *** Rent Givenchy Antigona U bag, from £129.58 for four days, selfridgesrental.com Upgrade your crossbody bag game with serious hardware. Loewe Puzzle bag,cocoon.club £99 a month with two swaps. Make this the centrepiece of your going-out look or dress it down with jeans and trainers. Burberry giant tote, from £121 for four days, hurrcollective.com A roomy tote will double as a chic weekend bag over the holiday season. *** Thrift Military satchel, £19.49, surplusandlost.co.uk Stuff all your essentials in a tried-and-tested army surplus kit bag. Off-white drawstring, £159.99, vestiairecollective.com Elevate your trackpants with this stylish alternative to a regular sports bag. Palace rucksack, £100, depop.com A sleek option for carrying your gym kit.Before the experience of the past two years of Covid-19, I had assumed that a deadly viral outbreak would be quickly contained by governments. Especially in rich countries with good health systems, public health infrastructure, economic support packages and trust in public institutions. I thought there would be general consensus on what needed to be done, and that people would get their information directly from experts working in universities and public health authorities. I mean, who would want to risk getting a deadly infection? Now, I wonder if an even more deadly virus – like a pandemic-ready version of Mers, a coronavirus which killed 20% of those it infected in South Korea before being contained in 2015 – would be treated the same way as Covid-19. Would thousands of people show up at protests because theyhad read on Facebook that Mers was a hoax? Would there be similar scenarios at every pandemic after that? After my experience of actively working through the Covid-19 pandemic, these possibilities seem horrifyingly possible. One of the most unpredictable aspects of the past two years, and one of the most disheartening, has been the rise of widespread misinformation. The line between facts and lies has disintegrated. Years of experience in infectious disease control and a doctorate or medical degree quickly became equivalent to the influencer on YouTube or Facebook who has garnered hundreds of thousands of followers by promoting exciting-but-untrue “facts”. You can see this clearly in the rise of anti-vaccine sentiment, where popular conspiracists share stories about alleged side-effects such as how vaccines are microchipping our bodies, or changing our DNA, or poisoning us. This has gone far beyond social media chatter and personal resistance, becoming an aggressive real-world campaign that has led to protests at hospitals, health workers being attacked and scientists being mailed death threats. I’ve personally learned that lies spread faster than truth. People have written entire blogs attacking my expertise and sharing clear falsehoods – such as the claim that I have no published scientific papers, or that I’m a global plant by the World Economic Forum or Gates Foundation, or that I am a philosopher rather than a scientist (because I have a DPhil from Oxford). It’s easy to laugh at such obvious untruths, until it sinks in that this clickbait gets shared thousands of times. People believe it, and then they too share it. And there is no way to counter every single falsehood. These lies carry more weight among some internet communities than the fact that Edinburgh University evaluated my expertise and granted me a professorship. I always try to counter these claims by sharing my funding sources, being transparent about what data I’m using for my analyses and advice, and acknowledging that while I might get things wrong, I always have tried to conduct myself with integrity and academic professionalism. But this isn’t always enough. There are many people voicing strong opinions who aren’t constrained the same way. Lots of politicians and leaders are seeking popularity, often by actively opposing basic public health measures. There are social media celebrities who build followings by sharing emotionally appealing lies. There are even academics who staked a claim with a certain camp early in the pandemic, and haven’t shifted their thinking despite new tools such as vaccines, mass testing and antivirals becoming available. The power of misinformation can be seen in the number of people appearing in hospitals, desperately sick with Covid-19 and struggling to breathe, who still say it is a hoax, and don’t believe that this is an actual virus (like many other viruses) that infects humans and makes us ill. A basic fact that somehow is harder for them to believe than the idea that this is a global conspiracy for government takeover of citizens. How is someone supposed to sift facts and real data from manufactured and glitzy stories on social media? There is little to no regulation of quality of data or sources on the internet. Some of the small lessons I’ve learned are to explain science clearly and simply so that it is comprehensible to everyone, and to try to reach people in small groups or at an individual level; fighting misinformation on social media is a losing battle. Important too is for experts to engage with TV, radio and newspapers, as mass media still carries considerable influence. Now is the time to understand and address these problems. I’ve written a book – out next year – about the experience of advising government and trying to communicate the fast-moving science and policy of the pandemic to the public, and hopefully how to do everything better next time. Reflecting and thinking ahead isn’t a theoretical exercise because we know that the next pandemic is coming – whether it is Mers or Sars or something else – and there may not be a quiet time to do it. Like everything else in the past two years, we have to learn these lessons as we go. Prof Devi Sridhar is chair of global public health at the University of EdinburghThe Tourist 9pm, BBC One One minute Jamie Dornan is animatedly singing along to Bette Davis Eyes while driving around, the next he is being violently knocked off the road by a truck driver on a mission. This is the tense opening to a six-part thriller from The Missing writers Harry and Jack Williams, set against a sparse yet claustrophobic Australian outback in which we immediately feel lost. When Dornan’s character later wakes up in hospital, he has no idea who he is or why he is there (although his eclectic taste in music remains intact). Cue a twisty-turny retracing of his life, with plenty of cinematic action and some licks of welcome comedy along the way. Hollie Richardson Harry Potter 20th Anniversary: Return to Hogwarts 8pm, Sky Max Ignoring the disappointment of recent screen reunions, it’s time to regather the Harry Potter cast two decades after the first film. Daniel Radcliffe, Emma Watson and Rupert Grint are all confirmed to join in, along with Ralph Fiennes, Helena Bonham Carter and Matthew Lewis. For Pottheads everywhere, it will likely be an emotional blast of magical nostalgia (even for Slytherins). HR Doctor Who 7pm, BBC One Lock the doors and head upstairs, because your nightmare is about to unfold: being stuck in a time loop with angry Daleks. Sarah (Aisling Bea) hopes she’ll just have the one regular customer at her storage unit on New Year’s Eve – Nick (Adjani Salmon). But then it all kicks off in true Who style. Hannah Verdier This Is Joan Collins 9pm, BBC Two A sumptuous feature-length documentary sharply narrated by the great dame herself, who promises to show us “what it feels like to get what you want”. Watching archive from her seven-decade career in showbiz, the star of Dynasty is unfiltered as she tells all – and that really does mean every detail. HR Taskmaster’s New Year Treat 9pm, Channel 4 Six game celebrities join Greg and Alex to provide New Year’s Day comedy balm. Adrian Chiles, Claudia Winkleman, Lady Leshurr, Sayeeda Warsi and Jonnie Peacock try their hands at vinegar detection, ball decoration and egg presentation. Effortlessly, irresistibly funny. Phil Harrison Mrs Brown’s Boys New Year’s Special 10pm, BBC One The second festive episode of this raunchy domestic farce features a wayward take on Shakespeare and the usual demolition of the fourth wall. There is also a surprise visit from Grandad’s sketchy brother Micky. Graeme Virtue Film choice The Sound of Music, 2.20pm, BBC One Sneaking into the festive schedule in time for the dregs of the mulled wine, Rodgers and Hammerstein’s nun-on-the-run musical makes its welcome, perennial appearance. Julie Andrews, coming off the back of Mary Poppins, is a natural as Maria, the novice governess whose real calling is turning the seven Von Trapp children into a happy family of choristers. Christopher Plummer has more gravitas than charm as the stern father, and the looming Nazi peril is at a family-friendly level, but the songs are the clincher – Edelweiss still wrings out a quiet tear. Simon Wardell Live sport Premier League Football: Arsenal v Manchester City 11.30am, BT Sport 1. The first top-flight match of 2022 from the Emirates Stadium. Premiership Rugby Union: Sale Sharks v Wasps 1.30pm, BT Sport 2, Followed by Exeter Chiefs v Bristol Bears at 4.15pm. World Cup Ski Jumping 1.40pm, Eurosport 1. The Four Hills competition from Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany. International Test Cricket New Zealand v Bangladesh 9.30pm, BT Sport 3. Day two of the first Test in the two-match series at Bay Oval. --“Vinegar can be made from any fermented alcohol or solution of fermentable sugars,” says the fermentation expert and author Sandor Katz, whose recipe in his book The Art of Fermentation I have adapted here. “The word vinegar comes from [the French] ‘vin-aigre’, which means ‘sour wine’. That’s why people don’t like to drink the dregs of wine, because after 24 hours they start to turn vinegary.” Katz explains how simple it is to make vinegar: “Take leftover wine, and put it in a jar that gives it a high ratio of surface area to volume” – in other words, in something that’s not full all the way to the top. “And make sure it has good access to oxygen: put a cloth over it and the process will just happen. It will happen faster if you add some sort of vinegar starter, but you don’t really need to do that, because the acidobacteria are everywhere.” Homemade vinegar from leftover alcohol Katz recently brought out a new book called Sandor Katz’s Fermentation Journeys that is full of wonderful stories and recipes from around the world, as well as all sorts of traditional fermentation techniques. Fermentation is a vital tool that can help prevent food waste through preservation. For a better success rate, I’ve included vinegar with its mother (AKA raw live vinegar) in today’s recipe, but Katz assures me that it isn’t necessary and that vinegar can be made simply by leaving alcohol to oxidise. Dregs of leftover wine will make wine vinegar, cider will make apple cider vinegar and beer malt vinegar; mixtures work, too. Buy vinegar with the mother at big supermarkets or online, and once you’ve made one batch, keep some aside with the mother to seed your next batch of vinegar without any extra outlay at all. Live vinegar with the mother is a highly valued food product, and, considering how easy it is to make vinegar, I’m going to start making a continuous batch at home using leftover wine. Katz told me how to do this: “I have an Italian-American friend called Ricky Boscarino, who has a four- to six-litre cask with a little spigot and a hole at the top for making vinegar. If you have a bottle of wine at his house and there’s a bit left at the bottom at the end of the evening, he pours it into the cask. Then, when he’s making a salad dressing or whatever, he’ll just open up the spigot, release some vinegar and use that. He does this as a continuous process, rather than making it in batches.” 300ml leftover alcohol (beer, cider and/or wine diluted with the same amount of water) 100ml raw vinegar (ie with the mother) 1 x 500ml wide-mouthed jar (500ml or larger) Cheesecloth and a rubber band Narrow-neck bottles, to store If you’re making wine vinegar, dilute the wine with an equal volume of water first, but cider and beer are fine just as they are. In a large, wide-mouthed jar, mix three parts beer, cider or diluted wine with one part vinegar with its mother. Cover the top of the jar with a piece of cheesecloth, seal in place with a rubber band, then store in a warm place – in an airing cupboard or near a radiator, say – and out of direct sunlight for a few weeks, until the gluey smell dissipates and the contents taste properly acidic. A film, or “mother”, will form on the surface, so once you’ve made your first batch, save this mother and enough vinegar as the base for your next batch. As soon as the vinegar is ready, decant into a sterilised bottle (or bottles), seal tightly and store in a cool place. Enjoy immediately, or store for six months (or longer) for a superior taste.Last New Year’s Day I found myself in the mildly paradoxical state of being relieved 2020 was finally over while still dreading the prospect of 2021. Twelve months on, I’m in the exact same position: the only thing preventing me from being glad to see the back of last year is the distinct possibility that 2022 will be worse still. A lot of this is, of course, subjective. The only way to accurately assess the goodness or badness of one particular year in relation to another is through the prism of cold, hard numbers. Here, then, is my personal statistical index for the year 2021, using the latest available figures: 100 Percentage of my adult offspring presently living with me, up from 66.6% this time last year. Initially, I considered this to be a 50% improvement – I was relieved to have them all under one roof, and it was also reassuring to have a generous amount of muscle in residence in times of need. But a stricter cost-benefit analysis – ie how much you spend feeding them versus the number of times you need help carrying a safe upstairs – proves a full house to be an expensive luxury. 27 Number of non-toxic courgettes successfully grown. In many respects it was a bumper season, but nobody remembers all those lovely, pale yellow, not even slightly poisonous courgettes I grew last year; just the two green ones that nearly sent my entire family to A&amp;E after just a few bites. As far as I could work out, the poisoned variety were the result of accidental cross-pollination leading to a bad batch of commercial seed that produced courgettes laced with natural toxins that can cause – and I’m here to tell you, do cause – diarrhoea, abdominal pain and vomiting. Also occasionally hair loss and death – rarely in both cases, although absolutely anything seemed possible that night. After that fateful event nobody would eat any courgette grown by me, even after I licked the end of each one to prove their non-toxicity. Now I lick the end of all courgettes, even the ones from the store, so I suppose a lesson of sorts has been learned. 6 Number of gigs the band I’m in played in 2021. It’s a lot more than the single gig we played between lockdowns in 2020, but rather less than the nine we were originally scheduled to play. One gig was cancelled and rescheduled three times, until it finally went ahead in October. We already have more than 20 gigs lined up for this year. I should probably practise. 4 Total number of injections received. This represents a huge increase over the previous year (0), the year before that (0) and the year before that (0). In fact, it’s almost certainly an annual record. I got my first vaccination jab in March and my second one in May. When I had the booster in November they asked me if I’d had a flu jab yet, and when I said no they gave me both, one in each arm. I walked out of that community centre feeling invincible, and woke up the next day feeling like crap. 1,063 Amount of money, to the nearest pound, that I spent on Covid tests in 2021. Again, it’s a big jump from 2020, when I spent nothing. I suppose one should average the total cost of testing across the whole pandemic, but in this case the entire sum was expended in an effort to get my family to the US for my father’s 100th birthday, the bulk of it on a single, ruinous trip to a drive-through testing centre in the States, 48 hours before our return. 19 By my reckoning, the total number of different names the old cat called me in 2021 in a bid to get my attention so I would feed it, or turn on the tap so it could drink from it. Those names included Mairead, Muireann, Meryl, Noirin, Noel and Joan, plus some minor spelling variations, none of which were even close to my actual name. Then, in August, the old cat died. RIP James. 1 New cats acquired. I thought it was too soon to replace the old cat with a new kitten, but I was overridden by four votes to one. It arrived in October and proceeded to wreak havoc upon our household. Months later, it still jumps out at me from hidden corners and it still stands on my plate while I’m eating. At least it doesn’t call me names. I sort of miss that, to be honest. Happy new year.Max on Joe What were you hoping for? Someone funny and up for a good time. In a perfect world a doctor – we can all dream. First impressions? Great smile and charming. He clearly had a free-spirited sense of self. What did you talk about? Growing up in the countryside and whether London was an amazing place to live or a terrible one. Our reality TV guilty pleasures – his being a Below Deck man and my love for Made in Chelsea. Any awkward moments? Maybe when he said he was vegan and I ordered a steak. Good table manners? For sure: he kept my glass full. Best thing about Joe? His clear passion for everything he has done and wants to do. Would you introduce him to your friends? For sure – not in a romantic sense but as someone to challenge their beliefs and add a new perspective. Describe Joe in three words? Idealistic, witty and caring. What do you think he made of you? That I was good laugh – even if there was no real attraction. Did you go on somewhere? We had a cocktail at the restaurant after dinner. And … did you kiss? No. I don’t think either of us had a strong desire to. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? I’d have encouraged him to order a pudding – I missed my favourite part of an evening. Marks out of 10? 8. Would you meet again? In a group of friends – sure. Joe on Max What were you hoping for? A glitzy night out with someone new. First impressions? Great – he could talk just as loud and fast as me, which was reassuring. What did you talk about? Dating closeted men and fancying straight ones. And we both despaired about dating apps in the countryside. Any awkward moments? None that weren’t resolved by his fun spiel about growing up in Weston-super-Mare. Good table manners? Excellent. He apologised repeatedly for getting the steak. Best thing about Max? He knows what he likes: enthusiasm for the licence fee, that “one good bar” in Aberdeen, and living in Chelsea. Would you introduce him to your friends? Yes, if he’d schlep to south-east London. Describe Max in three words? In his element. What do you think he made of you? He got the measure of me, literally. He looked me over and guessed my suit measurements, a skill honed over years working in retail. Did you go on somewhere? No. We opted for one more cocktail. And … did you kiss? It never materialised. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? I’d have sniffed out a dive bar nearby. Marks out of 10? 7. Would you meet again? Max has a penchant for doctors, so in a few years I’ll qualify for another date! • Max and Joe ate at Nest, Bishopsgate, London EC2. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.comGoing Out: Cinema Titane Out now Yowsa! The shot in the arm that cinema needs right now, Julia Ducournau’s Titane – starring Agathe Rousselle as a serial killer on the run – builds on the work of directors such as David Cronenberg, to deliver a juicy, pulsating, auto-erotic thriller that is not for the faint of heart. Cinderella: Met Opera 2022 Out now Start 2022 as you mean to go on by springing out of bed on New Year’s Day, doubtless fresh-faced and free from hangover, and treating yourself to this 90-minute adaptation of Jules Massenet’s operatic version of the classic fairytale, live from the New York Metropolitan Opera. Isabel Leonard stars as the eponymous heroine. The Electric Life of Louis Wain Out now Even if you’ve never heard of the prolific artist Louis Wain, you’ve likely seen his work at some point – his distinctive anthropomorphic cat pictures have a magic all of their own. This quirky biopic explores the man behind the kitties, with Benedict Cumberbatch in the lead role. The Humans Out now Writer-director Stephen Karam adapts his Tony-winning play to tremendous effect, as the Blake family gather in downtown Manhattan to celebrate Thanksgiving in a prewar apartment block that has seen better days. The stellar cast includes Amy Schumer, Richard Jenkins and Steven Yeun. Catherine Bray * * * Going Out: Gigs Joji O2 Shepherd’s Bush Empire, London, 6 &amp; 7 Januaryi Lo-fi R&amp;B practitioner Joji started life as hugely popular YouTube prankster Filthy Frank, before releasing comedy songs as Pink Guy. In late 2017 he switched focus to more serious output as Joji, a move that has paid off, with these two shows celebrating 2020’s Top 10 album, Nectar. Wolf Alice 5 to 31 January; starts Glasgow Released last summer to unanimous acclaim, Wolf Alice’s swaggering, chart-topping third album, Blue Weekend, finally gets its chance to shine in big venues across the country. Full of polished, widescreen alt-rock, it is a record crafted for festival headline slots, so think of these shows as just the warm-up. Michael Cragg Unsuk Chin Barbican Hall, London, 6 January The first performance of Unsuk Chin’s second violin concerto, Scherben der Stille (Shards of Silence), with Leonidas Kavakos as soloist, opens the London Symphony Orchestra’s concert. Simon Rattle conducts, and follows with Sibelius’s Seventh Symphony and the suite from Bartók’s ballet score, The Miraculous Mandarin. Andrew Clements Scott Hamilton Pizza Express Jazz Club, London, 1 to 7 January When the swinging Hamilton was born in 1954, John Coltrane was turning traditional jazz-sax thinking inside out. But if the American once seemed out of step with progress, his musicality has won over successive generations of fans. His regular London trio join for this new year trip. John Fordham * * * Going Out: Art Artist Rooms: Louise Bourgeois Tate Liverpool, to 16 January An outstanding selection of works by the artist who dragged surrealism into the 21st century. Bourgeois can unsettle with a stuffed figure, terrorise with a drawing. She helped invent the art of our time with her poetic installations. Yet her work is full of memories of a lost world. Late Constable Royal Academy of Arts, London, to 13 February The blast of a winter’s day comes into the art gallery in this brilliant exhibition. Constable’s later years were chilly indeed. Yet the melancholy artist created his most romantic and expressive works, unforgettable woodlands, wild seas, and skies etched in pain. A contemplative treat for the start of the year. Rachel Kneebone Yorkshire Sculpture Park, near Wakefield, to 24 April If you fancy a bracing new year walk, the epic, memorable landscape of Yorkshire Sculpture Park makes for a great outing. And, as well as strolling the paths and meadows, you can see the sensual, disturbing art of this sculptor who creates swarms of naked Rodinesque bodies in white porcelain. Peru British Museum, London, to 20 February Party on with hallucinogenic pottery and ecstatic funeral shrouds in this eye-opening trip through millennia of South American art. More than 2,000 years ago, the Nasca people not only drew vast hummingbirds and spiders in the earth but depicted severed heads, drugged musicians and doomed prisoners on portable objects. A delight. Jonathan Jones * * * Going Out: Stage Russian State Ballet of Siberia St David’s Hall, Cardiff, 2 January; touring to 26 March This troupe (above) may not be in the premier league of Russian ballet, but they bring classical dance to more places in the UK than anyone else, so get your tutu fix here, accompanied by live orchestra. Lyndsey Winship Spring Awakening Almeida Theatre, London, to 22 January Rupert Goold directs the Tony- and Olivier-winning musical about a group of teenagers growing up inside – and outside – the classroom. Dazzling, devastating theatre. Miriam Gillinson Stewart Lee Leicester Square Theatre, London, 4 to 13 January; touring to 3 July Reprising his cancelled tour, Snowflake/Tornado, the standup returns to glance sideways at the culture wars. Don’t expect liberal echo-chamber back-patting; do expect exasperated riffs on other comedians. Rachel Aroesti Sleeping Beauty Kings Theatre, Edinburgh, to 16 January In tribute to the longstanding panto clown, Andy Gray, Allan Stewart and Grant Stott revive their rip-roaring double act, which is as stupendously silly as ever. MG * * * Staying In: Streaming Anne ITV Hub Anne Williams’s son Kevin was 15 when he died in the Hillsborough disaster: she would spend the rest of her life fighting for justice for him and the other Liverpool fans who were killed on that day. Maxine Peake (above) plays her in a drama honouring her indomitable activism. Toast of Tinseltown BBC iPlayer There’s something distinctly old Soho about Steven Toast, the mustachioed thesp with the imperious boom (naturally – he’s played by Matt Berry). Yet in his latest outing he is swapping dusty pubs for gleaming studios: will Hollywood provide this gloriously out-of-touch snob with the recognition he definitely doesn’t deserve? The Tourist BBC iPlayer Memory-loss thrillers are having a moment: following the Connie Nielsen/Christopher Eccleston drama Close to Me comes this outback-set mystery from the creators of Baptiste. A British man (Jamie Dornan) wakes up in hospital not knowing who he is; unfortunately, the nefarious figures from his past haven’t forgotten. Pen15 Now This wildly evocative high school sitcom sees Anna Konkle and Maya Erskine relive the abject trauma of early adolescence by playing their 13-year-old selves amid a sea of real teenagers. Now, it’s waving an agonisingly awkward farewell with a final Covid-delayed batch of episodes. RA * * * Staying In: Games Animal Crossing: New Horizons Nintendo Switch New year, new start, right? Over the past few months, players have been doing amazing things with Animal Crossing’s new content and updates (above), so there is no shortage of inspiration to refresh your virtual island. If you have not played for a while, now’s the time to return. Grand Theft Auto Online PlayStation, Xbox, PC If you can deal with the sheer violent anarchy of GTA, Rockstar recently released a new storyline featuring Grand Theft Auto V star Franklin, now a celebrity fixer, in which you have to track down unreleased music from actual Dr Dre. Keza MacDonald * * * Staying In: Albums Moses Sumney – Live from Blackalachia Out now Recorded last summer in the Blue Ridge Mountains of North Carolina, this one-take, 14-track live album captures the musical polymath (below) performing for an audience of trees with “grasshoppers our background singers”. Sumney also directed the accompanying film, Blackalachia, featuring songs taken from 2017’s Aromanticism and last year’s Græ. Beverly Glenn-Copeland – Keyboard Fantasies Reimagined Out now Glenn-Copeland’s cult 1986 electronic opus Keyboard Fantasies (above) – reissued to huge acclaim in 2016 – is reworked by the likes of Bon Iver, Blood Orange and Kelsey Lu. Haunted and hollow, Arca’s piano-based remix of the courageous Let Us Dance is a standout. Itzy – It’z Itzy Out now After making inroads in America, the K-pop girl band have now set their sights on Japan. This excellently titled compilation, which features reworkings of their biggest singles in Japanese, also comes with a selection of their eye-popping, choreographed videos. Spector – Now Or Whenever Out 7 January Living up to their Twitter bio of “Part-time rock band”, London art-rock quartet Spector return with their third album proper since forming in 2011. Now or Whenever’s five singles so far glide between No One Knows Better’s galloping indie disco and I’m Not Crying You’re Crying’s 80s pocket symphony. MC * * * Staying In: Brain food Andy Warhol’s America BBC Two, 6 January This wide-ranging three-part documentary (above) examines how Andy Warhol’s development of pop art intersected with the history of the 20th-century US. We open on his rise to fame and the canny analysis of US consumerism in his early works. Stuff You Should Know Podcast Airing since 2008, this acclaimed podcast from hosts Chuck Bryant and Josh Clark is showing no sign of running out of things we should be learning about. Episodes take a lighthearted approach to everything from hysteria to dentistry. Letterheady.com Online Celebrating the art of written correspondence, this archive from the creator of Letters of Note posts the intriguing letterhead designs of famous figures. Among the curios are Looney Tunes cartoons from Warner Bros and artist Ray Johnson’s serpentine scrawl. Ammar KaliaOne upside from the climate crisis is that winters in northern Europe are warmer. The coldest January since 1659, when records began in England, was in 1795 when rivers including the Thames and Severn froze over. The temperature barely rose above freezing all month. Country parsons, who fed poor people at Christmas, gave them a shilling each to buy food for January. Grain was in already in short supply because of a dry summer and hunger became so widespread that the following spring there were bread riots. In his diaries, James Woodforde, a country parson in Weston Longeville in Norfolk, who was troubled by gout on very cold nights, said that even the fire in the parlour made no difference. He worried that poor people were suffering badly because their vegetables were ruined by frost. On Saturday 25 January, there was a terrible storm that took the thatch off the barn and stripped the tiles from his roof. He still managed to dine “on a couple of boiled rabbits, beef steaks etc but the wind was so tempestuous we made a very poor dinner”. Three days later there was still a “very severe frost indeed. It freezes sharply within doors.” He also notes: “Two women froze to death Saturday last going home from Norwich market to their home.”A thumping headache, a tongue that feels like a carpet and a strong sense of queasiness and regret – it is a condition with which many will be all too familiar on New Year’s Day. But while it may seem tempting to reach for a hangover “cure”, researchers have chosen New Year’s Day to tell us that most will offer cold comfort. Scientists say they have evaluated studies looking at 23 different substances alleged to help prevent or treat a hangover, but found all of the “remedies” had low-quality evidence for how well they worked. The study revealed only seven of the substances showed some sign of potential benefits for overall hangover symptoms, with participants giving a lower hangover symptom score, recorded as a percentage, compared with a placebo. “A hundred percent is really bad. So they have the worst hangover known to mankind,” said Dr Emmert Roberts, a co-author of the research based at the National Addiction Centre at King’s College London. Of these seven substances the largest and strongest effects were seen for clove extract, the anti-inflammatory drug tolfenamic acid, and pyritinol – a substance resembling two vitamin B6 molecules attached together. Participants taking a clove extract pill while drinking had, on average, a hangover symptom score of 19% compared with 43% for those who took a placebo pill. While the researchers said there would be limited harm in using such substances, it seems much more research is needed to explore whether they actually help the morning after the night before. The clove extract study, for instance, involved just 16 participants. Writing in the journal Addiction, Roberts and colleagues report how they looked at 21 studies, all assessing different alleged hangover cures, with 386 participants. Nevertheless the list has some surprising gaps. As Roberts notes, while some may find painkillers such as aspirin or paracetamol help with a hangover, neither has been studied for this purpose in randomised control trials. Among other limitations, the team notes that eight of the studies only involved male participants, while none involved adults over the age of 65. It is also not clear whether the findings of studies in one country would apply elsewhere. Furthermore, the team points out many of the studies had “significant degrees of imprecision in outcome measures of treatment effect” while 16 of the 21 studies involved sample sizes of fewer than 30 participants. Roberts suggested when it comes to hangovers, prevention is better than cure. “The most sensible thing to do is either to abstain from alcohol or drink in moderation,” he said. For those who are planning to drink more, Roberts said staying hydrated was likely to help – although, it was “not a surefire way to avoid a hangover”. Roberts has also stocked up on another option. “I have purchased a bottle of clove extract,” he said. Prof David Nutt, of Imperial College London and the government’s former chief drug adviser – who was not involved in the work – said the only way to stop a hangover was to drink less or consume alcohol-free alternatives. Nutt has developed the alcohol-free spirit Sentia, a drink that is claimed can make those who drink it feel “a mild sense of lightness and relaxation” without resulting in a hangover. “Hangover is probably the least researched major health impairment – costing the UK economy over £10bn a year,” he said.The biggest shake-up to the insurance industry for decades takes place on New Year’s Day, when insurers will be banned from quoting policyholders a higher price to renew their home or motor insurance than they would offer a new customer. The move will leave some customers better off, but others look likely to pay more. What’s this all about? After years of complaints that customers who regularly switched insurer were paying significantly lower premiums than those that renewed automatically, the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) has said both sets of customers must now be offered the same price. The FCA had found evidence that insurers were attracting new customers with artificially low prices and then increasing premiums in subsequent years – a practice known in the trade as “price walking”. Insurers were also found to be cynically targeting customers who they thought were less likely to switch in future. This move is designed to end the two-tier insurance market that has grown up as a result. How will it work? If the regulations are applied as intended, a car or home insurance customer receiving their renewal notice at the end of the year will be quoted the same premium as if they apply to switch to that company from a rival insurer. Until now, insurers offered generous discounts in the first year – often at or below cost – to attract customers in the hope they would be able to increase their premiums in subsequent years. However, it is a bit more complicated than it first appears. Insurers must prove, on aggregate, they charge new and existing customers getting insurance via the same “channel” at the same price. In effect, this means that insurers can still charge different rates for customers who use different price comparison sites (channels) but they can’t favour new customers over existing ones. What does this mean for prices? The move looks likely to be bad news for households that switched their home and car insurers each year – chasing the lowest new-customer premiums. There was nothing to stop people switching suppliers each year taking advantage of the discounted deals – and that is what millions of people have been doing. This group will undoubtedly end up paying more each year to insure their homes and cars, as those discounts will no longer be there. Conversely, the FCA said it expects loyal customers who renew policies automatically to save £120 a year each. Martin Lewis, the founder of the MoneySavingExpert website, and one of those who helped to turn UK consumers into a nation of switchers, said: “My best guess is firms won’t just cut renewal prices to match those for newbies. Rates will meet nearer the middle as happened in 2012, when insurers were barred from gender price discrimination. This will mean savings from switching are likely to relatively reduce. “We’re still unsure of how this will work exactly, but prices for switchers are very likely to be relatively higher for January.” Overall, insurance prices will still rise (and sometimes fall as happened in the pandemic) but they should shift equally for all customers – rather than just those who switch regularly. Will it still be worth doing a price comparison at renewal? Yes and this is still the best advice. Insurers tend to target different segments of the market, and some may still want to attract you as a customer and will quote accordingly. The big savings gained by switching will probably be a thing of the past, but there will still be savings on offer. Expect insurers to continue to offer deals via the price comparison websites such as Moneysupermarket, ComparetheMarket and so on. New entrants will still offer attractive prices to grab customers. It is worth noting that price walking has been particularly prevalent in the home insurance market where those renewing policies were often charged double or even triple what they would have paid as a new customer of the same firm. Anyone who has not swapped home insurance in recent years is advised to do a price comparison when they renew. Guardian Money is regularly contacted by people shocked having just discovered what their elderly parents or friends have been paying for their home insurance. Households have found themselves paying close to £1,000 a year for cover that could be bought elsewhere, or even from the same provider, for £250.• Molly Oldfield hosts Everything Under the Sun, a weekly podcast answering children’s questions, out now as a book. Does your child have a question? Submit one hereThe questions 1 Whose albums have an average title of 23.75? 2 Pull, aim, squeeze and sweep is the drill for operating what? 3 Who flew Jason from Croydon to Australia? 4 Deposed in 1974, who was the last monarch of the Solomonic dynasty? 5 Which planet rotates on its side? 6 Lagomorphs are hares, rabbits and which other animal? 7 Which sport has a 107% rule? 8 Who founded the Left Book Club in 1936? What links: 9 Oriental, Co-operative and Bolivarian Republics; Plurinational State? 10 Tabla; tabor; taiko; tapan; tasha? 11 Alan Clark; Caligula; Stephen Ward; Quentin Crisp; Joseph Merrick? 12 Spitsbergen; Nordaustlandet; Edgeøya? 13 Memory tag; age identifier; random letters? 14 Christopher Marlowe; George Villiers; George Cornell? 15 More Than a Feeling; Take My Breath Away; If You Leave Me Now? The answers 1 Adele (19, 21, 25 and 30). 2 Fire extinguisher. 3 Amy Johnson (1930). 4 Haile Selassie I of Ethiopia. 5 Uranus. 6 Pika (Ochotonidae). 7 Formula One (qualifying). 8 Victor Gollancz. 9 In official names of South American countries: Uruguay; Guyana; Venezuela; Bolivia. 10 Types of drum. 11 Real people played on screen by John Hurt. 12 Main islands in Svalbard archipelago. 13 Parts of a car number plate. 14 Killed in pubs: Eleanor Bull’s house, 1593; the Greyhound, 1628; the Blind Beggar, 1966. 15 Hits by bands named after cities: Boston; Berlin; Chicago.We have the Babylonians to blame for making the new year a festival of self-flagellation – although their resolutions were more about appeasing gods than weight loss or cutting back on booze. (Sensibly, they carried out their rituals in spring in the Middle East, not the meteorological hellscape that is a British January.) John Wesley, the founder of Methodism, rekindled the idea in 1740, with an annual new year’s service of resolution – his included a promise never to laugh, which might explain why we also choose punishment over joy. But it doesn’t have to be this way. What if, instead of being motivated by guilt and shame, we leverage our worst habits to serve us better? By being intelligently, purposely lazier; less mindful, disorganised, slower (and with a bit of self-compassion), we might actually be more successful, productive and happier – but on our own terms. Here’s how. Make peace with your body Most of the body positivity movement is well intentioned – what’s not to like about being encouraged to love our bodies whatever they look like? “But body positivity was a movement created by fat and black women as a space to celebrate themselves because they didn’t see themselves represented,” says Chrissy King, activist and founder of the Body Liberation project. “And it’s been co-opted by thinner, straight white women emphasising a little bit of cellulite or fat rolls and saying, ‘I love myself anyway’. That was never the point of the movement.” As well as marginalising the founders, the visual dominance of women who are very close to the Europeanised beauty ideal can be painful and frustrating for those who live in bodies much further from it, as well as for anyone with severe body image issues. “The idea that you’re going to love your body is too far of a place to jump to,” King says. “[Body positivity] is setting some people up for failure.” Body neutrality is more achievable. “I can look in the mirror and just be at peace with my body,” says King. “I can learn not to say I look gross, or ugly. I can say this is the body I’m living in today, and I’m going to work towards being neutral about it.” Body liberation takes things a step further: “If you live in a black body, a trans body or a disabled body, you can love yourself with all your heart, but that doesn’t mean that you’re not going to face systemic oppression in the world because of your body. Body liberation is about asking: can I come to a place of acceptance and love for my own body, and work towards dismantling the systems of oppression that make it difficult for all of us to be able to do so?” Be brilliantly lazy Kendra Adachi, podcast host and author of The Lazy Genius Way, is a productivity expert who isn’t necessarily into making people more productive. Instead, she’s interested in helping us figure out exactly which things in our lives matter to us (rather than to anyone else), how to do them well, and then being lazy (although cleverly so) about all the others – whether that’s laundry, morning routines or cooking (her next book is The Lazy Genius Kitchen). We should organise our lives in ways that reflect what’s genuinely important to us, she says – rather than to our parents, colleagues friends or neighbours – and let other, often very visible, things go, even when that’s socially uncomfortable. For example, for Adachi, it was accepting that she wouldn’t be the kind of mother who volunteered in her young children’s school, but could be the kind who donated money and materials; and realising that was just as valid. Learn to love negative emotions When your cat dies and someone breezily says, “Never mind, you can get a new cat,” that’s toxic positivity. “Two things go wrong with toxic positivity,” says Robert Biswas-Diener, positive psychologist and author of The Upside of Your Dark Side. “One is relational – when your friend comes to you wanting support, what they want and what you offer has to match, but often it doesn’t.” When we try to cheer someone up who actually just wants to be heard, “toxic positivity feels invalidating”. We’ve all felt this – when a parent or partner wants to solve our problem instead of letting us talk about it. They want to fix things in part because they can’t bear being near difficult feelings, and this is the second problem with toxic positivity: it often masks a distrust of uncomfortable or unpleasant emotions. “But there are a million good things about emotions – including negative ones such as fear, jealousy, anger, guilt and sadness. They are how we navigate the social world. [But] because people don’t spend any time tolerating negative emotions – they turn on Netflix or grab a bottle of wine – they get out of touch with them, and they parent their children to be out of touch with them, too. “But if you suppress one emotion, you suppress them all,” Biswas-Diener says. Learning to feel difficult emotions makes it easier when things go wrong in future; we won’t be blindsided by both events and our own reactions to them. If you’ve never had to navigate sadness, anger or fear, it’s almost impossible to be resilient. For Biswas-Diener, this changed how he parented: instead of soothing and rescuing when things went wrong for his son, he affirmed his son’s anger or disappointment, meaning he grew up skilled at dealing with difficult feelings. We can do the same by giving ourselves permission to feel uncomfortable things such as sadness or anxiety, giving them time and space to occur, rather than always chasing them away with busyness, booze or digital distraction. Be moderately disorganised According to the book A Perfect Mess: The Hidden Benefits of Disorder, “neatness and organisation can exact a high price”. While absolute chaos isn’t helpful, messy systems are often more robust and flexible, according to authors David H Freedman and Eric Abrahamson, who believe that constantly keeping everything shipshape can be an unnecessary waste of time or money. “Moderately disorganised people, institutions and systems frequently turn out to be more efficient, resilient, creative and effective than highly organised ones,” they say. We’ve been socialised into thinking that being well organised is an unequivocal good, without ever asking whether that’s really true. Freedman and Abrahamson point out that Albert Einstein’s desk – among many others – was always in “stupendous disarray”, so next time someone officious tells you to tidy up your desk (or your sock drawer), remind them that if one of the greatest thinkers of all time thrived in a semi-shambles, then so can you. Be less mindful “Traditionally, meditation was never thought of as something to create a moment of calm in the middle of crisis,” says Dr Julieta Galante, a neuroscience researcher at Cambridge University, who studies the upsides and downsides of mindfulness and meditation. “That is a western repurposing of it.” Mindfulness is not a mental health panacea – despite new Nice guidance suggesting that mindfulness should be recommended before medication for depression. Research suggests up to 25% of meditators experience negative effects, including anxiety, panic attacks, disrupted sleep and emotional or physical dissociation – exactly what we’re led to believe can be improved by mindfulness. Galante likens meditation to a drug with generally positive results for most people, but for which potential side-effects and interactions should be listed, rather than something anyone can start, via an app, with no trained support to fall back on if things go wrong. Which is not to say that mindfulness is bad, but it won’t make life better for everyone who tries it. Instead, be more mindless. “You don’t want to be mindful every single second,” says Biswas-Diener, who also studies mindfulness. “Sometimes you want to jam out to some tunes while you’re driving, rather than notice every colour and smell. Daydreams, fantasies, those insights that you get in the shower, those are all from mindlessness.” Work less “We now have a century of research that shows overwork is counterproductive,” says Alex Soojung-Kim Pang, a four-day week campaigner and author of Rest: Why You Get More Done When You Work Less. “It makes us less productive, less happy, increases the risks of burnout and of chronic disease; it negatively affects company performance, whether you are working in a factory, for the NHS or in a police station; you’re more likely to cut corners and to overlook small but crucial details that later on snowball into gigantic problems.” The only bits of the labour industry for which shorter working hours don’t make sense are, he says, “nonprofits trying to save the world or hedge funds trying to destroy the world, who have an essentially infinite labour source of 22-year-olds whose greed you can satisfy, whose idealism you can weaponise or whose ambition you can appeal to. For the rest of us, working less, but better, makes an awful lot of sense for economies and societies generally.” Love your clutter “I’m someone who collects a lot of stuff,” says the maximalist designer Bethan Laura Wood, who wears and makes fantastically layered and colourful patterns. “For some people, my home, which has a lot of objects in it, feels uncomfortable. I find being in a space with less stuff in it uncomfortable – so it’s about what brings joy to you.” Wood believes we should declutter only if we really want to. “Don’t feel bad if you take all your stuff down, dust it, decide you like everything and put it all back.” In fact, there’s even a branch of psychology that examines the connection between our stuff, our identity and our sense of home. “Our possessions can take on a value that far exceeds their physical properties,” says psychologist Dr Christian Jarrett, author of Be Who You Want – Unlocking the Science of Personality Change. “We imbue our belongings with meaning. They become extensions of ourselves, or of the people who once owned them, connecting us to our past or loved ones. It would be unfair to expect yourself to dispose of your stuff without incurring emotional cost.” In other words, we don’t need to feel guilty about not doing a Marie Kondo and throwing our treasured clutter away. One of the pleasures of an invitation to someone’s home is seeing their mix of precious and incidental objects, telling the story of their life. Abandon meaningfulness “The pursuit of meaning is not fundamentally a bad thing,” says Wendy Syfret, author of The Sunny Nihilist: How a Meaningless Life Can Make You Truly Happy. “If you want to spend your whole life in a monastery, or pursuing enlightenment, good for you. But meaning has become so intensely commodified that now everything around us has to have meaning: your job has to be meaningful, your relationship has to be groundbreaking and every single consumer product is presented as life-changing – I saw a pack of tampons the other day that said, ‘This box is a revolution.’” When looked at this way, it’s obvious that meaning is a construct – and if absolutely everything is meaningful, then, arguably, nothing is. “[This] creates an incredible vortex of pressure that no one can live up to,” says Syfret, who wants to help us realise our own insignificance, but cheerfully. For Syfret and other optimistic nihilists, nihilism is about being free from pressure rather than hopelessness or being selfish, and actually powers her activism. “People tell us we should care about things to get us to invest ourselves in them – particularly work, and often as a way to get us to work harder for less money. So when we’re offered meaning – which is not the same as quantifiable value [tampons are valuable, not meaningful] – let’s ask: what is the intention of the person that’s giving me this message? Is this actually a message that’s trying to coercively control me?” Don’t diet “Before you try diets or gruelling exercise programmes, spend one week treating yourself and your body the way that you would want the person you love most to speak to themselves,” says Shahroo Izadi, a behaviour change expert and author of The Last Diet, about how to improve our relationships with food and our body. “You may well notice that you are much softer with yourself, you forgive yourself quickly, you’re compassionate and you take a much more holistic approach to the way you treat your body.” Many of Izadi’s clients focus on the outcome – weight loss – as opposed to adjusting their behaviour. “People assume that the result will be enough to teach them a whole set of new skills. I often tell them to imagine they’ve already lost weight, and that their task is keeping it off and still enjoying their life. That’s when they start realising that the way to keep off lost weight in the long term is to move away from the all-or-nothing, I’ve-blown-it mentality and to not moralise their food choices. Because blame, shame and guilt are so often the feelings that people need comfort from – and their comfort is food.” What can we do to create a healthier relationship with food? Have a conversation with yourself, Izadi says. “For many of us, it isn’t until we do some internal inquiry that we realise diets and other unhelpful nutritional ‘rules’ have left us feeling guilty after [eating] what we’ve been taught to consider are ‘bad’ food choices.” This is not how we deserve to experience food, she says. “For those who want to stop comfort eating or eating to change uncomfortable feelings (such as shame and guilt), it’s completely counterproductive. Start gently factchecking, debating with and attempting to soften that voice.” Embrace being single “Women get in touch with me every day saying, ‘Oh, you look so happy. Should I leave my husband?’” says Helen Thorn, one half of the Scummy Mummies comedy duo and author of Get Divorced: Be Happy. “Now, I can’t make that decision for you, but I can tell you that divorce is the best thing that ever happened to me. I’m having a lovely time, all of the time. I mean, I wouldn’t recommend your husband having an affair, but you know, that’s OK.” Thorn is not against marriage. “And I’m not anti-love.” But now that’s she’s divorced and a single parent, she is more clear-sighted about how, sometimes, people succumb to pressure to be in a couple, or to stay in a relationship for the sake of children. “Being single was the thing that I feared the most. It was absolutely the thing that I thought would break me. But love comes in many forms. The happiness that I thought marriage would give me, the completeness, the satisfaction, is what I’ve got from being single. I’ve got everything I need.” She says life (and parenting) is easier and involves less compromise than when she was married. “Romance is lovely when it works, but it’s as hard as being single in many ways. I’ve created this life for myself where I’m happy – and now I don’t have to worry about someone complaining about how I cook my pasta.” Use your anger for good “In the next 365 days, there will definitely be anger,” says Professor David Lebel, who studies the effects of so-called negative emotions at the Joseph M Katz Graduate School of Business. “The question is how you’re going to handle it. There are times when anger is functional, and there are times when it’s not. There’s a big difference between in-the-moment anger, and using that anger at some future time. So, do you explode at a work meeting? Or do you think, ‘What that person said is upsetting. I’m going to address it, but not now.’ You can’t really tell anger to go away, because it’s too strong – it’s high energy, it’s not comfortable and it’s going to take some time to be calm.” Anger is useful, Lebel says. “Its function is to change a situation – something is disrupted, that’s why you feel anger. So the first step is just labelling it: ‘I’m angry about this.’ If you don’t know what you’re angry about, you can’t really make it functional. Then I tell people to draw on that anger in future – not to match the intensity, but to supply energy [when you do speak up], moving away from reactionary blow-ups and towards more proactive responses.” Using anger positively means harnessing it for good, such as improving diversity at work, or helping your partner and child navigate the fallout from a nasty row, rather than wading in while it’s happening, taking sides and intensifying a conflict. Care less “I’m a very ambitious, organised, successful person,” says Sarah Knight, author of the bestselling No Fucks Given books and You Do You, an alternative self-help series about putting yourself first and giving less of a damn about other people’s expectations of your behaviour. Knight moved to the Dominican Republic after realising that her job in publishing was forcing her not to be herself, and giving her severe panic attacks. “People look at what I do, and the whole No Fucks Given ethos, and they think, ‘She has no direction, no commitments, no limitations.’ But that’s actually not true, and part of the reason is that I don’t live the way culture and society tells me that I have to. A very big part of what I do is reminding people that it’s OK to pull back, it’s OK to say no, it’s OK to say that’s not important to me. You get to decide, in your career, in your marriage, in your art, as a parent. You’re allowed to decide that you don’t give a fuck about being organised, you’re allowed to decide you don’t give a fuck about being slender, you don’t give a fuck about getting a promotion. You don’t have to measure yourself against anybody else’s standards.” Rest better “Rest is good for us cognitively and physically,” says Claudia Hammond, author of The Art of Rest, psychology lecturer and presenter of All in the Mind, on Radio 4. “The key is to find what feels truly restful to you, and not feel guilty about it,” she says. “Many people find sitting on the sofa doing nothing quite hard. You don’t need to buy expensive candles to put around the bath before it can feel restful; you don’t have to have a spa weekend. Some find walking or even running restful – they can’t rest until they’ve exhausted their body, they can’t clear their mind.” Hammond recommends activities that occupy your hands but let your mind wander, such as jigsaws or gardening, listening – really listening – to music, spending empty time alone (by choice) and giving yourself permission to not achieve anything in particular. Why do we feel so bad about resting? “It’s a cultural issue – we’re taught at school not to doodle or stare out of the window, and as adults busyness has status; there are experiments that demonstrate that we think busy people are more organised and more successful.” Read a book (and watch telly) Guardian TV critic Lucy Mangan has never been caught up in self-improvement. “I’m resistant and stubborn about people making me do stuff, especially now I’m older,” says the writer, whose new novel is called Are We Having Fun Yet? “I’m not about to give in to people who say I should have a side hustle or improve myself.” In the face of a million well-publicised hobby options – macrame! netball! pottery! – it’s easy to forget that you don’t have to have a skills-based sideline in order to be a fully realised human. You could just read a book. “All the reasons we encourage children to read don’t disappear as we get older. It still increases empathy and gives us the ability to recognise and articulate our own interior world (and television is in the same direction of travel, even if it doesn’t go quite so far),” Mangan says. What should we pick up, if we’ve fallen out of the habit? “Something joyful such as Wodehouse, or warm and lovely like Maeve Binchy. But don’t go looking for something you think you should read. If I catch you looking at the Booker long list, I’ll smack you in the face.” Ignore people (for longer) Many of us already know we should use our phones less, but the thing that sucks us back in is often what feels like an urgent need to reply to people. The pressure is all in our heads, according to Emma Gannon, whose new book is called (Dis)Connected: How to Stay Human in an Online World. “We think other people care more than they do,” she says. Many of the people she spoke to for the book were scared of turning off their notifications. “We’re frightened that we’re going to miss out, and that no one will notice we’ve gone. We moan about notifications, but [many of us] don’t turn them off because we like them and they make us feel busy and important.” And of course, the more we respond, the more we get back in response. Gannon recommends “retraining” the people in our texts, DMs and inboxes not to expect quick responses. “We behave as if replying is a task we can complete, but we can never, ever, ever finish it. So step away.” Stay away from resolutions “Approaching yourself with as much kindness as possible, with as much love as possible, is really, as far as I can see, our only choice, especially now,” says Jeffrey Marsh. Marsh is an activist whose life-affirming videos have been watched over a billion times, and author of the bestselling How to Be You, part memoir of growing up non-binary in rural Pennsylvania, part manifesto for global self-acceptance. “If you hate your guts into losing 20 pounds, will you end up 20 pounds lighter? Maybe, maybe not. But what you will have practised is hating your guts.” How do we learn self-kindness? “To me, the essential question is: will I be able to be kind to myself? Self-hate is the engine that drives most people’s resolutions. It’s easy to say, ‘I’m going to lose 20 pounds.’ It is unfamiliar to say, ‘I’m going to deeply love myself, no matter what.’ It may be the hardest thing to learn in one’s lifetime, but it can also be the most loving, beautiful, fun and exciting process of one’s life.”The piercing “crex crex” call of the male corncrake once kept country people awake at night. But its last breeding strongholds are falling silent as this elusive migratory bird teeters on the brink of extinction in Britain. Despite a successful rescue effort that led to its numbers rallying on the islands of north-west Scotland, rising to 1,289 calling males in 2014, the corncrake’s population has since fallen by more than 30%, to just 850 calling birds in Scotland in 2021. A last-ditch effort to stop the corncrake vanishing is under way, with the Corncrake Calling project in Scotland encouraging farmers to cut hay meadows later in the year and in a corncrake-friendly way. In England, 100 corncrakes are being bred in captivity and released each year to re-establish them in the wild. The corncrake is an unusual species, a long-distance flying machine that soars through the skies from the Congo before spending all summer on the ground, eating insects and worms and rearing two broods of chicks hidden in long grass. The male’s repetitive, mechanical-sounding calls – which bequeath the bird its scientific name – once resounded across the land, day and night. But modern farming, with meadows cut mechanically early and often for silage, has led to corncrakes vanishing from most of Britain over one human lifetime. Populations have clung on in western Scotland, where traditional crofting gives the birds the insect-rich long grass through the spring and summer it requires. The species has been revived since 1993, when numbers fell to only 480 calling males in the UK. But a steady decline since 2014 is concerning conservationists who fear that there has been less uptake of government payments for corncrake-friendly farming in vital areas. Jane Shadforth, project manager for Corncrake Calling, an RSPB Scotland project to save the species supported by the National Lottery Heritage Fund, said: “Most crofters and farmers want to support wildlife and help nature and help the corncrake but they can only do that if they are getting the support they need from the government. They need to make a living and they need to be rewarded for farming in these wildlife-friendly ways.” In England, 97 corncrakes were this year bred in captivity by the Pensthorpe Conservation Trust and released on to the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust (WWT) reserve at Welney in the Fens, as part of a Natural England-funded bid to restore the species that became extinct in England as a regular breeding bird in the 1970s. Birds have been bred in captivity and released for 16 years to restore wild populations, which is particularly challenging with a migratory species. “There is no quick fix here,” said Chrissie Kelley, the head of species management at Pensthorpe. “Captive breeding is a huge learning curve and it does take years but I’m really hopeful that the Welney trial is going to show some success. The main aim is to get a self-sustaining population of wild birds.” Calling males have been heard again on the Ouse Washes around Welney and on the Nene Washes in Cambridgeshire in recent years, with wild birds successfully breeding at both locations. But another attempt to return the species to the Wensum valley in Norfolk has faltered because male returnees from Africa disperse too widely for their calls to be heard by females. Kelley said a good success rate for releasing a migratory bird is for more than 10% of the birds to return the following year. For the 97 released birds to produce seven or eight calling males next year would be a “good result”. “Captive breeding has its place – it can be a sticking plaster – but any reintroduction can only really work alongside habitat management,” said Kelley. “There’s no point releasing birds into habitat that can’t sustain them. These projects are long-term, very expensive and well-managed habitat is what it’s all about in the end.” In Scotland, Corncrake Calling is encouraging corncrake-friendly cutting. Traditional cutting from the field-edge inwards traps and kills corncrakes, who will not run or fly across a mown field. But if mowing begins in the centre of a field and works outwards, corncrakes and their chicks run to the safety of long grassy margins at the edge. RSPB Scotland’s annual survey has found that numbers have declined by more than 30% since 2014, but with important regional differences. While the population in the Outer Hebrides has increased by 9.9% since 2019, corncrakes on the Inner Hebrides have fallen by 12.2%. Since 2017, corncrakes have disappeared from Mull and their number plummeted on Islay from 75 to 26. There was better news on Lewis, where numbers increased from 75 to 89 while on South Uist they surged from 68 to 149. The reasons for these differences are likely to include changes in the uptake of agri-environment schemes. Managing land for corncrakes ideally requires farmers not to cut for silage or hay until 1 September to allow the birds to produce two broods in the long grass. A government scheme supporting corncrake-friendly farming, the Agri-Environment Climate Scheme, has been crucial in boosting corncrake populations in recent years but its future was in doubt until the Scottish government announced a three-year extension in autumn. But the climate emergency and more intensive farming in African wintering grounds are also challenging corncrakes. Many of Britain’s other long-distance migrants are also suffering drastic population declines, including the turtle dove, swift and willow warbler. “We don’t have the evidence at the moment to understand what might be occurring on that migratory route,” said Shadforth. “But we’re very keen to support the populations we have got in Scotland and enhance these by working with crofters and farmers here.”Salads in winter may seem as preposterous as a bikini, but these ones are the equivalent of layering clothes – except here the toasty layers are made up of robust seasonal fruit and vegetables in place of fragile, leafy greens, and of assertive dressings and the satisfying crunch of nuts and seeds. Whether you are seeking atonement for the excesses of Christmas or just craving something lighter, brighter and more refreshing, they are both vibrant and filling enough to eat for lunch or dinner without the need for any accompaniments. Chaat masala roast beetroots and shallots with coconut, cashews and curry leaf oil Earthy beetroot and shallots come alive with a sprinkle of deeply savoury chaat masala and a warming, south Indian-style tempered oil. Prep 10 min Cook 1 hr Serves 4 500g small beetroot, scrubbed and halved Rapeseed oil, to drizzle 2 tsp chaat masala Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper 300g shallots, peeled and halved 30g unsweetened desiccated coconut 50g cashew nuts For the curry leaf oil 2 tbsp rapeseed oil 1 tsp white urid dal (split black gram) 1 tsp brown mustard seeds A pinch of asafoetida 15 fresh curry leaves 1 Kashmiri or mild chilli, broken into pieces Juice of 1 lime Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Put the beetroot in a roasting tin, lightly drizzle with a little oil, add half the chaat masala, season and roast for about 15 minutes. Add the shallots, drizzle over a little more oil and the remaining chaat masala, toss and roast for another 40 minutes, until the beets and shallots are tender and caramelised. Add the coconut and cashews, roast for three minutes more, until golden brown, then remove from the oven and set aside. Meanwhile, heat the oil for the tempering in a small frying pan. Sizzle the dal and mustard seeds, until the mustard seeds pop, then sprinkle in the asafoetida, curry leaves and chilli, and fry for a few seconds more. Transfer the beetroot and shallots to a platter, spoon over the oil and mix gently. Squeeze over the lime juice and serve. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Sticky spiced honey-roast carrot and hazelnut salad with freekeh, dates and orange blossom water Dependable carrots rarely get star billing, but when roasted until caramelised with a spiced honey butter and perfumed with orange blossom water, they steal the show. Prep 10 min Cook 1 hr Serves 4 For the carrots 300g small yellow carrots 300g small orange carrots (or 600g if you can’t find yellow carrots) 75g unsalted butter 1 tsp ground ginger 1 tsp ground cinnamon ½ tsp allspice 1 fat pinch saffron strands, pounded ½ tsp turmeric 1 generous grating nutmeg 2 fat garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped 1 preserved lemon, skin and flesh very finely chopped 2 tbsp clear honey A few drops orange blossom water For the freekeh 200g freekeh, rinsed Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper 60ml extra-virgin olive oil ½ lemon, juiced 60g dates, stoned and sliced (I can’t resist the ones from Zaytoun) 50g toasted hazelnuts, coarsely chopped Finely chopped flat-leaf parsley or chervil, to serve Heat the oven to 200 C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Scrape the carrots, cut them in half vertically and lay in a roasting pan. In a saucepan, melt the butter over a low heat with the ginger, cinnamon, allspice, saffron, turmeric, nutmeg, garlic and preserved lemon, stir and leave for five minutes, to infuse gently. Whisk in the honey, pour the mix all over the carrots, then cover tightly with foil and roast for 20 minutes. Remove the foil (keep it for later) and roast uncovered for a further 10-15 minutes, until the carrots are tender and caramelised. Remove from the oven, sprinkle over a few drops of orange blossom water, re-cover with the foil and leave the carrots to steam in the perfume. Meanwhile, dry roast the freekeh in a frying pan until toasty. Put 400ml water and a teaspoon of salt in a medium saucepan and bring to a boil. Sprinkle in the toasted freekeh, stir, bring back to a boil, then cover, turn the heat down low and cook for 15 to 20 minutes, until the freekeh is tender and just about all the water has evaporated. Drain and transfer to a platter. Mix the oil, lemon juice and seasoning, then pour the dressing over the freekeh, toss to coat and leave to cool. Once cooled, add the dates and half the hazelnuts and herbs to the freekeh platter, and toss again. Top with the carrots, scatter over the remaining herbs and hazelnuts, and serve. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Shaved turnips with silken tofu, chilli, sesame and soy Peppery turnips and radishes are balanced with the sweet sharpness of apples and a zesty soy dressing, while the tofu bulks up the protein to make a satiating and refreshing salad. Prep 25 min Serves 4 400g small turnips, 1 watermelon radish and 2 granny smith apples, all peeled and thinly shaved on a mandoline (or cut into paper-thin rounds) 1 handful each coriander and mint leaves 1 handful watercress, tough stems removed 300g soft silken tofu, thinly sliced For the dressing 100ml lime juice Zest of 1 lime 1 finger of ginger, peeled and very finely grated 2 tbsp light soy sauce 1 tsp caster sugar To garnish 1 handful crispy shallots 1 long red chilli, finely sliced on the diagonal 1 tbsp toasted sesame seeds Shake all the dressing ingredients in a sealed jar. Mix the turnips, radish and apples with the coriander, mint and watercress on a platter, then top with the tofu. Spoon over the dressing, garnish with the shallots, chilli and toasted sesame seeds, and serve. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoAnd with that, we’ll wrap up the first blog of the year. Here’s everything that went down today: Australia reported 35,326 new cases of Covid today, setting a new record. Thirteen people also lost their lives overnight. NSW reported 22,577 cases, another record for daily cases. Four people died in the state, and 901 people are currently in hospital with the virus. Victoria recorded 7,442 Covid cases and nine deaths, with 451 people currently hospitalised. Tasmania recorded a big jump, reporting 428 new Covid cases today, almost doubling active cases on the island state to 938. There were 448 Covid-19 cases recorded in the Australian Capital Territory in the 24 hours to 8pm yesterday. Queensland recorded 2,266 cases, a new record for daily case numbers. There is currently one person in ICU and 80 people in hospital. The Queensland government has tightened mask rules in light of growing Covid cases, with masks now mandatory indoors from 1am on Sunday. South Australia has recorded 2,100 new cases overnight, a slight increase on yesterday. A South Australian pathology clinic has admitted to an error which led to 11 people receiving the wrong Covid test result on New Year’s Eve. The Northern Territory has recorded 54 new cases, including six cases of community transmission. A boy has died in the Northern Territory after going missing from a remote desert community south-west of Alice Springs. Thanks for reading. We’ll be back tomorrow morning. Leading health bodies are calling on the government to defer changes to the Medicare Benefits Schedule telehealth arrangements that they say could cause “mayhem” for patients. The changes, which came into effect on 1 January, restrict phone consultations for a long list of specialist items in favour of video conferencing or face-to-face appointments. The Clinical Oncology Society of Australia (COSA) president and medical oncologist Prof Fran Boyle told the Guardian the timing of the changes was “appalling” and urged the government to rethink the changes: What’s going to be a major problem for patients this coming week is the phone consultations will no longer have the Medicare item number they’d be expecting from the last year. It was an OK plan if there was no virus and it was business as usual, but business cannot be usual for cancer patients. These people are anxious enough already about their own vulnerability, the timing couldn’t be worse. You can read more on the story from Caitlin Cassidy at the link below: NSW paramedics faced their busiest night in 126 years on New Year’s Eve, despite concerns around Covid resulting in smaller crowds around Sydney. NSW Ambulance Inspector Kay Armstrong was on the Today show earlier, and said Covid itself added to the “usual business of New Year’s Eve”, with the service receiving a “record-breaking” number of calls. Last night was extremely busy. We actually reached a record-breaking day in NSW Ambulance. It’s the first time we’ve had this many calls in 126 years. We had the usual business of New Year’s Eve – alcohol-related cases, accidents, obviously mischief – and then we had Covid on top of that, so it was very, very busy for all of our crew. Armstrong added that there were a “lot of exhausted paramedics”, and urged people not to call the ambulance service to get Covid test results. We’ve got lots of exhausted paramedics out there at the moment, especially now it’s summer time. It’s holidays, we’re right in that Christmas-New Year’s season, and they’re under a lot of pressure going to a lot of triple-0 calls that sometimes are unnecessary. If you just want a result for a Covid test, don’t call us. A stretch of land near Bells Beach in Victoria has been closed the day after a man was killed when part of a cliff collapsed, AAP reports: Parks Victoria on Saturday warned landslips and rockfalls had occurred in a section of beach at Jarosite Headland, near the popular Great Ocean Road surfing destination. Parks Victoria warned the cliff may continue to move for several days and urged people to stay away from the area. The rest of the beach remains open. A 28-year-old man died on Friday after a 30-metre cliff face collapsed at Bells Beach. Six people were sitting under the cliff and three were struck by falling debris. The man was winched out by air ambulance and flown to Melbourne with serious upper body injuries but died on the way. A man and a woman sustained non-life-threatening arm injuries and were taken to hospital in Geelong by road. The beach is an internationally renowned surf spot, which up until the Covid pandemic held the annual Rip Curl Pro competition. Rafael Nadal was spotted practising in Melbourne today, alleviating concerns around his participation in the Australian Open after testing positive in the UAE last month. It comes as doubts continue to grow around whether the men’s world No 1, Novak Djokovic, will attend the tournament. The Serbian tennis star is set to be denied a medical exemption to enter Australia, and with doubts about his vaccine status, could skip the first grand slam of the year. The Australian Open is gearing up for a tournament amid huge Covid case numbers, with a contingent of up to 3,000 players and support staff making their way to Melbourne. The huge workforce will undergo daily rapid antigen tests, with Tennis Australia modifying its health and safety planning in the lead-up to the grand slam, in preparation for any potential outbreak. A boy has died in the Northern Territory after going missing from a remote desert community south-west of Alice Springs. NT police confirmed the death but gave no details on the incident, nor which community the child was from. Police did say the boy was under 10. The boy was reported missing after his family had searched for him for several hours, police said in a statement. Acting Commander Kirsten Engels said police had launched a search and rescue effort last night to find the boy. Tragically, the child was found in the community early this morning and has subsequently passed away. We request that the family’s privacy is respected at this time and offer our sincere condolences for their loss. The Northern Territory has recorded 54 new cases, inlcuding six cases of community transmission. Of the six locally acquired cases, five were from Darwin and one from Katherine. There are currently 21 people hospitalised with Covid in the NT, and none in ICU. Moving onto the Cricket now, and Australia is hopeful they’ll only be missing out on Travis Head at the SCG Test, after the rest of the squad tested negative for Covid. Head is currently in isolation in Melbourne, after testing positive yesterday, although there is still hope he will be able to make the fifth and final Test. There were concerns other staff and players may have contracted the virus, with every single member of the touring party tested on Friday. Cricket Australia has confirmed that all the tests returned negative, with the exception being one family member who is still waiting on their result. Vic Health has announced it is shutting down another series of Covid testing sites due to excessive heat. The sites are: IYU Recreation Reserve, Pakenham EACH - Ferntree Gully Casey Fields, Cranbourne East Wyuna Walk, Mooroolbark St Kilda East DPV Health, Mernda Northern Health, Epping Monash University, Clayton Temperatures in Melbourne are currently soaring, with the Bureau of Meteorology saying it has already hit 36C. Vic Emergency has issued a warning to resdents in Langkoop, Poolaijelo, Powers Creek to leave now if possible, with a grass fire currently out of control in the region. In their advice, Vic Emergency say the fire is travelling north-east, and that weather conditions could see it intensify: This grassfire is travelling in a north-easterly direction and has crossed Fergusons Road, near Ryans Road. It is currently burning in the Meereek State Forest. Weather conditions forecast for today may cause the fire to become dangerous and unpredictable and it may impact properties. Firefighters have been working throughout the night and will continue to work with aircraft and heavy equipment today. There are also “stay informed” warnings for regions around Poolaijelo, where the fire is burning. AAP is reporting that Australia’s trade minister, Dan Tehan, has welcomed the coming into force of a key regional partnership, saying it gives farmers and businesses access to the world’s largest free trade agreement. The regional comprehensive economic partnership agreement (RCEP) comes into force on Saturday for Australia, New Zealand, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, China, Japan, Laos, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam. The Republic of Korea will follow on 1 February. Tehan said in a statement: With Australian-made products and services held in such high regard in these markets, RCEP is a fantastic opportunity for Australian businesses. By streamlining requirements around rules of origin, RCEP will advantage local sourcing of goods and promote collaboration through regional value chains, which our businesses are primed to partake in. Tehan said RCEP improved on existing trade agreements in areas of the greatest growth potential, such as services, digital trade and two-way investment. He said Saturday also marked another set of annual tariff cuts coming into force for Australia’s free trade agreements, including the comprehensive and progressive agreement for trans-Pacific partnership (CPTPP) and the Korea-Australia free trade agreement (KAFTA). Australian bluefin tuna and Atlantic salmon exporters benefit from Japanese tariffs falling to 1.9% under the CPTPP on Saturday, while tariffs on sheep and goat meat exports fell by half to 2.25% under KAFTA. Tehan said: International trade is integral to business recovery from Covid-19. The entry into force of RCEP and further tariff cuts through our other free-trade agreements will help create Australian jobs and foster economic growth for our nation. South Australia has recored 2,100 new cases overnight, a slight increase on yesterday. The number of people in hospital has remained stable at 71, with the number of people in ICU at four. The Queensland government has tightened mask rules in light of growing Covid cases, with masks now mandatory indoors from 1am on Sunday. The chief health officer, Dr John Gerrard, announced the new mandate, with the exception being only when at home or in workplaces where it is safe. It means attendees at hospitality venues, including pubs, clubs and cafes, will need to wear masks, except when seated. “People have been wanting this and expecting this,” Gerrard said. A South Australian pathology clinic has admitted to an error which led to 11 people receiving the wrong Covid test result on New Year’s Eve. SA Pathology released a statement saying an IT issue resulted in the wrong results being sent out, and that a clarification message was sent within three hours. The error was found during our usual quality control processes and, while this is the first occurrence in South Australia, we’ve implemented further measures to avoid a similar incident happening again. The Queensland chief health officer, Dr John Gerrard, has said the new case numbers in the state only represent a 12-hour period, after health authorities decided to shift to a cut-off time of 7pm the previous night. The current system had a cut-off time of 7am, making it difficult for authorities to sift through the data. Gerrard said: Because of the large numbers of cases that we are seeing in Queensland, as expected, it is becoming increasingly difficult for us to ensure that we have accurate data available for this press conference in the morning using that cut-off time of 7am. From today, we are changing our cut-off time to 7pm. That is last night. The 24-hour period to 7pm. That will give the statisticians and data collectors time to make sure that what you are receiving is accurate given that large numbers of cases that we are seeing to make sure they aren’t duplicates, for example, that sort of thing. Queensland has recorded 2,266 new cases overnight, setting a new record for daily case numbers. There are currently 13,959 active cases in the state, with one person in ICU and 80 people in hospital. So I wanted to start by taking a look at staff shortages in hospitals in NSW, with the Guardian obtaining an email from St George hospital, where administrators beg staff to return from leave early. The email, sent to nursing staff, warns the hospital “can’t seem to keep up with the exposures and positive staff”, despite concerted efforts to source nurses: We have commenced the process for overseas recruitment. Across the facility, the patients numbers in the departments are unprecedented. It doesn’t really seem quite right to be wishing a happy new year. Another email, from St Vincent’s hospital sent on Thursday, pleads for nurses to work shifts on New Year’s Eve and New Year’s Day, offering a $250 bonus on top of usual penalties as an incentive: Our current staffing vacancies in nursing is unprecedented and at crisis level. You can read Elias Visontay’s full story at the link below: Good morning, and a quick thanks to Donna Lu for her expert work this morning, Mostafa Rachwani with you on this beautiful New Year’s Day, to bring you the rest of the day’s news. With that, I’ll hand you over to the excellent Mostafa Rachwani for now. The Bureau of Meteorology is warning of abnormally high tides along some parts of the Queensland coast. An “astronomical peak in high tides” over the next few days is coinciding with increasing swell generated by tropical cyclone Seth. The cyclone was first spotted yesterday in the Coral Sea, 495km north-east of Mackay, in the state’s north. Seth has strengthened to a category-two system with wind gusts exceeding 110kmh, with Bom saying it could weaken in the short term. However, it is expected to strengthen for a period later on Saturday and into early Sunday. Bom: The tropical cyclone is not expected to directly affect the coastline in the next 48 hours, however it will be directing large waves towards the coast over the weekend and early next week. There were 448 Covid-19 cases recorded in the Australian Capital Territory in the 24 hours to 8pm yesterday. That figure is slightly down from the 462 cases reported yesterday. There are 1,479 active cases in the territory and nine patients currently in hospital. None are in intensive care. While people were drinking the year away or distracted by fireworks last night, NSW Health released a statement saying health workers who are asymptomatic close contacts will be exempt from having to self-isolate in “exceptional circumstances” so “key services are not disrupted”. The policy change confirms a report from my colleague Elias Visontay. In an exclusive, he covered a leaked memo from a major NSW hospital that begged staff to cancel leave and take on extra shifts amid surging Covid cases. Read Elias’s story here: AAP is confirming reports of 428 new Covid cases in Tasmania: Another 428 Covid-19 cases have emerged in Tasmania, almost doubling active cases on the island state to 938. The majority of active cases, 224, are being managed at home, while there are 79 people in community management clinics. One hospital patient is being treated specifically for Covid symptoms, while another person with Covid-19 is being treated for an unrelated medical condition. Tasmania was free of the virus when it reopened to fully vaccinated travellers from mainland hotspots on 15 December. On Friday, Tasmania had reported 137 new cases and had 520 active cases. On Thursday it scrapped the requirement for travellers to take a PCR rest in the 72-hour period before travel to the state, moving to a rapid antigen test one day before arriving. We’re still waiting on official stats to be released, but there are reports that Tasmania has recorded 428 new Covid cases – a jump from 148 cases yesterday. A man has allegedly driven a car through a tent at a campground in Tasmania in the early hours of New Year’s Day, injuring two adults and three children, AAP reports. They were taken to the Northwest Regional Hospital with injuries ranging from minor lacerations to suspected internal injuries. The incident occurred about 2am on Saturday at the West Kentish Road Campgrounds in the state’s north-west. A 27-year-old man is in police custody and investigations are ongoing. NSW Health has republished its daily Covid figures, amending the post to four deaths instead of five as earlier reported. A brief intermission from Covid gloom: this is the best news I’ve seen all year. (Yes, I know he technically tweeted this last year, but allow me this skerrick of joy, will you?) Here’s Prof Adrian Esterman, an epidemiologist and biostatistician at the University of South Australia, with some analysis on the New South Wales and Victorian Covid figures. Worth noting that the Reff – the effective reproduction number – has risen in both states. There are a few searches under way for people feared drowned in South Australia and NSW. Per AAP, South Australian emergency services are searching for a teenage girl who fell off a houseboat into the Murray River south of Swan Reach on New Year’s Eve. The alarm was raised at 9.15pm after she did not resurface following her fall. A search is also under way for two men who went missing after taking a hired pedal boat at about 2am out on Lake Bonney in SA’s Riverland region. SA police said the empty boat was found together with an Esky believed to belong to the men. A search of the lake and foreshore was undertaken by police and SES through the night. In NSW, emergency service crews including police divers have resumed a search for a missing teenager feared drowned in the Shoalhaven River. AAP reports: Two teenage boys went swimming in the river near Burrier on New Year’s Eve at 6.30pm but one boy found himself in difficulty, police said. The boys, aged 15 and 16, tried to get back to shore but the 15-year-old disappeared under the water. Locals began searching before emergency services arrived with boats and a Toll rescue helicopter. Police divers were on scene from 10.50pm until 1.30am and resumed on Saturday morning. Unfortunately, the test positivity rate keeps rising. From today’s figures, almost one in five tests in NSW are coming back positive. The figure in Victoria is 11.81%. There have been 7,442 new Covid cases and nine deaths in Victoria. There are 451 people currently hospitalised. NSW has recorded new 22,577 cases and five deaths in the last 24 hours. There are now 901 people in hospital in the state, and 79 in ICU. Happy new year! It’s Donna Lu here, bringing you the first news blog of the year. Hope you are feeling bright eyed and bushy tailed this morning, or enjoying the celebrations elsewhere in the world. Police said they were “generally pleased” with revellers’ behaviour on New Year’s Eve. New South Wales police arrested 128 people statewide, including 10 in Sydney’s CBD, while 45 move-on directions were issued. Assistant commissioner Peter Thurtell thanked “members of the community who made their plans Covid-safe and celebrated the beginning of 2022 responsibly, in what we hope is a better year for everyone.” New year, same pandemic, unfortunately: NSW hospitals are resorting to flying nurses in from overseas, with staff being begged to take extra shifts. The state recorded 21,151 new Covid cases and six deaths yesterday, with a leaked memo from a major hospital warning it “can’t seem to keep up with the exposures and positive staff”. Within a fortnight or so, Australia has gone from having one of the lowest rates of new Covid cases in the world to being in the top 20 of countries with a population over 500,000. If NSW were a country, it would be sitting in the top 10. It is important, however, to note that countries with better testing systems are inherently likely to produce higher figures. From today, interstate travellers to Queensland will now be allowed to return a negative rapid antigen test instead of a PCR test before travel. Queensland recorded 3,118 new cases yesterday, with criticisms the new requirements are “pointless” in states with large outbreaks. Speaking of testing, the Victorian and NSW governments are scrambling to organise the distribution of rapid antigen tests to vulnerable people amid a national shortage.A Miley Cyrus wardrobe malfunction, a celebrity rant about outgoing New York City mayor, Bill de Blasio, and the traditional dropping of a six-tonne ball in Times Square were among the highlights as America welcomed the new year, and bid good riddance to the old one. The New Year’s Eve tradition of crowds at Times Square returned this year, though with only 15,000 of the usual 60,000 spectators there to watch the ball, encrusted with nearly 2,700 Waterford crystals, descend as couples embraced, some still wearing their masks. Though the crowds were smaller, the throngs nevertheless stretched for blocks to soak in the celebration, with many traveling from afar to take part. Confetti lit up by electronic billboards swirled in a light wind on a mild winter night in New York. TV networks vied for supremacy to cover the night, with NBC’s offering from Miami fast becoming a talking point after co-host Miley Cyrus’s top appeared to come undone mid-performance, forcing her to swiftly turn around and head to the back of the stage to grab a red blazer. Rival CNN also entertained viewers after its host Andy Cohen vented his disapproval of the mayor, Bill de Blasio, saying “sayonara sucker” on the night he stepped down, as co-host Anderson Cooper sought to ease tensions in the background. De Blasio was replaced by Eric Adams, who took his oath on stage in Times Square soon after the ball drop. He made a brief appearance earlier on the main stage to affirm the city’s resiliency. “It’s just great when New York shows the entire country how we come back,” he said. “We showed the entire globe what we’re made of. We’re unbelievable. This is an unbelievable city and, trust me, we’re ready for a major comeback because this is New York.” Times Square is often referred to as the crossroads of the world, and city officials insisted on holding the marquee New Year’s Eve event to demonstrate the city’s resiliency even amid a resurgence of the coronavirus. “I would be lying if I said I’m not concerned,” said Sue Park, a Columbia University student who was one of the 15,000 allowed to watch in person. “Definitely I think it’s worth it to come and celebrate. It will just be more meaningful to be in the crowd.” Mary Gonzalez from Mexico City attended the event, standing a few feet away from the crowd. “I’m happy that 2021 is over because it caused a lot of problems for everybody,” said Gonzalez. “We hope that 2022 is much better than this year.” Covid-19 cases in the US have soared to their highest levels on record at more than 265,000 per day on average. New York City alone reported a record number of new, confirmed cases – nearly 44,000 – on Wednesday and a similar number on Thursday, according to New York state figures. Officials required those attending the spectacle to wear masks and show proof of vaccination. “I look back and I see it as a sort of a stressful year, but it wasn’t a terrible year,” said Lynn Cafarchio, who braved the crowds to attend the festivities with her husband Pete. A New York City tour guide, she was unemployed for a spell as the economy was shuttered and tourism tanked. “We’re standing here glad that 2021 will soon be over,” she said, “but really positive about next year.” Even if the crowds were considerably smaller, people gathered across block after block to witness the ball drop. Nursing student Ashley Ochoa and her boyfriend, Jose Avelar, traveled from the central valley of California specifically to be at Times Square. “Covid did hold a lot of stuff back for me,” Ochoa said, “but I mean, I’m here today, so that’s what I’m thankful for.” Pandemic casts pall around world Around the world, the Omicron coronavirus variant dampened New Year festivities, with Paris cancelling its fireworks show, London relegating its to television, and Sydney cautiously welcoming 2022. Worldwide infections hit a record high over the past seven-day period, with an average of just over a million cases detected a day between 24 December and 30 December, up 100,000 on the previous peak posted on Wednesday, according to Reuters data. Deaths, however, have not risen in kind, bringing hope the new variant is less lethal. Around the globe, events were scaled back or cancelled outright, such as with the traditional fireworks over the Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpur. Midnight passed in Paris without a planned fireworks display or DJ sets, as city officials cancelled events planned on the Champs-Élysées following the advice of a scientific panel that declared mass gatherings would be too risky. In the Netherlands, where outside groupings of more than four people are banned, police dispersed several thousand people who had gathered at Amsterdam’s central Dam Square, ANP news agency reported. But in London, where a fireworks display and light show had been cancelled in October, officials announced on Friday the spectacle would come to life on the television screen, as Big Ben rang in the New Year for the first time since 2017 following a restoration. BBC images of the fireworks showed very light vehicle traffic and virtually no in-person spectators. In the wake of encouraging data, Cape Town abruptly lifted a curfew just in time for the New Year, after South Africa became the first country to declare its Omicron wave had crested – and with no huge surge in deaths. “I’m just hoping that Cape Town goes back to the old Cape Town that we all knew about,” said Michael Mchede, manager of a Hard Rock Cafe by the white sands of Camps Bay Beach, who was thrilled to get the place ready to host an unexpected bash. Hours earlier, the Australian city of Sydney also feted the New Year with something like full swagger, as spectacular fireworks glittered in the harbour above the Opera House. People in Madrid queued for hours to get into the main Puerta del Sol square where celebrations went ahead with multiple security checkpoints, mandatory masks and capacity at 60% of normal levels. Saul Pedrero, a 34-year old clerk, made the trip from Barcelona, which has some of Spain’s strictest controls, including a 1am curfew. “It seems like another country. Here you can do everything and nobody says anything,” he said. A lavish firework display lit up the festivities, which Spaniards mark by stuffing 12 grapes into their mouths to accompany each chime of the clock striking midnight. In Asia, celebrations were mostly abridged or cancelled. In South Korea, a traditional midnight bell-ringing ceremony was cancelled for the second year, while festivities were banned in Tokyo’s glittering Shibuya entertainment district, and the prime minister, Fumio Kishida, took to YouTube to urge people to wear masks and limit numbers at parties. China, where the coronavirus first emerged in late 2019, was on high alert, with the city of Xi’an under lockdown and New Year events in other cities cancelled. With Associated Press and ReutersWe are now closing our live coverage of New Year’s Eve celebrations around the world but you can keep abreast of the latest events and shows in our news wrap here. Thanks for reading and a happy new year to you all. In the UK, it has been a night of New Year’s honours, with the work of more than 1,000 people celebrated. Among them is an intriguing one for former Bond actor Daniel Craig. Alexandra Topping reports: “In a move that may raise eyebrows in Whitehall circles, the actor Daniel Craig receives the Order of Saint Michael and Saint George (CMG) for outstanding contribution to film. It is the same award given to the fictional character he is best-known for playing, and one normally reserved for professional diplomats and intelligence officers.” Not to be outdone by Miley Cyrus, Andy Cohen on CNN’s broadcast has enjoyed delivering some parting shots at outgoing NYC mayor Bill de Blasio. It featured the phrase “sayonara, sucker” but the full rant, and Anderson Cooper’s efforts to calm him down, are below. Aw Heavy falls reported in Times Square Outgoing NYC mayor Bill de Blasio saves the last dance on stage for wife Chirlane McCray as Ryan Seacret’s show wraps up. The aforementioned TV ratings battle in the US may just have hotted up with the news of a couple of wardrobe malfunctions during Miley Cyrus’s performance in Miami. She appears to have spotted her top slipping just in time to turn around and head to the back of the stage and put on a red blazer, though the eagle eyed appear to have seen more than intended. A mere 15,000 people attended Times Square tonight. It did look a little sparse but the joy was there, with people in masks, er, kissing. OK a quick glass of champagne and we’re straight into the oath of office for newly minted NYC mayor Eric Adams, the 110th to hold the office. And there we have it! Embraces galore in Times Square to the classic Sinatra soundtrack. I’ll bring you some images soon. Just minutes to go ... Associated Press journalists have been speaking to people in the crowd at Times Square, some of whom have come a fair way to soak up the atmosphere. Mary Gonzalez, keeping a safe distance from the crowds, is visiting from Mexico city. “I’m happy that 2021 is over because it caused a lot of problems for everybody,” said Gonzalez. “We hope that 2022 is much better than this year.” Nursing student Ashley Ochoa and her boyfriend, Jose Avelar, travelled from the central valley of California. “Covid did hold a lot of stuff back for me,” Ochoa said, “but I mean, I’m here today, so that’s what I’m thankful for.” Lynn Cafarchio, a New York City tour guide whose job disappeared at one point as tourism dollars evaporated, said: “I look back and I see it as a sort of a stressful year, but it wasn’t a terrible year.” “We’re standing here glad that 2021 will soon be over,” she said, “but really positive about next year.” The battle for the New Year’s Eve ratings is well and truly under way in the US. Anderson Cooper and Andy Cohen are hosting CNN’s New Year’s Eve Live, while on ABC, there is Dick Clark’s Primetime New Year’s Rockin’ Eve with Ryan Seacrest. And on NBC, Miley Cyrus and Pete Davidson are broadcasting live from Miami. There have been some casualties though as a result of the pandemic, the New York Times reports, with Fox ditching its Toast and Roast how, and LL Cool J pulling out of the ABC’s offering. We have Ashanti and Ja Rule performing in Times Square. We’re getting closer. An alarming message but a sadly important one in some parts of the world: Away from the festivities briefly, Taiwan’s President Tsai Ing-wen has given a New Year’s speech broadcast live on Facebook, in which she warned China against “military adventurism”. “The military is definitely not an option for solving cross-strait disagreements. Military conflicts would impact economic stability,” Reuters reports Tsai as saying. “Our two sides jointly shoulder the responsibility of maintaining regional peace and stability.” Her comments come a day after Chinese President Xi Jinping’s New Year address, in which he said the complete unification of “the motherland” was an aspiration shared by people on both sides of the Taiwan Strait. China claims democratically governed Taiwan as its own territory and has increased military and diplomatic pressure in the past two years to assert its sovereignty claims. A bit of bandwagon jumping here from Nasa but it is an excellent shot. This is a perfectly timed shot Couple of hours to go until the ball drops in New York’s Times Square. There’s a bit more to it this year, not just because of coronavirus (though that did see crowd limits reduced from the usual 60,000 to 15,000). As the clock ticks over, or ball drops, Mayor Bill de Blasio will hand the baton to successor Eric Adams, who is due to take his oath in the square. Adams expressed hope on Thursday that 2022 would be “a new beginning of our resiliency”. Adams is a former police officer and Democrat who beat Republican Curtis Sliwa (and earlier progressives in his own party) in November’s mayoral race, prommising to cut government inefficiency and improve public safety. You can read more about him here. Love is in the air in New York! Here’s 1min 23sec of your time well spent – a selection of the firework displays and celebrations from around the world, from Hong Kong to Dubai, Pyongyang to Paris. Time for a spot of culture, courtesy of the Tate gallery in the UK. This 19th century piece is called The Fairy Lovers, by Theodor von Holst. It features Oberon and Titania from A Midsummer Night’s Dream. Among the many determined messages of hope emerging on New Year’s Eve is one from Japan’s Emperor Naruhito, who thanked doctors and other health care workers for their hard work. “By treasuring more than ever the connections among people, sharing our pain and supporting each other, I hope from the bottom of my heart that we will overcome these hard times,” he said. The Tokyo Olympic Games, delayed from 2020 due to the pandemic, were one bright spot of “courage and hope”, he added. He also expressed concern for countries that lack access to vaccines and adequate hospitals. Empress Masako, a Harvard graduate and Naruhito’s wife, offered prayers and said: “May this year be a gentle and fruitful year for us all.” Press Association reports that about 1,000 people of all ages climbed to the top of Edinburgh’s Calton Hill to make the traditional countdown to the bells at midnight. Before Christmas, First Minister Nicola Sturgeon urged people to “stay at home as much as possible” with crowd limits on outdoor public gatherings capped at 500, forcing the cancellation of NYE street parties for a second year. Scotland’s traditional Hogmanay celebrations have been cancelled because of the pandemic but there was still room for a spot of bagpipe music in Edinburgh. One for the Great British Bake Off fans, while (some of) the UK is still awake. 2021 champion Giuseppe Dell’Anno has a rousing message to get the new year off to a rousing start. Pleased to bring you an image of UK celebrations away from London. This one is from the city of Peterborough, about 90 miles (145km) north of the capital. Plenty of backgarden fireworks going up into the sky. A couple enjoy a hug near the Arc de Triomphe during the celebrations in Paris. I think there will be many hoping 2022 will bring a time when such close contact will be in abundance (where appropriate). In a few hours’ time, after the Atlantic Ocean has celebrated NYE in its own quiet way, we will be joining the celebrations in New York where KT Tunstall appears very keen to get things going. I am post-Brexit Britain, hear me roar Remarkable combination of old and new in tonight’s display: drones v fireworks. The latest tech strikes me as beautiful and slightly terrifying. Wherever you are in the world, feel free to get in touch with NYE thoughts on @G_J_Russell Thanks Tom, and may I add my sincerest wishes for a happy new year to everyone wherever you are and whatever 2022 brings. Plenty of firework fun in the UK at the moment so I will continue that theme as the images come through. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, tonight. Happy new year everyone. I’m handing over to my colleague Graham Russell, who will keep you across all the New Year’s Eve celebrations from around the world in the coming hours. Before I go, here are some last snaps of the scenes in London tonight... And there we have it folks, for London at least. 2021 - perhaps best remembered as the second Covid year - has officially passed us by and we shall soon see what delights, or fresh hell, 2022 brings us. Let’s hope for the former. Happy new year everybody! Have a fantastic 2022. Time for another round-up of all the light shows and firework displays taking place around the world tonight. Crowds gathered to see a laser show in Poland, while fireworks lit up the skies above the United Arab Emirates and Greece. Back in the UK, the countdown is on with little over half an hour to go until 2022 is ushered in at last. But, as has been widely commented on, it is only England without Covid restrictions in place tonight, as party-goers travel across the border to enjoy the festivities... The New Year’s Day Rose Parade and Rose Bowl college football game between Ohio State and Utah remained on track despite surging cases of Covid, which forced the cancellation of the 2021 parade. The 133rd edition of the Pasadena, California, tradition was scheduled to feature actor Levar Burton as grand marshal, 20 marching bands, 18 equestrian units and dozens of floats reflecting the theme of “Dream. Believe. Achieve.” In a change due to soaring infections, Kaiser Permanente said its float, “A Healthier Future,” would not have 20 “front-line medical heroes” riding or walking alongside, the Associated Press reported. “We must prioritise the health and safety of our front-line medical staff and ensure we are able to treat patients during this recent surge of Covid-19 cases caused by the Omicron variant,” the health care network said. Spectators planning on camping out overnight were allowed to begin staking out spots along sidewalks at noon Friday. Pasadena authorities urged people to wear masks and avoid mingling with anyone outside their own groups. Ticket holders for parade bleachers and the Rose Bowl game will be required to show proof of full vaccination or a negative Covid-19 test within 72 hours, and masks will be required for everyone age 2 and up, the Tournament of Roses Association said. As countries across Europe start celebrating the new year, our correspondent in Athens, Helena Smith, has sent in this shot of fireworks over the Acropolis. Party-goers are out and about across England tonight, with large crowds gathered in cities such as London and Manchester. The Associated Press has a piece this evening about the trepidation with which all corners of the globe are saying goodbye to 2021 and ringing in 2022. Here is a short extract below: Sorrow for the dead and dying, fear of more infections to come and hopes for an end to the coronavirus pandemic were — again — the bittersweet cocktail with which the world said good riddance to 2021 and ushered in 2022. New Year’s Eve, which used to be celebrated globally with a free-spirited wildness, felt instead like a case of deja vu, with the fast-spreading omicron variant again filing hospitals. At the La Timone hospital in the southern French city of Marseille, Dr. Fouad Bouzana could only sigh Friday when asked what 2022 might bring. “Big question,” he said. “It’s starting to become exhausting, because the waves come one after another.” The mostly muted New Year’s Eve celebrations around the world ushered in the fourth calendar year framed by the global pandemic. More than 285 million people have been infected by the coronavirus worldwide since late 2019 and more than 5 million have died. In the United States, officials took a mixed approach to the year-end revelry: nixing the audience at a countdown concert in Los Angeles, scaling it back in New York yet going full speed ahead in Las Vegas, where 300,000 people were expected for a fireworks show on the strip. In New York, officials planned to allow just 15,000 people — vaccinated and masked — inside the perimeter around Times Square, a sliver of the 1 million people that typically squeeze into midtown to watch the famed ball drop. Outgoing Mayor Bill de Blasio, defending the event, said people need to see that New York is open for business. Yet by Thursday, rapper LL Cool J had dropped out of the New York telecast after a positive Covid-19 test, “The Music Man” was shuttered on Broadway after lead actor Hugh Jackman tested positive, and restaurant owners battered by staffing shortages and omicron cancellations throughout the holiday season struggled to stay open. “I’m really scared for our industry,” said restaurateur David Rabin, a partner in the Temple Bar, Skylark and other city venues who watched reservations and party bookings disappear this month. “No one made any money in December. The fact they may have a good night tonight, it has no impact.” Airlines were also struggling as the year came to a close, cancelling thousands of flights after the virus struck flight crews and other personnel. Bad weather was also to blame at times. The pandemic game-changer of 2021 — vaccinations — continued apace. Pakistan said it had fully vaccinated 70 million of its 220 million people this year and Britain said it met its goal of offering a vaccine booster shot to all adults by Friday. In Russia, President Vladimir Putin mourned the dead, praised Russians for their strength in difficult times and soberly warned that the pandemic “isn’t retreating yet.” Russia’s virus task force has reported 308,860 Covid-19 deaths but its state statistics agency says the death toll has been more than double that. “I would like to express words of sincere support to all those who lost their dear ones,” Putin said in a televised address broadcast just before midnight in each of Russia’s 11 time zones. Meanwhile, in London, you would normally expect to see Waterloo Bridge and Embankment crammed full of revellers enjoying a bit of Auld Lang Syne and the spectacular firework display the capital has become accustomed to. Not tonight though. For the second year in a row, there is a much more muted atmosphere in London on New Year’s Eve. Having said that, the London Eye still looks dazzling in purple tonight. Here are some of the latest images of New Year’s Eve celebrations from across the globe today. New Year’s Eve celebrations kicked off in the Serbian capital of Belgrade where, unlike elsewhere in Europe, mass gatherings are allowed. Large crowds gathered in the city for outdoor concerts, fireworks and a light show at a newly-constructed Dubai-style glass tower that has become a trademark project by Serbia’s right-wing populist government. The Associated Press reported: With its numerous nightclubs and bars and relatively low prices, Belgrade has become a major attraction for mostly young party-goers coming in from neighbouring Balkan states. Serbia’s state RTS television reported that about 100,000 visitors have flocked to Belgrade for the holidays, filling up the city’s hotels and rented apartments. Restaurants and bars have been packed. Serbian officials have ignored warnings by medical experts who say that mass festivities should be scrapped as long as omicron is racing through the continent. Most European nations have imposed restrictions and banned New Year’s celebrations to contain the virus that has fuelled record numbers of new infections. Serbian epidemiologist Zoran Radovanovic compared state-sponsored gatherings to “premeditated mass murder.” Radovanovic predicted that Serbia will see thousands of new Covid-19 infections after the holidays. In a bid to stave off concerns, Belgrade city authorities provided 50,000 face masks and had rapid virus test sites and disinfection tools at the entrances to fenced-in areas for the New Year’s Eve concerts. But the Covid-19 vaccination passes that are required for bars and restaurants are not mandatory for outdoor events in Serbia. Concerns over the Omicron variant haven’t deterred everyone from going out to enjoy the festivities tonight. It appears, pandemic or no pandemic, people will still insist on wearing those New Year-themed glasses... Hogmanay celebrations have been cancelled across Scotland in response to the surging spread of coronavirus, with people urged to stay at home and limit how many people they meet. Scotland’s traditional large-scale Hogmanay celebrations have been cancelled as part of new Covid restrictions announced by Nicola Sturgeon last week, PA Media reported. The First Minister also introduced new curbs on hospitality and urged people to “stay at home as much as possible” until at least the first week of January. New limits on large public gatherings have forced the cancellation of New Year’s Eve street parties, including the one planned for Edinburgh. Hogmanay street parties across Scotland have been cancelled, with crowds at outdoor public events capped at 500 since Boxing Day, for at least three weeks, and numbers at indoor public events limited to 100 standing or 200 seated. Ms Sturgeon said the restrictions were aimed at cutting down transmission of the Omicron coronavirus variant and because “large events put an additional burden on emergency services”. Explaining the latest guidance Ms Sturgeon said: Over Hogmanay and New Year’s Day, and for at least the first week in January, we are advising everyone to stay at home more than normal, to reduce contacts with people outside our own households, and to limit the size of any indoor social gatherings that do take place so that they don’t include people from any more than three households. Announcing the restrictions, Ms Sturgeon added: This will, of course, make sports matches, including football, effectively spectator-free over this three-week period. And it will also mean that large-scale Hogmanay celebrations, including that planned here in our capital city, will not proceed. I know how disappointing this will be for those looking forward to these events, and for the organisers of them. They arrived at Bristol Temple Meads train station clutching cans of booze, a change of clothes and this year’s most essential New Year’s Eve accessory – a negative lateral flow test. The closure of nightclubs and restrictions in bars and pubs in Wales was not going to stop a determined band of Welsh fun-seekers hopping across the border for a big night out on the English side of the Severn. “Mark Drakeford [the Welsh first minister] doesn’t want us to have a good time in Cardiff but he can’t stop us coming over here,” said Luke Spear, a 22-year-old bar worker. “Covid has affected young people a lot. I spent my 21st birthday in lockdown. We’re going to have a good time now.” Gabe Mason, 23, a student from Swansea, said he believed the Welsh government had been too cautious. “I think they have panicked, to be honest with you.” Mason was accompanied by a carrier bag filled with cans of lager. He and a group had booked rooms at a budget hotel. “Usually we would go out in Swansea,” he said. “We’ve all been vaccinated and had boosters so we’re not worried.” The Welsh government has been criticised by many in the hospitality industry for bringing in strict rules while the UK government has allowed a pretty normal New Year’s Eve to take place. New York City readied to embrace the new year — and bid good riddance to another pandemic-marred 12 months — as it prepared to revive its annual New Year’s Eve celebration in Times Square. It did so as an uneasy nation tried to muster optimism that the worst days of the pandemic are now behind it — even as public health officials warned on Friday against unbridled celebrations amid surging Covid infections from the omicron variant, the Associated Press reported. The city said it would limit the number of people it lets into Times Square to witness a 6-ton ball, encrusted with nearly 2,700 Waterford crystals, descend above a crowd of about 15,000 in-person spectators — far fewer than the many tens of thousands of revellers who usually descend on the world-famous square to bask in the lights, hoopla and shower of confetti during the nation’s marquee New Year’s Eve event. “We are very excited to welcome back visitors to Times Square this New Year’s Eve,” said Tom Harris, the president of the Times Square Alliance. “Our goal is to have a safe and responsible event for the world to see.” The annual ball drop takes place Friday, as the clock ticks into midnight and ushers in the new year, an occasion usually commemorated with Champagne, clinking pints, joyous embraces and hopes for better times ahead. But 2022 begins just as the year prior began — with the pandemic clouding an already uncertain future. Doubts swirled whether the city would have to cancel this year’s bash, as the city posted record numbers of Covid cases in the days leading to it, even as some cities like Atlanta had decided to cancel their own celebrations. Last year’s ball drop was closed to the public because of the outbreak. It’s that time during New Year’s Eve when some parts of the world are already ringing in 2022, while the rest of us wait for midnight. In the meantime, take a look at some of the best images of celebrations around the world so far here. The UK has experienced its hottest New Year’s Eve on record, with temperatures reaching more than 15C (59F) and customers being turned away from ice rinks that had melted. The record was broken twice in one day, with the Met Office recording 14.9C at 11am on Friday in Ryehill, in East Yorkshire, and 15.3C about an hour later in Coningsby, in Lincolnshire. The previous 31 December high was 14.8C, observed in Colwyn Bay in north Wales in 2011. At Somerset House, one of London’s most popular event venues, the unseasonably warm temperature forced the closure of the ice rink attraction on Thursday and Friday, with similar scenes at the ice rink in Hampton Court in Surrey. In Berkshire, some people had New Year’s Eve ice creams, as visitors to Windsor enjoyed the alfresco cafes. The Met office said temperatures would continue to climb across the country later on Friday, before falling slightly at night as the UK rings in 2022. Areas of southern and eastern England, including the West Country, London and Lincolnshire, were expected to experience the warmest weather. Revellers in some parts of the UK will have to brace for rain in the evening, with light drizzle expected across pockets of eastern and southern England and north Wales. However, the overall picture was “exceptionally mild”, with temperatures of 14.5C in Hawarden, north Wales, and 14.2C in Yeovil, Somerset, reported on Friday morning, forecasters said. Evening all. Tom Ambrose here, reporting for duty from London. I’ll be with you for the rest of the evening as we count down to midnight across the world, wherever you may be reading from. Let’s start with some good advice from the UK animal welfare charity Dogs Trust. They have been tweeting top tips on how to keep your dog comfortable when all the fireworks start going off later tonight. Advice includes building a cosy den for your four-legged friend and not forcing them outside. Here is the full list... Meanwhile, the RSPCA has shared some more general advice to pet owners around the world, covering animals of all shapes and sizes, from guinea pigs to horses and everything in between. And it’s not too late to pop out and get hold of some silent fireworks instead, if you don’t mind watching the spectacle without the loud bangs. That is it today from me, Martin Belam. As difficult as 2021 has been, and as worrying as 2022 may look, I wish you all the best for the new year. I’m handing over to Tom Ambrose, but before I go, here’s another striking image from today, which to me sums up the hopes and fears for the year ahead. It is a picture of someone taking a picture of 6,500 candle lights, as they prepare a ceremony to wish for overcoming the pandemic, and for good luck in 2022. Take care and stay safe. I’ll see you next year. If you’d asked me three years ago whether “Is London having fireworks tonight?” on New Year’s Eve was a legitimate question I would have laughed and laughed and laughed. And here we all are. With the public fireworks event cancelled, it is being reported that tonight’s TV broadcast from London may feature fireworks from a secret location to prevent crowds gathering, and performances from Jessie Ware and Paloma Faith, with Elton John and Dua Lipa in a pre-recorded segment, and messages from Gareth Southgate and Sir Ian McKellen. All I know is that Peter Hitchens will probably not be watching. There have been some striking images during the papacy of Pope Francis as we live through the pandemic, and today’s pictures of him celebrating a mass on New Year’s Eve in Saint Peter’s Basilica at the Vatican continue that trend. As well as being regarded as New Year’s Day, in the calendar of the Catholic Church 1 January is considered the World Day of Peace, established by Pope Paul VI in 1967. In his message for tomorrow, which is issued ahead of time, Pope Francis made an appeal for intergenerational dialogue, saying: Young people need the wisdom and experience of the elderly, while those who are older need the support, affection, creativity, and dynamism of the young. The bell-ringing ceremony might have been pre-recorded [see 15.22], but that hasn’t stopped some people being out on the streets to celebrate the new year in Seoul. Sisipho Skweyiya has a report for Reuters from South Africa at the cheer the lifting of the midnight Covid curfew has caused, just in time for 2022. “(The past two years) have been hard on us, if you look at our neighbours most guys have closed down, that’s how bad it was,” said 32 year-old Michael Mchende, a manager at Hard Rock Cafe in Cape Town. “For this brand we are all about having a good time, so now that we have been allowed to actually have a good time, these doors are just going to be here for display. We are not going to shut down no more, we are all in.” The South African government has said that people should keep getting vaccinated and observing health protocols, including the mandatory wearing of masks in public places. “We must ensure that our actions, our behaviour and our decisions over this festive season and beyond do not lead to more infections, more people ending up in hospitals and more deaths,” President Cyril Ramaphosa said in his New Year message to the nation on Friday. “I’m happy and excited because the curfew has been lifted. But I’m also a little bit nervous because I hope that people won’t abuse that,” 41-year-old Gwendolyn Louw told Reuters. “I am happy to see our freedom returning. Let’s hope it doesn’t come at a price.” There are going to be very different New Year’s Eve celebrations across the constituent parts of the United Kingdom tonight. In Scotland, Hogmanay will take place in a situation where pubs can stay open if they are providing table service, but night clubs are closed. The situation is similar in Wales, and in Northern Ireland dancing is prohibited. England will see no such restrictions. But it isn’t just the rules that make a difference, it is also how people approach the risk of socialising a new year, nearly two years into a pandemic. My colleagues Alfie Packham and Rachel Obordo have spoken to three different people about what they are planning to do tonight, asking the question, self-isolate or party? Read more here: Self-isolate or party? Three Britons share New Year’s Eve plans As the clock next strikes the hour it will be midnight in Beijing, China. While the festival to celebrate the Chinese New Year isn’t until February, just ahead of the city hosting the Winter Olympics, that doesn’t mean there aren’t events taking place there tonight. Artiste Kong Ning has been wearing her latest work entitled “Earth’s Snowflake”, which has struck me as very Björk–esque. And I’ve got to be honest, I’m live blogging from London, and not entirely clear what is actually going on in this particular photograph, but it seems to involve fake snow and fake pandas, and I thought you would enjoy it. Here are some more of the non-firework images that have caught my eye as the world enters 2022. People have been enjoying a lot of activities as the sun sets for the last time on 2021, including taking a camel for a stroll. This is a fisheye lens view of people waiting for fireworks to start under the Burj Khalifa in Dubai in the UAE. Patriarch Kirill of Moscow and All Russia has been conducting a New Year’s Eve service. Large-scale New Year celebrations have been cancelled in Germany and recently installed Health Minister Karl Lauterbach has advised Germans to spend the holiday period “very cautiously” and celebrate only in very small groups. Australia may have scaled back official celebrations, but there are still plenty of people out on the streets enjoying the firework displays and party atmosphere. 2022 has begun in South Korea, and here’s a picture of Seoul Mayor Oh Se-hoon and others hitting a huge bell to welcome in the new year, which has just been broadcast. One catch, though. The photograph is from 29 December, when they were pre-recording the new year celebrations. It is the second year in a row that Seoul’s annual New Year’s Eve bell-ringing ceremony has been cancelled due to the pandemic. How does celebrating New Year’s Eve in 2021/22 feel in one photo? This is a contender. A dog with a Happy New Year collar and wearing 2022 glasses, sat right next to a “Do Not Enter. Keep Out” sign. The dog is called Teddy and he is 12 years old, and I should imagine he is a very good boy indeed. A lot of us will set new year’s resolutions around our alcohol intake in the coming hours, and Fiona Beckett has her view for us today on what to do about drinking in 2022. Her suggestion for wine – drink less, but drink better. She writes: I’m not advocating increasing your booze budget, rather reallocating it. Add up what you spend on alcohol in the average week (average perhaps not being the run-up to Christmas), and spend it on something better – you could pick up a more than decent bottle for the cost of a couple of cocktails, for example. Plus, you should still be able to take advantage of Christmas offers this weekend, as well as bin-end and sale reductions during the coming month. Drinking better doesn’t just mean spending more, however; it also means drinking with a spirit of adventure. Explore a new country, wine region or grape variety each month. Overcome your prejudices. You could also think of buying your wine in alternative formats – half-bottles, say, or even cans. I’m very much a two-pints-of-lager-and-a-packet-of-crisps man myself, but you can read Fiona’s suggestions here: New Year wines – drink less, drink better The next tranche of countries that will be entering 2022 on the hour will include Japan. Yesterday the honour of ringing the bell to close trading on the Tokyo stock market for the year fell to actor Ryo Yoshizawa. Today, Shintoist priests have been arriving to hold a ritual in preparation for the New Year at the Meiji Shrine in the city. Comiket is also going on in Tokyo at the moment. Said to be the largest fan convention based around comics in the world, it hasn’t been held since December 2019 because of a combination of the coronavirus pandemic and wanting to avoid clashing with the Tokyo Olympics in the summer. This photograph shows someone there who is cosplaying as a “remote worker”. I can neither confirm or deny that I wear a similar outfit while live blogging for the Guardian. Time zones staggered every thirty minutes are the gift that keep giving on New Year’s Eve. It is about to strike midnight in Darwin and Alice Springs in Australia’s Northern Territory. But not every New Year’s Eve picture is a happy one. Activists have chosen today to demonstrate and highlight the plight of youth detainees who will see in the new year in the Don Dale Youth Detention Centre. Speaking of Russia, it celebrates New Year’s Eve over 11 time zones, and that means that Russian President Vladimir Putin has already given his televised midnight message in the Kamchatka peninsula. Agence France-Presse report that he offered support to all those in Russia who had suffered through the coronavirus pandemic, saying “The insidious disease has claimed tens of thousands of lives. I want to express my sincere support to everyone who has lost relatives, loved-ones, friends.” He also had a strong message that will be heard beyond Russia’s borders, telling his nation that “We firmly and consistently defended our national interests, the security of the country, and citizens.” You might be forgiven for thinking that New Year’s Eve is all about fireworks from the photographs that get picked by the media, but here are some of my favourite pictures of the day so far that don’t feature fireworks. This is Ethiopia’s Belay Bezabh winning the Sao Silvestre international race in Sao Paulo, Brazil. Run over 15 kilometres, the race is held annually on New Year’s Eve, but was suspended in 2020 due to the coronavirus pandemic. It was on again this year, but closed to the public this year as a safety precaution, and all the runners had to be fully vaccinated against Covid. Somewhat braver than me, members of the She Swims Falmouth have had a bracing morning New Year’s Eve swim at Gyllyngvase Beach, Cornwall. These people gathered in Quetta, Pakistan, to watch the sun set for the last time in 2021. Here are people gathered in Red Square in Moscow. It will be shut later from 5pm local time until 7am the next day as part of Russia’s Covid curfew restrictions. OK, I still couldn’t resist one fireworks photograph. Queensland in Australia is about to greet 2022, as are Papua New Guinea and Guam. Emily Woods has a round-up here of how Australia has been celebrating cautiously this year: Australia has welcomed in the new year more cautiously than usual, with far fewer people attending firework displays and other events. But after a tumultuous 2021 the prime minister, Scott Morrison, said Australians had much to be thankful for. “Despite the pandemic, despite the floods, the fires, continuing drought in some areas, the cyclones, the lockdowns, even mice plagues, Australia is stronger today than we were a year ago. And we’re safer,” he said in a New Year’s Eve message. Although thousands of people flocked to vantage points beside Sydney Harbour to watch the city’s internationally renowned fireworks, only 17,000 tickets went on sale. Masks were encouraged and unvaccinated people were asked to stay home. More than a million revellers have visited the city for the displays in previous years. But this year’s displays did not lacked scale, with six tonnes of fireworks launched across two displays at 9pm and midnight. Read more of Emily Woods’ report here: Australia cautiously rings in 2022 with firework displays but smaller crowds Readers have been getting in touch to tell us how they’re celebrating the New Year. In Australia, Huw Neill, 53, who moved to Melbourne from London in June 2020, has spent his evening watching the fireworks with his family in Coogee Beach, a short distance south of Sydney city centre. The event started early to avoid clashing with the “big one’’ at midnight in Sydney Harbour Bridge. “We booked our holiday here a couple of months back, before Omicron was a thing,” said Neill. “We’ve not been out of Victoria since we arrived last year, so we’re just in time for the Omicron explosion. We entered New South Wales with a certain amount of trepidation, but the event on the beach was fairly well socially distanced, so it was good fun.” Neill, who works in sales for a small publishing company, says he is “trying to be optimistic” about the coming year. “We’ll have to see what happens with Omicron, but this time last year we were saying 2021 would be better than 2020, and that worked out for us. I think you have to enter every year thinking the same thing.” If you would like to share your own New Year’s Eve plans, you can get in touch here. Now, I’m not saying that I am a new year curmudgeon, but you may have noticed that I’m spending my New Year’s Eve writing our live blog, and be able to draw your own conclusions about my party plans. Michael Segalov has absolutely put his heart on his sleeve for us today though, writing about how he is embracing staying in: It was never my intention to hide in the toilet. There was lots going on outside: highbrow small talk and top-tier networking; free drinks, air kisses, and cold canapés. The gallery was filled, I’d been assured, with fashion figures and media leaders. I was lucky to have been invited to this salon, one of the hosts had informed me, generously. Exactly what a “salon” is, I’m still unsure. Deep down, I just didn’t want to be there. Only 90 minutes previously I’d been watching Gogglebox and scoffing Pringles in bed. But I went along out of some sense of duty. Perhaps a desire to broaden my horizons, or a compulsion to step outside my comfort zone, where I had become too safe and snug. Now here I was, sitting in a locked cubicle counting down the minutes before I could leave without seeming rude. This year, I’m refusing to be sucked in again – I’m determined to embrace saying yes to saying no to things I simply don’t want to do. Read more here: Michael Segalov – Say no to Fomo: how I embraced staying in Melbourne, Sydney and Canberra are now very firmly into 2022 – so I’d like to take a moment to wish a happy New Year to all our Australian readers, and indeed my colleagues in our offices there. Canberra, as ever, keen to let people know that Sydney doesn’t have a monopoly on fireworks in Australia. Rather excitingly for time nerds, Australia enjoys one of those time zones that is offset by thirty minutes, rather than an hour, which means Adelaide is about to celebrate the new year. However, they made a head start to it, with a firework display already over Adelaide Oval after the Men’s Big Bash League match between the Adelaide Strikers and the Sydney Thunder. We’ll draw a discreet veil over the fact that the Strikers just lost their sixth match in the last seven. Is any New Year’s Eve celebration complete without a shot of fireworks over Sydney Opera House and Harbour Bridge? Absolutely not. Don’t forget that we are very keen to hear how you are celebrating – or indeed have celebrated – the start of 2022 where you live. Here’s how to get in touch with our community team: Tell us – what are your plans for New Year’s Eve? Another chunk of the planet has just gone past midnight and into 2022. Vladivostok isn’t quite far east enough in Russia to have done so yet – it is still just gone 11pm there – but it looks like the party is in full swing in in Revolution Fighters Square. There’s a treat in store for traditionalists in London today, as Maya Wolfe-Robinson reports: London’s public fireworks display may be cancelled, but Westminster’s new year revellers will be treated to Big Ben’s newly painted dials as the clock bongs 12 times to mark the end of 2021. The 96-metre clock tower above the Houses of Parliament, which houses the Great Bell known as Big Ben, has been mostly hidden from view since a £79.7m conservation projection began four years ago. For the first time since 2017, the clock face will be revealed to show the conservation work that has taken place, including the restoration of the original colour scheme. Using historic paint analysis and Charles Barry’s original watercolour designs, conservationists have reinstated a Prussian blue and gold colour scheme for the dials and clock hands. They believe the black paint of the clock dials and stonework that many associate with the national symbol was chosen in the 1930s to mask the effects of pollution. The team hope that New Year’s Eve will be the last time Big Ben is struck using a temporary striking mechanism, which has powered the hammer used to strike the bell during the restoration period to mark events such as Armistice Day and Remembrance Sunday. Read more of Maya Wolfe-Robinson’s report here: Restored Big Ben to bong again at midnight to bring in new year Hello, it is Martin Belam here taking over the blog for a while. It is the second consecutive new year that the world will be celebrating under the shadow of the coronavirus pandemic – and while we will try and keep things light-hearted and celebratory here, there’s going to be a lot of Covid symbolism in some of the pictures coming through. This scene is from Ahmedabad in India. As new year approaches, crowds around the world may be expecting whizzes and bangs to light up the sky. But the appeal of fireworks could fizzle out with the growing use of drones for light shows. One notable example was the opening ceremony of this year’s Tokyo Olympics, while the Over the Top NYE event at Reunion Tower in Dallas is among those planning to combine fireworks and drones to welcome 2022. They are also being embraced at a local level: more than 1,000 people watched a drone display at Mercia Marina in Derbyshire to celebrate Bonfire Night this year. The latest countries to pass into next year are another series of islands in the Pacific including Fiji, Tuvalu, Kiribati, as well as the eastern most town in Russia, Anadyr. Over in the state of Western Australia, the local daily newspaper The West Australian, has captured the feelings of many with its New Year’s Day edition frontpage headline. “Here’s to 2022 being better (Hey, it can’t get much worse!)“ Over in Sydney, they enjoy the fireworks so much that they hold two displays. The city in Australia is not due to see in the New Year for a couple of hours yet – but holds two sets of shows. The first one was let off at 9pm local time, with another due later as the clock strikes midnight. They took place in the city’s famous harbour, against the backdrop of the Opera House. New Zealand celebrated the first moments of the new year with a light show on the Harbour Bridge in Auckland. Crowds were able to gather for the first time since August after the city on the country’s north island was moved from red to orange in its Covid traffic light system. Happy New Year’s Eve! It’s certainly a different one as the planet celebrates the second New Year’s Eve during the Covid-19 pandemic. Pacific islands including Samoa, Kiribati and Christmas Island have already been among the first to mark the arrival of 2022. It’s been a year that has seen the roll-out of vaccines, the Capitol attacks, the US’ withdrawal from Afghanistan, Derek Chauvin was jailed for murdering George Floyd , the latest James Bond finally hit cinema screens and Britney Spears was freed from her conservatorship. It was a year to remember in sport, as 18-year-old Emma Raducanu won the US Open, England reached the final of a major tournament for the first time since 1966 and the delayed Tokyo Olympics took place. Many celebrations in major cities across the globe have been cancelled because of the threat of rising Covid cases amid the Omicron variant. So as we splutter rather than sashay into the New Year, tell us how you’re seeing in the New Year.It’s 2017 and Sam, a middle-class, perimenopausal wife and mother living in Syracuse, NY, is maddened by America. Who wouldn’t be? The US is both terrifying and electrifying in its inventiveness. In this, her fifth novel, Dana Spiotta is prepared to itemise her crazy country’s collapse. If her data collection effort ultimately becomes an exercise in passivity, there are a few good “Whoa!” moments along the way. This is the first year of Donald Trump’s destabilising presidency. Innocence has been defiled. Unarmed Black teenagers are getting shot in the back by cops, don’t-mess-with-me gun ownership is the prevailing ideal, and everybody’s a tattletale. At the state fair, which previously seemed innocuous to Sam, even charming, she now encounters T-shirts for sale that say things like “LGBT (Liberty, Guns, Beer, Trump)”. Other slogans attack the liberally minded, now derided as “snowflakes”. History is being obliterated, along with art, thought, justice, morality and landmark buildings. Sam seems almost alone in treasuring Arts and Crafts architecture and furniture, peeling paintwork and antique tiling, her daughter’s prepubescent years (now over), her mother’s perpetual love, the mid 19th-century Oneida community (exultantly adventurous about sex, but blemished by the practice of eugenics), and L Frank Baum, who gets off very lightly here despite his genocidal attitude to Native Americans. Dissatisfied with her fellow menopausal Trump-resisters – all sauvignon blanc, “landmine squats” and Hillary Clinton pantsuits – Sam leaves the comforts of suburbia for a solitary life in a crumbling house in downtown Syracuse that, like Sam herself, is “dirty, falling apart, empty too long”. There, she relishes the freedom to stay up all night, polish wooden floorboards and hardly ever eat. She even attends ghastly open-mic events at a local comedy club. She seems to be abandoning her self in order to study her society. Or she might just be unravelling. In place of old structures, sincerity and taste, online she discovers bizarre new allegiances that have emerged like fungi overnight, groups for this, groups for that. (For “group”, you could substitute “hatred”.) She meets a few of these networkers in person, but most of her investigations seem restricted to the stinky, stagnant pond of the internet, making the novel smell somewhat of the lamp. Still, many of Sam’s findings are plausibly excruciating. Some of the off-gridders Spiotta catalogues advocate survivalism, others are opposed to cosmetic surgery (yet make exceptions for stomach flab). There are witchcraft communities with sidelines in sundials, and lots of Christians and dieters (anti-vaxxers haven’t yet hatched). A clandestine sorority of ageing women, calling itself Hardcore Hags, Harridans and Harpies, is matched by another outfit: Men Going Their Own Way. Some renegades dress badly; others have superb teeth. Sam has pretty much left her real life behind, including a husband – good in bed but offputtingly dependent on post-workout amino acid and whey protein shakes – and their teenage daughter Ally, a straight-A student who’s into etymology, dating older men and bearing grudges against her mother. Given Sam’s obsessive attitude towards Ally, which has at times driven her to spy on her daughter’s online activities and fixate on her breasts, this is probably just as well. To focus on a middle-aged woman is still an enterprising novelistic task. Alas, the book is besotted with the kid. Why can’t an ageing female character exist on her own in a piece of fiction without being mirrored by a youthful one? Held in this Trumpian vice of desirability, the younger contender (except maybe in the case of Bette Davis in All About Eve, or Mrs Merdle in Little Dorrit) is pretty much bound to come out on top. Ally duly develops an air of moral superiority, but she and her mother are so similar in outlook, you really wonder why Spiotta felt she needed them both. It would have been better to concentrate on Sam’s psyche, which wavers oddly between bewildered and smartass. Is she even likable? “Sam hated her own shallowness” … so do we. While everybody in Syracuse runs more and more (as ordered by their personal trainers), Wayward plods along. It can get preachy and pedantic, too, and overly medical. Spiotta tussles valiantly with serious things – human nature, racial conflict, cancel culture, homelessness, road rage and feminism – without reaching firm conclusions. A fairly touching soliloquy on menstruation comes out of nowhere, then disappears as if ashamed of itself. Instead, the normally staid narrative approach, complete with loads of dutiful backgrounding and flurries of zeitgeist, makes this feel at times like an up-to-the-minute Anne Tyler novel. Spiotta’s analogy between the Trump presidency and the menopause is apt: both cause fatigue, anxiety, insomnia, sudden upsets, fury, revulsion, ostracism and a lot of sadness. But on second thoughts, this maligns the menopause, which can be a real liberation for women; Trump is only about terror. It’s clear men should not be running the world, but the wishy-washy women of Syracuse seem almost as untenable. • Lucy Ellmann’s Ducks, Newburyport is published by Galley Beggar. Wayward by Dana Spiotta is published by Virago (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.At least 12 people have died and 13 were injured in a stampede at a religious shrine in Indian-administered Kashmir as thousands of pilgrims massed to offer prayers. The disaster happened around 3am on New Year’s Day while it was still dark on the route to the Vaishno Devi shrine, one of the area’s most revered Hindu sites. “People fell over each other ... It was difficult to figure out whose leg or arms were tangled with whose,” witness Ravinder, who gave only one name, told AFP. “I helped pick up eight bodies by the time ambulances arrived after about half an hour. I feel lucky to be alive but am still shaking with memory of what I saw.” One official said that there was a rush to offer special prayers for the new year but this was not confirmed by others. Mahesh, a devotee who gave only one name, told Associated Press the stampede occurred near one of the gates where pilgrims entered and exited the route to the shrine. “Something happened near one of the gates and I found myself under a crush of people. I suffocated and fell but somehow managed to stand up,” he said. “I saw people moving over the bodies. It was a horrifying sight, but I managed to help in rescuing some injured people.” Another devotee named Priyansh said he and 10 friends from New Delhi arrived on Friday night to visit the shrine and that two of his friends died in the incident. “I have never seen anything like this,” he said. The Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, expressed his condolences on Twitter. “Extremely saddened by the loss of lives due to a stampede,” Modi wrote. Before the pandemic, every day about 100,000 devotees would trek up a steep winding track to the narrow cave containing the shrine to Vaishno Devi, about 60km from the city of Jammu. Authorities had capped the daily number to 25,000 but witnesses and press reports said that this may have been exceeded several times over. Two stampedes in as many months in 2008 – one in Rajasthan and one in Himachal Pradesh – left more than 370 people dead. Others in Kerala in 2011 and in Madhya Pradesh two years later each killed more than 100. In the latest incident, other reports suggested an argument had broken out between devotees. Rescue operations started immediately and the injured – some of whom were reported to be in a serious condition – were taken to hospital. Video footage on social media showed small minivan ambulances with flashing lights rushing to hospitals while it was still dark, as well as massive crowds. Access to the shrine was halted after the stampede but later resumed. Witness Ravinder said the crush happened at a point where huge crowds of people coming down from the shrine meet those going up. He estimated that there were at least 100,000 people. “No one was checking registration slips of the devotees. I have been there many times but never seen such a rush of people,” he said. “It was only when some of us managed to lift a dead body up with our hands that people could see [what was happening] and made space for moving the bodies out,” he said. With Agence France-Presse and Associated PressThe UK’s first specialist black bookshop is weighing up a move to new premises after a crowdfunding campaign to save it from closure raised £50,000 in just a few days. New Beacon Books was founded in 1966 and has been based in Stroud Green Road, north London, for all but one year of its existence. It announced in December that it would be forced to close its physical store in Finsbury Park due to competition from online retailers and the effects of the Covid pandemic, prompting dismay at the potential loss of a “crucial cultural space”. Campaigners launched a crowdfunder in a bid to raise the cash to keep the shop open. Its £35,000 target was smashed within 48 hours. By Friday, more than £50,000 had been raised in support of the shop. New Beacon Books’ director, Michael La Rose, said this week that the shop may have to find new premises so that it can scale up its publishing arm to avoid going online only. “In order to meet its financial commitments, New Beacon Books must continue to do much more than just sell books,” he said in a statement. “The publishing arm … has been scaled down considerably, but there are increasing calls for New Beacon Publications to commission and publish work by young creatives and provide a forum for the exchange of ideas. “For New Beacon Books to do this, it must be able to make full use of its existing space and, if necessary, relocate to premises that will allow for the expansion of its publishing and public affairs programmes as well as for bookselling.” He added that an alternative premises may be needed “to accommodate publishing, bookselling, writers in residence [and] public programmes.” Francesca Gilbert, a campaigner who helped to organise the campaign, said: “The New Beacon bookshop exists as far more than just a bookshop. It is an invaluable institution of black history that is needed now more than ever. “It is a crucial cultural space rich with the affirmation, validation and celebration of black literature, culture and art that must be preserved.” She added: “As a young mixed-race Caribbean woman of colour, I never feel more affirmed and held than I do when I spend an afternoon at the New Beacon bookshop surrounded by the work of writers who uplift black voices and stories. It is a second home, a heartbeat and a legacy that we must protect now and in the years to come.”Simultaneous exhibitions to mark the 60th anniversary of Yves Saint Laurent’s first collection are to be held by six leading Paris museums in an unprecedented tribute from the art world to the late French fashion designer. The events at museums, among them the Louvre and the Musée d’Orsay, will reveal how the celebrated couturier was inspired by some of the 20th century’s greatest artists including Picasso, Matisse and Mondrian. Mouna Mekouar, who curated the multi-centre event that will feature the designer’s work placed in the context of each establishment’s permanent collections, said the participation of some of France’s largest and most renowned museums was unprecedented. “I thought it would be impossible to get so many museums to agree to our idea, but they were all very interested and hugely enthusiastic from the beginning. It is the first time they have all worked together on one project,” Mekouar said. “Saint Laurent was very much inspired by art and this shows the links and dialogue between his work and the museum exhibits. We didn’t want to put the clothes in a room, we wanted them there among the permanent collections. “In this way visitors will rediscover those collections at the same time as paying homage to Yves Saint Laurent. It’s like a cultural archipelago.” Saint Laurent, who died in 2008 aged 71, was just 26 when he founded his haute couture house with the businessman Pierre Bergé in December 1961. He had moved to Paris nine years previously where his designs quickly gained notice and he was introduced to Christian Dior, then a giant in the fashion world. Yves Saint Laurent presented his first haute couture show on 29 January 1962. “I believe the work of a couturier is very much like that of an artist. In fact, I have constantly found inspiration in the work of contemporary painters: Picasso, Matisse, Mondrian,” Saint Laurent said later. “Always influenced by painting, I owe my July 1966 collection to American painters like Wesselman, Roy Lichtenstein. All my dresses were lit with landscapes, moons and sunlight,” he added. “How could I resist pop art that was the expression of my youth.” The six museums taking part in Yves Saint Laurent Aux Musées, which runs from 29 January to 15 May, are the Centre Pompidou, the Musée d’Art Moderne de Paris, the Musée du Louvre, Musée d’Orsay, Musée Picasso and the Musée Yves Saint Laurent. Each will feature different aspects of Saint Laurent’s work. At the Louvre there will be some of his most exceptional garments, including jackets embroidered with gold and crystals. At the Musée d’Art Moderne de Paris, Saint Laurent designs will echo the colours of the artists Pierre Bonnard and Raoul Dufy. The Musée d’Orsay will feature some of the evening wear he created for the Proust Ball to mark the 100th birthday of the writer whose guests dressed by Saint Laurent included Baron Guy de Rothschild and Jane Birkin. A total of 50 Saint Laurent creations will be on display as part of the exhibition as well as about 300 designs. At the Yves Saint Laurent museum, visitors will be taken through the creative process from sketch to finished garment. Mekouar spoke of the “dialogue” Saint Laurent created between “art and literature” and said the designer expressed “a whole artistic universe” through his creations. “It wasn’t just one collection but his whole life’s work that was linked to art. It’s about looking at Saint Laurent from the perspective of art. Both Saint Laurent and Pierre Bergé were great collectors of art and this had a great influence on the fashion designs,” Mekouar said. “I think he would never had said he was an artist, but today with the links between art and fashion I think we can see Saint Laurent as a creative artist.” Madison Cox, an American garden designer who married Bergé shortly before the latter’s death in 2017 who is president of the Pierre Bergé – Yves Saint Laurent Foundation said the exhibition was an extraordinary showcase “of one of the greatest innovators of French fashion”. “For Yves Saint Laurent, the fine arts were an inexhaustible source of inspiration, embracing all cultures throughout history. This constant dialogue was a key element of the designer’s boundless ingenuity and creativity,” Cox wrote.Rachel Reeves Luck plays a big part in politics and the shadow chancellor took full advantage of her good fortune when Keir Starmer tested positive for Covid just before the October 2021 budget. According to parliamentary tradition, the leader of the opposition responds to the chancellor’s budget speech, but Starmer’s absence meant Reeves stepped in and, by general consent, delivered a polished reply to Rishi Sunak. No single speech, no matter how widely praised, will be enough to revive Labour’s fortunes after four successive election defeats, and 2022 will be a crucial year for the party and for Reeves. Although the government has been floundering, the message from byelections, opinion polls and focus groups is that the public still have their doubts about Labour. The former Bank of England economist’s task as shadow chancellor is to come up with an approach to running the economy that is radical enough to be eye-catching yet also reassuring. She will need to do more than attack the Tories for higher taxes and rising inflation: she will need to start fleshing out Labour’s alternative. Larry Elliott Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala The task facing the World Trade Organization’s director general over the next 12 months is simple: to save it from irrelevance or – even worse – from falling apart completely, When Okonjo-Iweala was appointed last year, much was made of her being the first woman and first African in the role, but it was her reputation as a political operator that decided the contest in her favour. She will need skills honed as finance minister in her native Nigeria and during 25 years spent at the World Bank to navigate her way through three big issues facing the WTO. The immediate task is to find agreement to waive patent rights on Covid vaccines so that developing countries can produce their own treatments for the pandemic. Success there would enhance Okonjo-Iweala’s reputation as a political fixer and give her a better chance of resolving two longer-running issues. When it was created in 1995, the WTO had two core functions: to deliver multilateral trade deals and to settle trade disputes between member states. For the past few years it has struggled to do either under a succession of technocratic leaders. The next year will show whether Okonjo-Iweala can do better. LE Kristalina Georgieva When she was selected to succeed Christine Lagarde as the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, Georgieva was seen as a safe pair of hands, but it hasn’t quite turned out that way. She has become the latest occupant of her office to be afflicted by the curse of Washington’s 19th Street, the home of the IMF. Like Lagarde and her predecessor, Dominique Strauss-Kahn, Georgieva has been touched by scandal and only just clung on to her job last year. The row over whether she tampered with a report to give a more favourable impression of China during her previous job at the World Bank was a distraction the IMF could have done without as it sought to deal with the economic fallout from the pandemic. A slowing global recovery, upward pressure on inflation caused by supply bottlenecks, the threat of financial crisis in two of the bigger middle-income countries – Turkey and Argentina – and the buildup of worrying levels of debt in many low-income states are all pressing issues. Georgieva will have her hands full in 2022 and must show she has put her personal troubles behind her. LE Emma Walmsley The chief executive of GSK was masterminding a bold revamp of Britain’s second-biggest drugmaker when the New York activist hedge fund Elliott Management emerged on the shareholder register in April. Since then, Elliott has kept Walmsley – a former L’Oréal executive who took the helm at GSK in spring 2017 – on her toes. GSK has firmly resisted the hedge fund’s public demands that she reapply for her job before the demerger of its consumer healthcare division planned for the middle of next year. Walmsley has stuck to her plans, and has received a boost lately from a spate of good news. GSK’s long-acting HIV treatment Vocabria, which replaces daily tablets with an injection every two months, was last month recommended by the UK’s National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, which decides which drugs are available on the NHS. The company has also agreed a $1bn (£740m) contract with the US government to provide its Covid-19 treatment Sotrovimab, which has been shown to reduce hospitalisation and deaths by 79%. Yet Walmsley probably needs more successes in the drugs pipeline to keep Elliott at bay and to prove to other investors that GSK’s turnaround is under way. It will be a tense six months until the split of the business is complete. Julia Kollewe Sharon White The chair of the John Lewis Partnership has been in her post for less than two years but has already caused quite a stir. The former Ofcom boss has already closed 16 loss-making John Lewis branches, including major Birmingham and Sheffield outlets, cut thousands of jobs and shelved the annual staff bonus for 2020. The staff-owned enterprise’s “partners” are now waiting to see if that bonus can be restored through stronger online sales and new avenues of business including financial services, building homes for rent above some stores and widening distribution with outlets on local high streets. White is betting that retail alone will not deliver the kind of profit margins capable of keeping staff well remunerated, but there is a fear that her team’s new ideas are riskier bets than shops and could be a distraction. Meanwhile, back at the retail coalface there are plenty of challenges ahead. John Lewis, under attack from cheaper rivals, is expected to ditch the brand’s “never knowingly undersold” policy – a key part of its pitch to shoppers for almost a century. It’s not clear how shoppers will react. The first step towards that aim was the introduction of the cheaper Anyday range, which some see as a misstep downmarket and others as vital in recalibrating its image for younger shoppers. Waitrose is also facing tricky times. Having cut ties with the online specialist Ocado, giving new life to Marks &amp; Spencer, the supermarket faces a battalion of cheaper rivals during a period of high inflation. Finding cash to expand its newly independent online business could be a challenge. Sarah Butler Alex Mahon The chief executive of Channel 4 faces the biggest challenge of her tenure this year when the government’s push to privatise the broadcaster comes to a head. Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary, will publish her final decision on whether to sell off Channel 4 in the new year, dampening its 40th anniversary of being set up as a publicly owned, commercially funded alternative to the BBC and ITV. Mahon has her work cut out to fend off what looks to be a political fait accompli, despite widespread criticism that any new owner would have to make large cuts to its programming budget and scrap much of its commercially unattractive content to boost profits. But Mahon may yet win the day, with Channel 4 having survived about half a dozen attempts to push the privatisation agenda over the years. The most serious came under David Cameron’s government in 2016. Against what seemed insurmountable odds the broadcaster survived, with the government able to save face in a “levelling up” deal that has resulted in significant operations and more than a third of staff moving out of London, as well as the opening of a new national headquarters in Leeds and creative hubs in Bristol and Glasgow. Mahon appears to have no such sweeping strategy changes to offer that might appease ministers this time around. However, with mounting opposition from TV producers in the nations and regions arguing that privatisation is diametrically opposed to the government’s agenda of spreading wealth across the country, the battle is not over yet. Mark Sweney Debbie Crosbie Crosbie has become a dominant figure in the mid-tier banking sector, becoming the first woman to lead for two major UK institutions: TSB and, in 2022, the UK’s largest mutual lender, Nationwide. She joined TSB in 2019 from the Clydesdale Bank owner CYBG – since rebranded as Virgin Money – where she had worked for more than 20 years, becoming its chief operating officer in 2015. Crosbie since led a turnaround at TSB, after an IT meltdown in 2018 that left 1.9 million customers locked out of their accounts tarnished the bank’s reputation and led to the ousting of her predecessor, Paul Pester. During her tenure, Crosbie has cut nearly 1,000 jobs and shut nearly half of branches as part of a gruelling restructuring programme. But after three years at the helm, Crosbie leaves TSB in good stead, having led the bank back to a profit in the half year to June. She is due to replace Joe Garner as chief executive of the Nationwide building society in the first half of 2022. She joins a small cadre of female bosses in the City, which is still grappling with a male-dominated sector where men make up about 70% of senior management positions, according to the Women in Finance Charter’s latest annual review. Kalyeena Makortoff Leena Nair The appointment of the Indian-born executive as CEO of the luxury brand Chanel in December was greeted as a sign of much-needed diversity coming to fashion. The hope is that Nair’s appointment will provide an example for other brands in the industry. Nair moves to Chanel from Unilever where she was used to firsts – she was the company’s first Asian, first female and youngest ever chief HR officer. She will have challenges at Chanel, a private company that has been owned by the same family since the 1920s. Nair will take over from Alain Wertheimer, the grandson of Pierre who originally invested in Chanel. Wertheimer will remain involved as global chair. Nair will face problems familiar across fashion: the pandemic led to sales at Chanel falling by 18% in 2020. While the company rallied, with revenue growing in the first half of this year, she will want to keep that trajectory up in 2022. Some of her focus will undoubtedly be on Chanel’s workforce. Speaking to Time in 2021, she said: “Human capital is as important as financial capital.” At Unilever, Nair oversaw about 150,000 people in 190 countriesand worked on its diversity and inclusion programme. Last year it was announced that Unilever was gender balanced at management level globally. Lauren CochraneJust as the flakes of the season’s first winter storm began to fall in the Colorado foothills, Heather Diiorio, 67, and her husband walked hand in hand in a daze down South 68th Street in Louisville, a community often ranked as one of America’s most livable small towns. They had just gone to inspect their home after one of Colorado’s most destructive fires in history struck this week. “All I can say is we lived there 35 years and we lost everything,” said Diioro’s husband before emotion overwhelmed him. He declined to give his first name. He and his wife embraced neighbors, some of whom had also lost their homes in Thursday’s fires, and others who had not. “By the grace of God, we still have a beautiful house standing here,” said Steve Kingswood, 68, whose home was surrounded by the charred remains of other houses. “My wife and I will do the best we can to love our neighbors and respond to their needs.” The fire burned in a mosaic fashion as the flames and 160km/h (99mph) winds combined to act like a blowtorch to some structures, while completely missing others, mainly in the towns of Louisville and Superior. The fire destroyed at least 500 structures, mostly homes, and moved so quickly that many fled on foot or as flames licked at their cars. More than 30,000 people fled or were evacuated to stay in local recreation centers. “We still have no reports of casualties or fatalities,” the Boulder county sheriff, Joe Pelle, said in a news conference Friday. “That’s awesome news and given the events we had yesterday that’s pretty miraculous.” Pelle and the Colorado governor, Jared Polis, surveyed the fire damage from the air on Friday morning. Polis said Joe Biden called him and expedited a major disaster declaration to speed up assistance to those who suffered losses in the fire. Bin Zhang, 59, and his wife emigrated from China and worked and saved to be able to live in the Louisville home they bought two years ago that is now burned to the foundation. “We enjoyed the neighborhood and open space,” he said. “It was a peaceful place to live near a vibrant city like Boulder. The force of nature is beyond everyone’s description.” The people of Boulder county, including Louisville, have had to brace against nature’s force several times in the past decade alone. They have experienced at least four major wildfires and a historic flood, whose destruction was exacerbated by erosion caused by previous fires. This year, the region has experienced unseasonably warm temperatures and a drought. The first snowstorm of the season, abnormally late, arrived on Friday as homes still smoldered. In the summer of 2020, Colorado suffered three of the largest wildfires in its history, but those fires burned over the course of days or even weeks. Thursday’s blaze devastated suburban neighborhoods and shopping plazas with familiar stores like Target and Costco in half a day, accelerated by winds so fierce they overturned at least three semi-trailers on local highways and knocked down power lines, which are suspected of having sparked the fire. Wildfires in the American west have been burning later into the fall and into the winter, with scientists pointing to the climate crisis as the likely culprit due to rising temperatures and disrupted moisture patterns. “This hit close to home for so many of us, but also in terms of this being a fire that wasn’t a wildfire in the forest. It was a suburban and urban fire,” Polis said. “We talk about houses destroyed. Each house is not just a house. It’s a home. It’s a sanctuary of comfort and a reservoir of memories.” Throughout Louisville and Superior on Friday, yellow and black smoke rose through the air with at least one fire reigniting in Louisville. Fire patrols fanned out through the area and warned those checking on their homes to turn around because of lingering danger, including small fires, toxic smoke and unstable power lines held up by burned wooden poles. Planes flew overhead surveying the damage while police cars blocked roads. Those who wanted to reach their homes had to do so on foot in many places, including South 68th Street. “I know residents want to get back to their homes as soon as possible to assess damage,” Sheriff Pelle said. “In many of those neighborhoods that are currently blocked off it’s still too dangerous to return. We saw still active fires in many places this morning and saw downed power lines and a lot of risks that we’re still trying mitigate.” Once Zhang finished surveying his destroyed home and taking photos for his neighbors of the condition of their houses, he returned to the main road where police had blocked vehicles from entering. He encountered his wife and daughter, both in tears. His wife was too overcome to talk, but his daughter was measured, almost a bit world weary. “It’s hard to let go but things come back,” said Laura Zhang, 20. “So many people go through this kind of thing.”1 January Film Summer of Soul Disney+; Celia Amazon Prime Video; Attack the Block Netflix; A New Leaf Various To help nurse a hangover or just will in a brighter 2022, what better time for a quadruple bill of streamable classics? Some are under-seen, others pure pick-me-ups. Kickstart the morning with 2021’s best film, Summer of Soul; in the afternoon, try the goosebumpy political coming-of-age Celia; as a teatime treat, just because, Attack the Block; and lastly A New Leaf, the comedy of unlikely love from the genius Elaine May. And then? Well, then you go back to bed, of course. Danny Leigh 2 January Brain food The Pudding Rev the kids back up for their return to school with some musical STEM work courtesy of the Pudding, a digital publication whose visual essays track some of the most intriguing parts of music history. Through graphs, animations and some serious number-crunching, you can discover the rapper with the most wide-reaching vocabulary, dance along to a cute 8-bit history of boy bands, or have your Spotify tastes judged by a sophisticated AI. Data is fun! Jenessa Williams 3 January Art &amp; Book The Beano: The Art of Breaking the Rules Somerset House, London, to 6 March; The Ultimate Art Museum by Ferren Gipson End the school holidays with a lesson in insurrection, courtesy of the mavericks of Beanotown. Artist and exhibition curator Andy Holden’s everything-goes history of the kids’ comic takes in its anarchic influence on British culture and the real-life minxes and menaces now making contemporary art. Ferren Gipson’s outstanding encyclopaedic children’s art book (Phaidon, £25.99), meanwhile, manages to make a global sweep of art history – from Indian miniatures to Claes Oldenburg – playful and informative, with something for all ages. Skye Sherwin 4 January Podcast Dead Eyes Connor Ratliff landed a tiny part in the 2001 miniseries Band of Brothers. Then director Tom Hanks saw his audition tape, decided he had “dead eyes”, and replaced him. Ratliff’s funny, digressive and melancholy podcast about the experience is now in its third series. Guests have included Aimee Mann, Seth Rogen, Elijah Wood and Lost creator Damon Lindelof. No word yet on whether Hanks himself – the Godot figure here – will eventually show. Ryan Gilbey 5 January Theatre One-Woman Show Soho Theatre, London, to 15 January The hands-down funniest live comedy show of 2021 is back to brighten the dark days of January. Liz Kingsman’s parody of Fleabag, and the “messy woman” solo shows that followed in its wake, sends itself up and stacks the jokes high while taking a sharp stiletto to liberated-woman cliches. Join the queue now for tickets, which are hotter than Andrew Scott’s priest. Brian Logan 6 January Game Chicory: A Colorful Tale PC, PS4/5 January is a quiet month for new games so it offers the perfect opportunity to discover gems you may have missed. Released last summer, Chicory: A Colorful Tale is a gentle, relaxing puzzler in which you must use a magic paintbrush to bring colour to a devastated monochrome world. It sounds childlike, but through its exploration of creativity and legacy, it becomes a wonderful allegory on depression and recovery – and will provide some therapeutic joy through the dark months of winter. Keith Stuart 7 January Film The 400 Blows In cinemas François Truffaut’s 1959 debut is a luminous early masterpiece of the French New Wave. Back out today in a 4K restoration, it follows sensitive truant, tearaway and Truffaut surrogate Antoine Doinel. He is played, in one of cinema’s great child performances, by the 14-year-old Jean-Pierre Léaud, who would later reprise the role for Truffaut on four further occasions over the next two decades. RG 8 January Art The Sunken Garden Margate A literally overlooked gem, this award-winning garden is dug almost below sight-lines into Thanet’s headland, a breezy winter walk from Margate’s famed sands. First landscaped in the 1930s, it was recently brought back to life by the local community with permanent contemporary artworks added to its hardy planting scheme last autumn. These intentionally low-key additions exploring its history and ecology include sound works and a sculptural composting bin. It’s a good option for a bracing weekend walk. SS 9 January Music The Marriage of Figaro Royal Opera House, London, to 27 January There are few more uplifting ways to launch the operatic year than with Mozart’s comic masterpiece. The Royal Opera is reviving David McVicar’s lovingly detailed period production, with Riccardo Fassi as Figaro and Giulia Semenzato as Susanna this time, and Covent Garden’s music director Antonio Pappano in the pit. Andrew Clements 10 January Music Clairo Touring to 23 January; tour starts Bristol Described by the Observer as “a cinematic delight”, 23-year-old Claire Cottrill’s understated second album Sling was a quiet highlight of 2021, elegantly ruminating in a similar vein to that of Elliott Smith or Sufjan Stevens. Enjoy its acoustic intimacy for yourself as she embarks on this UK and Ireland tour. JW 11 January Film Glasgow Film Theatre The sun isn’t coming out any time soon, but let a cinema be your Sad lamp. A model for movie houses everywhere is the Glasgow Film Theatre, helping Scotland though the murk of January with typical brio. Seasons this month include films about neurodiversity and new German directors, alongside 35mm screenings of Paul Thomas Anderson’s blast of cine-vitamin D, Licorice Pizza. DL 12 January Television Landscape Artist of the Year Sky Arts; episodes available on Sky Go and Now This has always been one of the more rewarding TV competitions in terms of January self-improvement, in that you can pick up many more practical tips about how to capture a view than you can learn about, say, making a cake from watching the Bake Off tent. Stephen Mangan and Joan Bakewell again guide the contestants around coastlines, countryside and city centres, often filmed in glorious summer sunshine which is another point in the show’s favour at this time of year. Nicholas Wroe 13 January Comedy John Bishop: Right Here, Right Now Regent theatre, Ipswich; touring to 8 April He spent autumn 2021 touring the galaxy with a confused Time Lord and a humanoid dog. Now Doctor Who’s newest companion (pictured, above) gets back to what he does even better: convivial conversational standup in a rich scouse burr. January finds him work-in-progressing towards a European tour, with tales of surviving lockdown, moving to Surrey and life as a white, straight, middle-aged man at a time when those identities are losing their lustre. BL 14 January Music Celebrate the birthdays of some brilliant albums If the existential crisis of a new year has not hit quite hard enough, there is nothing like a big album anniversary to remind you of the cruel passing of time. In January 2022 alone, Klaxons’ nu-rave odyssey Myths of the Near Future turns 15 (I know!), while Daft Punk’s debut Homework celebrates it’s quarter-centenary. Dust off your iPod Nano or source a charity shop CD for true sonic nostalgia; those halcyon glowstick days have never felt so far away. JW 15 January Brain food Islamic Sound Map of China An invaluable repository for the Uyghur and Hui aural traditions the Communist state is seeking to permanently silence. British, Uyghur and Chinese ethnomusicologists have collated video and sound from festivals at the Taklamakan desert shrines, zikr chanting rituals in women’s homes, epic tales set to shawm and kettle drum melodies, the daily adhan – or calls to prayer – that have long since stopped ringing out from Ürümqi mosques. Dale Berning Sawa 16 January Art Life Between Islands: Caribbean-British Art 1950s-Now Tate Britain, London, to 3 April This huge, urgent, high-energy exhibition telling stories of crosspollination between Britain and the Caribbean packs in seven decades of history. Caribbean and British-born artists respond to histories rarely taught in British schools, taking in the legacy of slavery and imperial power, the Windrush generation, riots, police brutality and the recent “hostile environment”. SS 17 January Television Hip-Hop Evolution Netflix Having officially outpaced pop as the most commercially popular genre in the world, hip-hop has come a hell of a long way from its early beginnings. Track the adventure with Netflix’s Hip-Hop Evolution, a smart, concise documentary series that covers the key players of each era and community coast. Season three episode The Dirty South is a particular highlight, recognising the often-unsung contributions that women have made to rap. JW 18 January Television Imagine BBC iPlayer Alan Yentob’s long-running culture documentary series often manages to do the impossible: making sense of artists’ unique impulses to create. With a new episode on choreographer Wayne McGregor arriving this month, a selection of the show’s archive is already available to stream. Among the highlights are a visit to Chris Ofili’s studio in Trinidad and Tobago in 2017, Lemn Sissay exploring his adoptive childhood in 2020, and a pandemic special on the uncertain future of theatre. Ammar Kalia 19 January Theatre The PappyShow: What Do You See? Shoreditch Town Hall, London, to 23 January This energetic theatre ensemble has made a new performance about unconscious bias, focusing on how we see ourselves and others. As part of London international mime festival, the company has brought a collection of cross-genre creatives on board to help it create a multidisciplinary show that seeks to celebrate all the different parts of ourselves. Kate Wyver 20 January Comedy Katherine Ryan: Missus Charter Hall, Colchester; touring to 28 May You’re three weeks into the new year. Your resolution – and your resolutions – are fading. Who better to stiffen the resolve than swaggering Canadian comic Katherine Ryan, acknowledging no frailty whatsoever as she delivers a new set of will-to-power standup about new love, with her childhood sweetheart no less, after years of single motherhood. You can do it! She can, too! Enjoy! BL 21 January Art Testament Goldsmiths CCA, London, to 3 April From Edward Colston’s statue being dumped in the river to demands to topple the hated colonialist Cecil Rhodes from his spot at Oriel College, Oxford, who we memorialise and how, is a red-hot issue. What then will 50 artists –from established luminaries such as Jeremy Deller and Phyllida Barlow to younger guns – make of an invitation to commemorate our conflicted moment? Tackling BLM, environmental breakdown, Covid and Brexit, the responses across painting, film, performance and sculpture will veer from campaigning to deeply personal. SS 22 January Film Black Film Archive Taking an intuitive and evolving approach to curation, writer Maya Cade’s Black Film Archive presents a catalogue of Black films made from 1915 to 1979, organised by decade and accompanied by contextual writing explaining their plot and significance. Streamable movies range from box-office successes such as Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner, starring Sidney Poitier, to hidden gems like Welfare, a three-hour documentary on the US welfare system. AK 23 January Music Mahler’s Third Symphony Bridgewater Hall, Manchester The longest symphony in the repertoire, Mahler’s Third is also his most celebratory and positive, a hymn to nature, love and renewal, conceived on an epic scale. Performances are always a special event; this one comes from the Hallé Orchestra and its music director, Mark Elder, with Alice Coote as the mezzo-soprano soloist and the Hallé adult and children’s choirs. AC 24 January Game Weird West PC, PS4, XBox One If you cannot decide what sort of games you want to be playing in 2022, Weird West might be a good place to start. An overhead shooter set in a supernatural wild west, it has elements of role-playing games and stealth adventures, and its world is extremely reactive to player actions, so you carve out your own story. The developers previously worked on the classic titles Dishonored and Prey, so this promises to be a vibrant, exciting world to explore and interact with while you’re cosy at home. KS 25 January Art Gainsborough’s The Blue Boy The National Gallery, London, to 15 May Exactly 100 years after being sold to the US, Gainsborough’s The Blue Boy is back in the UK. Its loan to the National Gallery allows British viewers to reassess a maybe overfamiliar image that has gone on to play a role in modern gay politics and history as well as exerting a remarkable pull on popular culture more generally, from Cole Porter songs through to Batman and Tarantino movies. NW 26 January Brain food Kwantu Language Exchange Made a new year’s resolution to learn a new language? Africa accounts for 30% of the world’s languages but only Swahili features on Duolingo. During lockdown, the Texas-based multilinguist and Kwantu founder Khanyisa Mnyaka set about fixing that. Her first offering is a six-week beginner’s course in conversational isiXhosa. Trying your tongue at the South African language’s sonorous clicks will explode your sense of phonetic possibility. DBS 27 January Art Rachel Feinstein Gagosian Davies Street, London, to 5 March Any post-Christmas examination of the feelings provoked by a period of excess would be aided by exposure to Feinstein’s paintings, sculptures and installations. Her meticulously detailed work often pits examples of opulence from art history – spiritual and secular in this new show – against 21st-century objects of taste and desire in an unsettling excavation of luxury and materialism. NW 28 January Theatre &amp; Music Ghost Walk; Ghost Quartet For Londoners who fancy some fresh air, try Poltergeist’s geo-located audio show Ghost Walk, for ages seven and over. You download the app, wrap up warm and listen as stars including Juliet Stevenson and Paterson Joseph take you through the streets on a ghoulish guided tour. For those outside the capital, put your feet up and listen to Ghost Quartet, an unearthly and beautiful sung-through show of interwoven stories. Recorded in 2015, the gentle, folk-infused performance is now available on YouTube. KW 29 January Book &amp; Television Ways of Seeing turns 50 John Berger’s book and TV series of the same name first emerged 50 years ago and opened up areas of academic cultural study to a mainstream audience, not least in addressing issues such as the sexist history of the nude and the links between art and advertising. It remains hugely influential, right up to Emily Ratajkowski’s recent modeling memoir My Body opening with a quote from it. The full series is available to watch online. NW 30 January Podcast Talking Simulator All platforms If one of your new year’s resolutions is to understand a little more about how games are made, this podcast by the Gadget Show presenter and sometime Guardian contributor Jordan Erica Webber is a fine place to start. It is a series of short, interesting interviews with game designers, covering elements such as romance, esports, puzzles and even activism in games. If video is more your thing, the excellent People Make Games series on YouTube covers similar ground. KS 31 January Art Ida Applebroog, Right Up to Now, 1969–2021 Hauser &amp; Wirth Somerset, Bruton, to 2 May Feminist polymath Ida Applebroog was inspired by Beckett and shaped by the women’s movement, but the absurdist comic strip-style drawings that made her name are uniquely her own. Highlights here include her early skit on Galileo, reimagined as a headless chancer suppressing his daughter’s genius. The nonagenarian’s new composite abstract-figurative works continue her darkly funny, oblique explorations of power dynamics. SSThe start of a new year always makes one feel inclined to do something new, whether it’s taking up knitting, committing to a workout regime or, for the more ambitious among us, making a film. In a suitable spirit of beginnings, Mubi annually serves this impulse with its First Films First series of essential debut features by major film-makers – though most of them, admittedly, don’t inspire a surge of hopeful “I could do that” confidence. Mubi’s debut selections this year are a formidable bunch, beginning with their admittedly pretty downbeat New Year’s Day pick, Andrea Arnold’s sharp, lean, unshakable revenge drama Red Road (2006), which set the tone for one of the great sensory film-making careers in British cinema. That’s followed up with Roy Andersson’s A Swedish Love Story, a gentle, tender coming-of-age romance from 1970, drawing inspiration from the likes of Miloš Forman, that you’d scarcely recognise as the work of the man latterly known for his arch absurdist formalism. Other highlights from the Mubi lineup include Chadian director Mahamat-Saleh Haroun’s lively, Godard-referencing docudrama Bye Bye Africa (1999), built around a fictionalised version of the director himself; Lucile Hadžihalilović’s La bouche de Jean-Pierre (1996), with its vivid, unnerving evocation of teenage trauma and abuse; and British film-maker Daniel Kokotajlo’s vastly moving Apostasy (2017), about a family riven by Jehovah’s Witness law. It’s a very fine group of films, though it does rather create the impression that directors can only start their careers by plunging into the heart of despair. To carry the theme beyond Mubi’s mini festival, then, there are more comforting debut features to be found among Hollywood classics – none perkier than the ever-cheering sailors-on-leave musical On the Town (1949; Amazon), which gave both Stanley Donen and Gene Kelly their first directorial credit. The 1940s also gave us the most celebrated and prodigious debut film of all time: even if you don’t subscribe to the enduring awe surrounding Orson Welles’s Citizen Kane (1941; BBC iPlayer), you’d be hard-pressed to find many first features executed on such a robustly ambitious scale. From the same year, you hear less talk about John Huston’s immortal noir The Maltese Falcon being among the great debuts – only because it’s so supremely hardboiled, you assume he’d been directing for aeons. Mid-century New Wave auteurs had an eerie habit of debuting with films fully formed in aesthetic and outlook: take the French pair of Agnès Varda’s fierce, precise La Pointe Courte (1955; Curzon) and Jean-Luc Godard’s still radical, still jazz-cool Breathless (1960; BFI Player), for example. Over in Italy, Luchino Visconti arrived in the sparest, most ruthless form of his career with Ossessione (1943; Amazon); the recently departed Lina Wertmüller began with clear-eyed sociopolitical observation in her lovely 1963 debut The Basilisks (Amazon). John Cassavetes didn’t just arrive, but announced a whole new form of independent cinema with his wrenching Shadows (1959; Amazon), just as Ken Loach did for British realism a decade later in the potent, anti-swinging 60s snapshot Poor Cow (1967; BFI Player), while Steven Soderbergh rewrote the Cassavetes indie playbook three decades later in his pithy, witty sex, lies, and videotape (1989; Apple TV). In my lifetime, few debuts have announced a major directorial career as tellingly and evocatively as Claire Denis’s sensuous, post-colonial reflection Chocolat (1988; BFI Player), Quentin Tarantino’s bloody, chatty, nasty shoot-’em-down Reservoir Dogs (1992; Amazon) or Jordan Peele’s ghoulishly funny race-hate horror Get Out (2017; Google Play). I can only hope that some of my favourite recent debuts, including Maggie Gyllenhaal’s knotty psychodrama The Lost Daughter (2021; now on Netflix) and Serbian director Milica Tomović’s raucous, politically inflected farce Celts (2021; Google Play), lead to similarly sustained greatness. Also new on DVD and streaming Malignant (Warner Bros) James Wan’s utterly unhinged, reality-blurring horror film died a swift death in cinemas last year, but a cult following has been quick to form, cheered on by kitsch-loving critics – not surprising for a genuinely eccentric, spirited film that rejects studio genre formula. Venom: Let There Be Carnage (Sony) Speaking of eccentric studio genre fare, 2018’s Venom was both deliriously stupid and a refreshingly loose-limbed deviation from stiffly moralistic superhero tradition. Andy Serkis’s sequel is, if anything, even more so, with the actor-film-maker unsurprisingly giving free rein to Tom Hardy’s loopy, physically immersed performance of a hybrid human-alien vigilante. Sure, why not? In the Realm of the Senses (Sony) The Criterion Collection welcomes Japanese film-maker Nagisa Oshima’s once controversial, still nervy 1976 erotic drama to its ranks. This glittering, high-definition transfer has the usual array of extras, though the film’s frank, upsetting study of obsessive, escalating power plays between a hotel maid and her abusive boss speaks for itself, passing barely perceptibly from transcendent beauty to stomach-churning violence.There is a pothole on the Bristol Road just north of Nailsea, north Somerset, which I cycled over at about 30mph back in June. It casually blew out both my tyres; somehow I managed to skid, on my two flats, to a stop. It is in moments like this that your vulnerability as a cyclist comes into focus, and you realise how little there is between you and death: a bit of plastic on your head, a thin bit of Lycra, your wits and skill on the bike. Britain’s roads are in a terrible state thanks to austerity. According to the RAC, 6% of B and C roads are in need of repairs, a proportion that has remained the same for the past five years. It is bad for cars, but even worse for cyclists riding in the gutter. One thing you quickly learn when out riding, as I have been for more than 300 hours this year, is you have to pay attention. Vehicles can appear at any point and will do anything. I have been pushed into hedges by two-tonne SUVs, almost T-boned by hatchbacks, forced to dice with death in narrow bike lanes. It is simply accepted that this is what cycling is: taking your life in your hands every time you get in the saddle. I have not always been a Cyclist with a capital C. I used my bike to get to school, to commute to work in London, to just get around. That all changed thanks to the pandemic. I suddenly had nothing to do and seemingly endless time to explore new places by bike. I found that cycling was not only something to occupy my time, or even just to keep me fit; it benefited my mental health enormously. Last year I cycled 4,039 miles around Southampton and then Bristol; this year I reached 5,000 miles, mostly in the south-west. I have been to Wales, to Cheddar Gorge and the New Forest on my steed. It truly is the best way to explore, to understand the geography of a place. Pacing along country lanes, almost at one with nature, never gets old. The freedom that comes with my bike also opens up my mind. It is not too much of a stretch to say I might not have survived the pandemic without it. As thrilling as it can be, road cycling in the UK is still incredibly perilous, and there is evidence the pandemic has made matters worse. New data from the Department for Transport showed that 89 cyclists lost their lives on rural roads in 2020, compared with 60 the previous year. Britain is dominated by the private car – but it doesn’t have to be this way. Last year during the height of the first lockdown, Boris Johnson said that he would usher in a “golden age” for cycling: £2bn was promised, with £250m of that forming part of an emergency “active travel” fund to be used by councils to build “protected space for cycling”. Cycling was so much nicer during those halcyon days of spring and summer 2020, when cycle lanes were temporarily installed on largely empty roads, and active travel seemed to be a genuine priority. Comparatively, though, £27bn was put towards roadbuilding in the 2020 budget, which includes 50 projects, from a tunnel on the A303 near Stonehenge to a Lower Thames Crossing linking Kent and Essex. While this investment was reviewed thanks to the pandemic, it is clear where the Conservative government’s priorities lie. The truth is that cycling infrastructure is still seen as something to be tacked on. It is a token gesture towards a greener and healthier country; often as weak as a painted white bicycle on the asphalt. These drawings offer surprisingly little protection against the SUV roaring past you at 60mph. I have lost track of the amount of times a driver has had a go at me for holding them up, or not pulling over – for simply existing. It is all too usual for someone to pass me so close that I wobble, and all I can do is shout expletives into the wind. Cyclists are forced to share the road space with everyone else, and are then abused, intimidated and even spat at – as I have been three times this year – just for having the temerity to be precariously occupying a tiny amount of that shared space. How can we become a “great cycling nation”, as Grant Shapps put it in May 2020, when it is so scary to ride a bike? It is fine for me to pontificate about all the benefits of cycling, but without the provisions to ride safely, many will never try it. Cycling isn’t the preferred activity for millions in the Netherlands because it is a flat country: it is because there has been consistent investment in infrastructure there. According to the 2018 book Building the Cycling City, the Dutch government spends £22 per person, a year, on cycling – 15 times the amount spent in England. The Netherlands has 35,000km (21,750 miles) of fully separated cycle lanes – infrastructure that separates the motor vehicle from the bike, and both from pedestrians at the same time. We need more people on bikes. For the sake of the environment, obviously, but also for the sake of public health. My addiction to pedalling is not going to abate anytime soon – I am hooked now – but cycling needs to be taken seriously if we are to achieve a better world. The bicycle is an emancipatory machine, and it should be safe for everyone to use one on our roads. Adam Becket is digital staff writer for Cycling WeeklyArsenal Mikel Arteta is eager to fine-tune a squad that looks increasingly capable of a top-four push but may have to wheel and deal. He would like to address a lack of depth in midfield, perhaps using the sale of Ainsley Maitland-Niles to part-fund any signing, while Nicolas Pépé’s future is uncertain so a right-sided forward may be on the agenda. Arsenal need a new long-term option at centre-forward, too, but even if Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang is frozen out for good that is likelier to be addressed in the summer. Budget Will be sales-dependent but could reach £30m. Nick Ames Aston Villa Steven Gerrard is expected to be backed in his first window in charge. A defensive-minded midfielder is high on Gerrard’s wishlist after Marvelous Nakamba suffered a knee injury which may rule him out for the rest of the season, while reinforcements at full-back are also wanted. The Southampton midfielder Oriol Romeu was tracked in the summer, as was his club-mate, James Ward-Prowse. Villa have been linked with moves for the Liverpool defender Joe Gomez, and Glen Kamara, who excelled under Gerrard at Rangers. Budget Around £30m. Ben Fisher Brentford The Bees’ squad depth has been tested to the limit by injuries and, even though relegation looks unlikely, they have been exposed at times. Thomas Frank would like to sign a right wing-back, although he appears to have missed out on the Monaco-bound Brazilian Vanderson. Goalkeeping cover for the injured David Raya and competition for the strike duo of Ivan Toney and Bryan Mbeumo could also come into consideration. Some squad players could depart on loan. Budget Around £20m should secure them the calibre of players they need. NA Brighton Another striker who could lighten the load on Neal Maupay’s shoulders has remained elusive but Graham Potter will know that if he can find one then it could make all the difference. Brighton welcomed back Danny Welbeck from his injury layoff as they ended their winless run against Brentford on Boxing Day and have been linked with a £20m move for Blackburn’s Ben Brereton Díaz in January. They may face some competition given the Chile international’s goalscoring record so this season but with several key players coming back from injury, Potter is likely to be able to concentrate his resources on his main targets. Budget Around £20m. Ed Aarons Burnley As with any side in relegation trouble, Burnley will be keen to add to their brittle squad. Sean Dyche has spoken to the owners about bringing in some new faces. Scoring has been an issue, so a striker and added creativity are the areas the club plan to target. Summer signing Maxwel Cornet – their biggest attacking threat – is off to the Africa Cup of Nations, making the matter far more urgent for the club, as they rely heavily on him. Budget They do not work to specific numbers but it is safe to say there is money to spend on requisite signings. Will Unwin Chelsea Much depends on whether Ben Chilwell makes a quick recovery from the knee injury he sustained against Juventus in November. Chilwell needs surgery and they could go into the market if the left wing-back is ruled out for the season. Everton’s Lucas Digne is an option. Meanwhile Thomas Tuchel could revive his interest in the Sevilla centre-back, Jules Koundé, and there could be a move for the Monaco midfielder Aurelien Tchouameni. Budget Tuchel should have funds given that Chelsea missed out on Kounde last summer. Jacob Steinberg Crystal Palace A busy summer window that saw Palace strengthen their squad in several departments means that it’s unlikely to be a busy window for Patrick Vieira and co. The Frenchman has insisted that despite the absence of Wilfried Zaha, Cheikhou Kouyaté and Wilfried Zaha for the Africa Cup of Nations he is only interested in signing players who can improve his side. They have been linked with Roma forward Borja Mayoral and Napoli midfielder André-Frank Zambo Anguissa, although both may be out of reach for now. Budget Funds in place if the right player becomes available. EA Everton There is a pressing need for Everton to act swiftly and successfully in this transfer window with the squad’s weaknesses exposed regularly and criticism of the club’s direction under Farhad Moshiri mounting. Rafael Benítez, who spent merely £1.7m in his first window as manager, wants to strengthen in both full-back positions – Dynamo Kiev left-back Vitaliy Mykolenko and Rangers’ right-back Nathan Patterson are targets – while a central midfielder, possibly Newcastle’s Sean Longstaff, is also on his wishlist. Budget “I think we will have some money to spend but I don’t think that will be too much,” said Benítez, whose budget could be shaped by whether Lucas Digne stays or leaves. Andy Hunter Leeds Marcelo Bielsa’s budget is said to be “tight”, but the Leeds manager has always preferred to work with a relatively small nucleus of senior professionals. Injuries to, among others, Patrick Bamford and Kalvin Phillips this season have suggested that he might have taken this policy too far and, with relegation now a real danger, some spending is expected. The Reading central midfielder John Swift is one target, but another striker is also required. Ditto an extra defender. Budget Might stretch to £20m. Louise Taylor Leicester Brendan Rodgers hopes good news is on the horizon, with a raft of key players set to return to fitness in the coming weeks, lessening the need to strengthen defensively this window. Rodgers is hopeful of having Caglar Soyuncu and Jonny Evans back before the end of the month, while James Justin and Wesley Fofana are into the final stages of their rehab. A shopping spree is off the menu but no club in the division is likely to have more players at the Africa Cup of Nations, with at least four players set for duty. Budget Around £10m. BF Liverpool Stellar names continue to be linked with Anfield but, as previous windows have demonstrated, Jürgen Klopp is reluctant to buy in January unless a golden opportunity (Virgil van Dijk) or a bargain (Takumi Minamino) presents itself. Last year he broke with the habit of avoiding short-term measures to sign Ozan Kabak and Ben Davies on deadline day, only to discover better solutions to a defensive crisis under his nose in Nat Phillips and Rhys Williams. The Africa Cup of Nations will stretch resources up front although Mohamed Salah and Sadio Mané will potentially miss only two Premier League games. Budget Liverpool made a profit on transfers in the summer, underlining how stringently the club is operating in Covid times and while building a new stand on Anfield Road. AH Manchester City Ferran Torres has joined Barcelona but this may be Manchester City’s only major piece of business as Pep Guardiola’s wish to sign a No 9 appears one to be revisited in the summer window. A glance at the Premier League table shows why: the champions lead as they continue to be a formidable force. Guardiola’s is a close-to-perfect squad. Budget £100m-plus but likely to be kept until the summer. Jamie Jackson Manchester United A central midfielder of Declan Rice’s quality remains the No 1 target but Ralf Rangnick’s hopes of landing the West Ham player or AN Other in this window appears remote. A centre-back who can challenge Raphaël Varane, Harry Maguire and Victor Lindelof is the next priority but, again, this may have to wait until the close season. The interim manager has green-lit Anthony Martial’s desire to leave so the forward may do so in January – possibly on loan. Budget £50-100m. JJ Newcastle Talk about a paradox. Newcastle may be the world’s richest club but they are also in acute relegation peril and, accordingly, not the most attractive destination for top talent. While reinforcing the defence – where Atlético Madrid’s Kieran Trippier and Lille’s Sven Botman rank among the assorted targets – remains Eddie Howe’s priority, central midfield also requires bolstering. Fresh injuries to his two best players, Allan Saint-Maximin and Callum Wilson, have made frontline recruitment another unexpected imperative. Budget Financial fair play rules would allow Newcastle to spend up to £200m. LT Norwich There is hardly a position on the pitch where Norwich could not do with reinforcement. Only at centre half, where City have five first-team options, are there the requisite numbers, but with 31 goals conceded it’s hard to argue there isn’t room for improvement there too. The need is greatest in attack where Norwich have scored only eight times in 18 games, but the club’s sporting director, Stuart Webber, has made clear that manager Dean Smith will not have money to spend unless players leave. Max Aarons, the subject of interest from Tottenham and Everton, is the most saleable asset. Budget £5m maximum. Paul MacInnes Southampton Ralph Hasenhüttl is relaxed after adding greater depth to his squad in the summer, but the Saints could look to utilise the one permitted loan spot they have left. They could also try to replicate the success they have had with teenage sensation Tino Livramento, a £5m pickup from Chelsea, by luring a youngster from a rival with the carrot of first-team opportunities. They have a decision to make over whether to extend 40-year-old goalkeeper Willy Caballero’s deal beyond January. “I’m not a big friend of transfers in the January window,” Hasenhüttl says. Budget Around £5m. BF Tottenham Antonio Conte wants a centre-half and someone for the right flank but he knows that, even though Daniel Levy says he will always back him for the right player, sales will be vital to the extent of that backing. Virtually everybody in the squad has his price and the key question will be whether they are realistic – with particular focus on those for Joe Rodon, Steven Bergwijn, Harry Winks and Dele Alli. Budget Levy could stump up £20m-£25m. On the other hand, he could not and it will be largely sell-to-buy. David Hytner Watford The only top-flight team yet to keep a clean sheet, Watford will at the very minimum seek to strengthen the centre of their defence this month, while with the summer gamble on Danny Rose having apparently failed a left-back would also be useful. The Hornets rarely spend heavily on defenders and January is not usually a time for bargains, so loan moves – Sead Kolasinac has been linked – might be preferred. Budget Limited while relegation remains a threat – perhaps £10m. Simon Burnton West Ham West Ham desperately need a new centre-back after losing Angelo Ogbonna and Kurt Zouma to serious injuries. Liverpool’s Nat Phillips, Bournemouth’s Lloyd Kelly and Burnley’s James Tarkowski have been targeted by David Moyes, who needs strong backing from the board. West Ham’s squad looks stretched and they would also like reinforcements in attack. Manchester United’s Jesse Lingard is still on their wishlist and Moyes likes the Blackburn striker, Ben Brereton Díaz. Links with Sparta Prague’s Adam Hlozek also refuse to go away. Budget Could be as much as £30m following Daniel Kretinsky’s arrival on the board. JS Wolves A low-key window is likely, with no major incomings expected. Wolves could recall Rúben Vinagre and Dion Sanderson from loans to cover for the Morocco defender Romain Saïss heading to the Africa Cup of Nations and give Bruno Lage a chance to cast his eye over his options. Going forward, Wolves are set to be boosted by the returns of Jonny, Pedro Neto and Hwang Hee-chan from injury before the end of January. Rúben Neves and Adama Traoré have admirers but it is difficult to envisage Wolves sanctioning sales unless clubs offer silly money. Budget Up to £10m. BFBoris Johnson steps down, to be replaced by David Frost – or Jeremy Hunt, or Michael Gove, or Peppa Pig. French presidential elections are beset by civil unrest over pandemic restrictions. Russia mounts some kind of incursion in eastern Ukraine. China waits for an opportune moment to overrun Taiwan. And the world runs out of Greek letters to attach to Covid variants. Yes, it’s the time for pundits and predictions – a new year stretching ahead and no shortage of views on what it will deliver. Some things seem dead certs: elections in Brazil, the US, Hungary and France. A new Covid wave to grapple with. A platinum jubilee. A controversial World Cup – and Winter Olympics. But what about the unknown unknowns? We asked the Guardian’s 1 million supporters to make their predictions. The picture painted by a colourful spray of submissions was an alternative foretelling of the year ahead – and not hugely cheerful. Geopolitically, Ukraine and Taiwan seem most vulnerable, but there were also predictions of showdowns in Bosnia-Herzegovina, Ethiopia and Iran, of something stirring on Russia’s border with the Baltic republics, and of deepening hunger in Afghanistan and parts of sub-Saharan Africa. Donald Trump declares for the 2024 presidential race after the Republicans wrest back control of Congress; but populists and the far right fall into retreat elsewhere. Everyone will have slightly more money – but that’s just another way of saying inflation will march upwards. Higher interest rates cause consumer pain around the world, and a Chinese property market collapse has a palpable financial impact. Food shortages bite. The UK government has to nationalise electricity provision, amid the wretched decay of privatised industries struggling with underinvestment. Businesses pursue purpose and sustainability like never before, mindful this is the best way to retain fleet-footed talent. An incipient desertion of Facebook and Twitter becomes a proper exodus; cryptocurrencies collapse in value faced with the twin threats of regulation and the issue of official digital currencies. Airports, supermarkets and lampposts become EV charging hubs. Gigabattery is voted word of the year, just ahead of microbiome, plyscraper, nanodrone and wolf warrior. There will be digital daemons for all. Rain patterns change and there are further startling weather events in unexpected parts. A cyberattack causes major infrastructure disruption. Billions of trees are planted, but not all of them in the right places. Horses are increasingly used as a method of transport. Assisted dying becomes bigger business than ever, as planned death becomes something of a performance. There is a backlash against the availability of online pornography as a new social division emerges between sybarites and prudes. Fertility rates plummet amid a crisis over sperm counts. Overall, it will be a marginally better year than 2021. A survey of supporters found 50.5% optimistic about the new year, compared with 49.5% who were pessimistic. A selection of supporters’ predictions for 2022 Europe will be facing two tricky crises: the refugee situation in Belarus and newly sparked tensions in Serbia, both potential candidates for another war in Europe. Extreme civil unrest due to the harsh Covid restrictions imposed by the governments. War between the US and China over Taiwan. Christine Brösenhuber Horses will begin to be used for travel and will appear in towns and cities. To enable this to happen, horse parks will be provided where owners can safely leave their horses while they pop to the shops, go to work, nip to the GP ... Horses run on grass – it makes so much sense. Penny Nicholson Prediction of a repeat of the 1920s following the Spanish flu pandemic ... if it is correct it will result in increase in social disease, alcoholism and drug taking ... others much more relaxed will reap the benefits of an alternate life Covid-19 allowed them to see. Elaine Hasty You’ll be able to personalise the sound of your electric car and the streets will become a cacophony of Clash meets Tchaikovsky. You’ll be able to select your own online daemon to accompany you to online office meetings: it will sit in the corner of your screen and scratch, titter, scowl, chuck pips etc while you nod seriously at your boss. Insects will be the new crisps, until people realise how gross insect farming is. Coralie Wilson We’ll start to see a more purpose-orientated approach in business and in working life. The “great resignation” has encouraged many people to seek out work that feels personally meaningful to them, and I expect this trend will continue in 2022. As employees start to realign their working lives around a sense of personal meaning, it will eventually become clear to employers that purpose is a priority. This will encourage business owners and leaders to take a more intentional approach to strategy and management, figuring out what they can offer their employees and stakeholders, and working to make a meaningful impact in the world. Eloise Skinner Enough people will leave Facebook and Twitter to make them unviable. Nick Jones There will be bigger splits across society with those vaccinated v anti-vaxxers. This will lead to further disinformation and probably further violence and inequalities across society especially where compulsory vaccines are introduced. Gerry Lee Macron will be re-elected. A definite 55% of Scottish yes for independence. A fourth dose of vaccine starting in May. The relationship between France and the UK will turn even sourer. Anna-Laure Damongeot I see two major universal trends. The first that one half of the population of human beings of this world will evolve into a kinder and more generous species, grateful to have survived the worst existential crisis in our recent history. The other half, which has sunk into an alternative reality of viewing fellow people as enemies of their race, will have a rude awakening and lose considerable ground because their own clans will desert them even as their predictions keep getting exposed as hate and not facts. Aruna Hariharan A growing youth movement of authentic and knowledgeable activists who demand transformative change in our governance systems. Steve Martin Sinn Féin/Alliance form Northern Ireland government at Stormont in May causing civil war in the Conservative party as their negotiating stance on the NI protocol with Europe collapses. Further Brexit issues with border controls and supply chain problems ramp up the pressure on Johnson. He does not rise to the challenge and further infighting results in a leadership challenge. Paul Collins Julian Assange freed and allowed to return to Australia with his wife and two sons. Mariam Dessaive I predict that Boris will further seek to weasel his way out of No 10 because he doesn’t like being PM when it’s difficult. Kathy Duggan A major crypto crash, perhaps because of regulatory crackdowns and/or the introduction of one or more official digital currencies. Geoff Barnard A significant decline of the far right in many countries. A bigger “normality” of our lives facing Covid-19 (vaccination and weaker variants). A more severe crisis between western countries and China and Russia. Luiz Bastos I think that countries where there’s no free speech, a lot of corruption, poverty and very high Covid deaths will face big trouble (India, Egypt, Iran, even maybe Russia and China), if not in 2022 then in the next 10 years. Erika Claus Petiot Due to political embarrassment of stories of exploitation of overseas workers in Qatar, Fifa moves World Cup location to the more sensitive choice of Saudi Arabia, only after Belarus turned down the opportunity. Patrick Brosnan With four major Covid-19 variants in two years we can expect another two in 2022. Could be more with the lack of take-up of vaccines worldwide. Eventually, we’ll run out of Greek letters. Dave Bartlett There will be a series of scandals of older vulnerable people coming to significant harm as a result of the lack of social care availability. Peter Loose We’ll all move to the Orkneys to soak up the surplus electricity. As a result there will be a run on warm clothing especially puffer jackets. As a result of that the eider duck population will crash. Jane Edmonds While the west is distracted by further Covid outbreaks, Russia invades Ukraine and China attacks Taiwan – simultaneously. The west subsequently does not know which way to turn. George Stephens China will begin to take serious measures on climate emissions, and Australia and Canada’s fossil industries will suffer accordingly. Norm Mohamid There will be a major disruption caused either by a cyberattack or by failure of GPS – caused by a large solar storm or a system problem. We have become far too dependent on technology that is vulnerable to widespread failure. Martyn Thomas More people than ever will give up on the US and Canadian costs of living and move to Mexico and Panama. Suzanne Gravelle 2022 is going to be significantly worse even than 2021 and 2020. Large increases in the price of food, fuel, energy, hospitality. Maybe even food shortages. More extreme weather events, including more, and worse, in the UK. Terrifying clampdowns on freedom of speech and the right to protest – eg “protesters” being imprisoned for sharing views and communicating with each other online. And who knows what is going to happen with Covid? The shocking thing is that, even with 2020 and 2021 being as awful as they have been, they are better than any year we’ll see for the rest of our lives. Cathy Eastburn The Covid variants will have to be named in Sanskrit, after we run out of Greek letters. Mike Allen I hate to say this, but there will be an increase in tensions over the Ukraine, Taiwan, and Iran’s nuclear programme. This will not be triumph of the west. The US will retreat from these facedown, and Ukraine will fall into the orbit of Russia, Taiwan will fall to China, without a fight, at the early signs of invasion, and Iran will find itself on the receiving end of Israeli attacks on its nuclear programme. Whether it retaliates effectively, along with its allies Hezbollah and to a lesser extant Hamas, will determine Israel’s fate. The 2022 elections in the US will lead to a return to Republican majorities in both ouses. Harry Rajchgot The Queen abdicates, Charles sees the light and decides to retire to his potting shed, William stands down for the sake of his family, Harry says “no way”, everyone else in line looks the other way … and a republic is declared. Myanah SaundersIt’s the time of year for reinventions – or, perhaps more accurately, preparing for reinventions. For buying the diet book, drawing up the new morning routine, bookmarking the therapists’ websites or purchasing the storage cabinets for the soon-to-be-perfectly-organised house. As with all attempts at personal transformation, at new year or otherwise, this is the fun part. You get to experience all the excitement of becoming an entirely different person, without having yet had to put in the effort – and without having failed. Like untrodden early morning snow, the vision of who you’ll become remains pristine. Usually, though, something inside you knows the truth: in a few days’ time, the whole thing will have turned into unpleasant grey slush. Personal reinventions fail partly for the obvious reasons: you set your goals too high; or your existing obligations at work or home get in the way; or you find (who could have imagined it?) that the unimpressive level of self-discipline you’ve demonstrated for your entire life until this moment can’t magically be tripled overnight. But there’s also a deeper problem with quests for wholesale transformation, which explains why they rarely work as intended – and why, as 2022 begins, embracing the existing version of yourself, with all its messiness and imperfections, might be the most transformative thing you’ve ever done. The core of the trouble is that schemes for constructing a New You – whether in every area of life, or just one major one, such as your relationship with your children, or your physical fitness – are always devised by the Old You, who by their own admission has some pretty glaring issues. (Otherwise why would you bother to envision a new one?) You’ve got no good reason to trust this dubious character’s thoughts about reinvention; indeed, it’s likely they’re using what looks like “reinvention” to reinforce old hang-ups instead. And so, for example, your vow to become more productive this year might just stem from your old belief that you’re obliged to fulfil every demand made by those around you, when a better way forward might be to start strategically letting a few people down. Likewise, your intention to make this the year you find your soulmate might simply represent your conviction that you don’t have what it takes to cope on your own. Even if it works, the so-called reinvention will only end up entrenching the status quo. “No one awakens in the morning, looks in the mirror and says, ‘I think I will repeat my mistakes today’ or, ‘I expect today I will do something stupid, repetitive, regressive and against my best interests,’” writes the Jungian psychoanalyst James Hollis. “But frequently, this replication of history is precisely what we do.” One consequence is that while you’ll fail to pull off a total transformation of your personality – that would entail the impossible feat of somehow jumping outside your own life – you probably will end up feeling worse about the life you have. “Focusing your mind on an imagined future where you’re someone different makes your now-self inevitably ‘less-than’,” says Jocelyn K Glei, host of the Hurry Slowly podcast, who recommends using the new year to take stock of the preceding year’s transformations instead. The alternative to reinvention – making a wholehearted commitment to accepting who you already are – is liable to sound horribly cheesy, or at best like a matter of settling for a mediocre life. But as the celebrated psychologist Carl Rogers famously noted, the very opposite is the case: “The curious paradox is that when I accept myself just as I am, then I can change.” When you no longer imagine you must transform yourself, in order to justify your existence on the planet, you’re finally able to do so, in small ways and large. The stakes are lower, now that your self-worth no longer hangs in the balance. “There’s a quiet power in forgiving our flaws, missteps and perceived shortcomings,” says Madeleine Dore, author of I Didn’t Do the Thing Today: Letting Go of Productivity Guilt, out this month. “Often when we accept ourselves, we’re more likely to get the best from ourselves, because we’re better placed to look at what we need to thrive, rather than change.” The psychotherapist Bruce Tift suggests a thought experiment: imagine whatever issue you struggle with now – the trait in yourself you wish you didn’t possess, the behaviour in which you wish you didn’t engage – persisting to the very end of your days. What if you’ll always be something of a procrastinator? What if you never entirely lose your tendency to lash out at others when upset at yourself? When I run this experiment on myself, I feel deflated at first. Hold on – you mean I’ll never get to the part of life that’s problem-free? But then comes a sense of a burden being lifted. What a relief: I get to drop that stupid fantasy and focus on the real world, which is where real changes can happen. The self-help writer Mark Manson describes how this might work in the context of social anxiety: “Paradoxically, accepting that you’re just not a confident person and you’re always going to feel a little off around other people will begin to make you feel more comfortable and less anxious around others. You won’t judge yourself, and then you’ll feel less judged by them as well.” There’s a kind of defeat that needs accepting here: a willingness to concede that, by the perfectionistic standards to which you’ve been holding yourself, you have already failed. There’s no going back. You’ll never unwaste the time you tell yourself you’ve wasted, or undo the bad things you’ve done. Which is great, because it means you get to stop trying to evade the unavoidable mess of existence and get stuck in to a few worthwhile and pleasurable activities instead. The Zen teacher Shunryu Suzuki nailed the matter when he told his students: “Each of you is perfect just as you are – and you could all use improvement.” Yes, it’s a paradox. You’ll just have to deal with that, too.If you pay close enough attention you will notice that there are only three types of dating show: “laughs”, “influence” and “genuinely wanting romance”. The first category, laughs, barely counts: participants on these one-episode dating shows are rarely in it for anything other than a story, ironically enough to use as a conversation starter on subsequent, untelevised dates – “An interesting fact about me? Oh, uh: my episode of Dinner Date is still available on ITV Hub for the next 19 days”, “Ah, yeah? I got sent home after the penis round on Naked Attraction”. Second is the blockbuster dating format, where everyone entering a villa half-hopes not for love but for a significant uptick in Instagram followers and the offer to open a shop in a local mall for a head-spinning amount of cash. These shows litter our screens in the summer months – a Love Island, an Ex on the Beach, a Ready to Mingle. (Play the game right and you can enter the Love Island villa at the start of the summer and leave the Celebs Go Dating villa at the end of the following winter.) Then you get what Channel 4 excels in: taking people who are 30 or almost 30 or a bit past 30, and all emotionally damaged by something in their romantic history, and throwing them into a speculative dating show that, if sociologists enacted it in the 60s, we’d be talking about now in the hushed tones we use when we mention the Stanford prison experiment. Anyway: welcome to The Language of Love (Channel 4, Tuesday, 10pm). It is exactly as ridiculous as it sounds: six lovelorn Brits do their little pre-roll interviews saying they’ve tried everything and they just can’t find the missing piece, all they want is love, and they’re willing to travel to the Costa del Sol to find it, and blah blah blah blah blah. Then they get on a rickety coach and exchange tentative banter with each other (lads blasting the question “OI, WHAT’S YOUR TYPE?” at each other like a football) as it winds up a hill. Then Davina McCall pops out, the pedigree presenter to end all other presenters, and tells them: you’ve all tried everything, you all failed to find the missing piece, you all want love and, guess what, today you’re going to find it. But guess what guess what: none of the sexy singles we’re going to introduce you to can speak English, and none of you can speak Spanish. You have to negotiate heavy petting with the same staccato elan you use to order an omelette at a Tenerife hotel. Channel 4 more than any British channel understands the need to fill January, the most miserable of months, with a captivatingly absurd dating show. This is how they got me hooked on Married at First Sight: Australia last year. (What else was I going to do? I’d spent all my Christmas money and I wasn’t drinking.) The Language of Love seems similarly primed for an audience of people who can’t legally leave the house for whatever reason. As a result, I’m already resigned to watching it to the bitter end. After the initial group meetings between the Spanish boys and the British girls, you think: “How fun can this be, really? They keep misunderstanding each other. Nobody knows how to count. This is stupid.” Then, a banquet-style paella meal and some sangria jugs later, and the electric crackle of human chemistry is somehow overriding the language barrier, and you’re engrossed. Kimey, a medical student, is infatuated with Akonne, a surprisingly sweethearted Brummie MMA fighter. Tracy and Thalia are squabbling over the same hotel worker. The whole thing seems to be filmed on the exact same hardware they use for the grainy interior shots of First Dates Hotel, so you keep expecting Fred to turn up. Instead, as Davina and co-host Ricky Merino watch from a distant balcony, you actually spy something darker and more primal: the inherent human impulse to try to get off with someone even if you can’t confidently tell them where the library is. It doesn’t make sense that this show is as good as it is, but then it doesn’t make sense that any human would spend a fortnight trying to forge a horny lingua franca just because Davina McCall told them to, and yet here we are. This is what your January looks like. Staring into the abyss of the human condition and seeing just how deep it can go.Like every other spectacles wearer I know, I’m adamant that my prescription has deteriorated disproportionately during the pandemic. Where forgetting my glasses was once a mere inconvenience, it’s now a crisis that forces me home to retrieve them. It’s been an interesting process, beauty-wise – what one gains in not being able to see gaping pores, one loses in the ability to apply a straight swoosh of liner. Sight isn’t the only consideration. Specs cast a shadow (anti-reflective coating helps), so concealer has to work harder to brighten dark circles (I use Dior Forever Correct, £27), and thick frames can obscure hard work done on eyeshadow, which can be both a blessing and a curse, depending on the application. For days when my glasses will be on and off as often as a teenage romance (I wear a librarian’s chain from Missoma), I want eye makeup to be simple but noticeable. The solution almost always comes via a crayon. By far the easiest eyeshadow with a tremendous effort/effect ratio, crayons are a must for specs wearers. The bullet shape means that even an approximate aim lands on target. After drawing creamy colour on to the lid, I simply take a clean, fluffy brush and soften the edges. The technique is foolproof. For years, Bobbi Brown made the only great crayons (Long-Wear Cream Shadow Sticks, £25, are still the longest-lasting), but I’ve diversified to include Vieve’s Eye Wands, £21, which fill some gaps in the Bobbi shade lineup. Vieve’s Sand, a pale, warm nude, is a no-brainer lid colour on lighter skins, and a terrific brow bone highlighter on darker tones. Camel and Hazelnut are warm, neutral nudes that work on everyone (more shades coming this month). Perhaps prompted by the threat to its monopoly on crayons, Bobbi Brown has introduced some delicious new shades, too. Cashew and Shore are two endlessly useful neutrals (warm and cool, respectively) and Skyward is a universally flattering metallic chartreuse for more playful looks. All can be swiped underneath the eye and smudged in the same way, which helps enormously if your eyes appear to recede behind your glasses, as mine do. What has become absolutely crucial over time is a SimpleHuman sensor mirror (£290). Illuminated, mega magnifying and as pricey as it is indispensable, it allows me to apply, sans specs, the complex makeup looks that I once took for granted. You won’t regret a penny of the considerable outlay.The bad news for Marcelo Bielsa and Leeds is that Kalvin Phillips, their England midfielder and anchor, and Liam Cooper, their captain and usually ever-present centre-half, will be absent injured until March. Patrick Bamford is set to return to the home attack, though, after hamstring trouble and, although Bielsa’s principal striker is expected to begin on the bench, he will doubtless be anxious to enter the fray and jog Sean Dyche’s memory. Bamford did not exactly see eye to eye with Burnley’s manager during a loan stint at Turf Moor and would surely revel in proving a point by scoring the winning goal. Louise Taylor Sunday 2pm Venue Elland Road Last season Leeds 1 Burnley 0 Referee Kevin Friend This season G6 Y36 R1 6.16 cards/game Odds H 6-5 A 5-2 D 13-5 LEEDS Subs from Klaesson, Bamford, Firpo, Gelhardt, Drameh, Greenwood, McCarron, Summerville, Bate, Jenkins Doubtful None Injured Shackleton (achilles, Feb), Cresswell (shoulder, Feb), Cooper (hamstring, Mar), Phillips (hamstring, Mar), Rodrigo (heel, unknown), Struijk (foot, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y50 R1 Form DWDLLL Leading scorer Raphinha 8 BURNLEY Subs from Norris, Pieters, Bardsley, Thomas, Collins, Vydra, Cornet, Pope, Rodriguez Doubtful Cornet (hamstring), Pope (Covid), Rodriguez (Covid) Injured Barnes (hamstring, unknown), Roberts (illness, unknown), Brownhill (Covid, unknown), Long (Covid, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y34 R0 Form DDDLDL Leading scorer Cornet 5After threatening a three-way title race, Chelsea and Liverpool both find themselves on the brink of dropping out of contention. Manchester City have opened up an imposing lead at the top of the table and can look on comfortably when their rivals meet at Stamford Bridge on Sunday afternoon. The champions will take some stopping from here. They have seen Liverpool pick up one point from their last two games and the signs are ominous for Chelsea. Thomas Tuchel has mounting injury problems at the back and is dealing with the fallout from Romelu Lukaku’s explosive interview. Jacob Steinberg Sunday 4.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Stamford Bridge Last season Chelsea 0 Liverpool 2 Referee Anthony Taylor This season G14 Y58 R4 4.43 cards/game Odds H 2-1 A 7-5 D 13-5 CHELSEA Subs from Arrizabalaga, Bettinelli, Christensen, Sarr, Simons, Hudson-Odoi, Azpilicueta, Vale, Loftus-Cheek, Barkley, Saúl, Ziyech, Havertz, Soonsup-Bell Doubtful Christensen (back), Loftus-Cheek (knock), Silva (thigh) Injured Chilwell (knee, unknown), James (hamstring, unknown), Werner (Covid, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y32 R1 Form LWDDWD Leading scorer Mount 7 LIVERPOOL Subs from Kelleher, Pitaluga, N Williams, Gomez, Konaté, Jones, Milner, Morton, Keïta, Minamino, Firmino, Jones Doubtful None Injured Phillips (cheek, 15 Jan), Adrián (calf, unknown), Elliott (ankle, unknown), Origi (knee, unknown) Suspended Robertson (last of three) Discipline Y26 R1 Form WWWWDL Leading scorer Salah 15Steven Gerrard returns to the touchline for Aston Villa after recovering from Covid but will be without the suspended Tyrone Mings as well as the injured Leon Bailey and Marvelous Nakamba. Ezri Konsa and Ollie Watkins are set to start against their former club. Depleted Brentford, looking to avoid a fourth consecutive defeat, can expect to have more possession than the 23% they managed in their midweek loss to Manchester City. Tim Knowles Sunday 2pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Brentford Community Stadium Last season n/a Referee Craig Pawson This season G11 Y42 R1 3.91 cards/game Odds H 2-1 A 6-4 D 2-1 BRENTFORD Subs from Thompson, Forss, Wissa, Ghoddos, Onyeka, Valencia, Peart-Harris, Baptiste, Bidstrup, Roerslev, Zamburek, Racic, Ajer Doubtful Mbeumo (calf) Injured Henry (hamstring, 16 Jan), Martin (knee, Mar), Dasilva (hip, unknown), Fosu-Goode (hamstring, unknown), Jørgensen (hamstring, unknown), Janelt (Covid, unknown), Jeanvier (knee, unknown), Raya (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y35 R1 Form WLDWLL Leading scorer Toney 4 ASTON VILLA Subs from Steer, Sinisalo, Tuanzebe, Davis, El Ghazi, Trezeguet, Philogene-Bidace, Carney Chukwuemeka, Archer, Ramsey, Young, Traoré Doubtful None Injured Nakamba (knee, Apr), Bailey (thigh, unknown) Suspended Mings (one match) Discipline Y38 R1 Form WLWLWL Leading scorer Watkins 5A record number of people are expected to try to eat only plant-based foods this month as growing concern about the climate crisis heightens interest in the Veganuary movement. The global campaign is gathering momentum as more large employers promote it internally. This year, Harrods, Superdrug and Volkswagen UK are among the big names taking part in the Veganuary “workplace challenge” for the first time. The corporate push involves making more vegan food available at work as well as running education and morale-boosting events to help participants keep going throughout the month. More than 500,000 people signed up to take part in last year’s Veganuary, about a quarter of whom – 125,000 – were based in the UK. However, the campaign’s research suggests that potentially 10 times as many people participate and a significant number continue with plant-based diets beyond the end of the month. By the end of January, Veganuary expects to have reached the milestone of 2 million participants since its launch in 2014. It passed 1 million sign-ups in October 2020. A YouGov poll of 2,079 UK adults for Veganuary found 4% planned to participate. Extrapolated to all UK adults, that would equate to 2.7 million people. The survey found that attitudes towards veganism had become more positive over the past two years, with 36% describing it as an “admirable thing to do”. Veganuary’s Toni Vernelli said that 20 years ago if people said they were vegan, others would think it was a “weird thing to do” or “quite extreme”. “Now the first thing people say is ‘oh, I’m really cutting back on my meat and dairy consumption,’ and nine times out of 10 the reason is the environment.” At the same time, going vegan is not the food-eliminating challenge it once was. There has been a gold rush in the food industry with investors pouring billions into alt-meat and dairy brands, a trend that has resulted in thousands of new products including high-profile innovations such as plant-based bars of Cadbury Dairy Milk. With more than 50,000 products certified by the Vegan Society, there has been no let-up before the 2022 campaign, with a welter of treats arriving on supermarket shelves and menus in the coming days. A number of the most anticipated launches can be found in the cheese aisle. A vegan Babybel, made out of coconut oil and starch and wrapped in green rather than the brand’s trademark red wax, will make its debut. An almond- and oat-based Philadelphia spread is also coming. Forty-two companies in the UK have signed up to the workplace challenge this year, including Marks &amp; Spencer, the professional services firms PwC and EY, and the insurer Hastings Direct. Cian O’Brien, the director of Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles UK, said the company was focused on becoming more sustainable, and that went beyond its work on electrification. “Sustainability is broader and the opportunity to make a personal contribution through changing our habits has to be explored,” he said. Vernelli said it was important for business leaders to “set the tone”. “Our meat and dairy consumption is not sustainable and the leaders in our society have to take action on this. By taking part in the workplace challenge, they’re not only publicly showing their commitment to sustainability, but also to their staff and leading by example,” she said. “I’m think it is incredible to have someone like Harrods taking part,” she added. “It shows that veganism cuts across all demographics. It isn’t a leftwing or rightwing thing or a class thing. We’ve got participants and businesses across all the whole spectrum.”Can Manchester United start 2022 with their most convincing display yet under Ralf Rangnick when Wolves visit? Thursday’s victory over Burnley was the best performance under the interim manager but still lacked a compelling rhythm that allowed United to govern the contest and it suggested the structural stability the German yearns for is yet to form. Wolves last won at Old Trafford in the league in February 1980 – how they would love to break this sequence. Jamie Jackson Monday 5.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Old Trafford Last season Manchester United 1 Wolves 0 Referee Mike Dean This season G12 Y40 R0 3.33 cards/game Odds H 3-5 A 11-2 D 10-3 MANCHESTER UNITED Subs from Heaton, Henderson, Shoretire, Mata, Hannibal, Mengi, Lingard, Elanga, Martial, Jones, Dalot, Lindelöf, Rashford, Van de Beek, Bailly, Greenwood Doubtful Lindelöf (match fitness) Injured Pogba (thigh, 3-4 weeks) Suspended None Discipline Y39 R2 Form DWWWDW Leading scorer Ronaldo 8 WOLVES Subs from Ruddy, Moulden, Cundle, Hoever, Traoré, Dendoncker, Campbell, Silva Doubtful Silva (Covid) Injured Aït-Nouri (groin, 9 Jan), Mosquera (hamstring, Feb), Jonny (knee, Feb), Neto (knee, unknown), Boly (calf, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y31 R1 Form DDLLWD Leading scorer Hwang 4Everton bid to start the year with a much-needed victory after a torrid run that has resulted in one win from their past 11 matches. Rafael Benítez is under significant pressure from supporters sceptical from the outset owing to his Liverpool history. Their last match, on 16 December, was a draw at Chelsea, but Benítez needs wins to quieten the discontent at Goodison. By a strange quirk of fate, Brighton’s 1-1 draw at Stamford Bridge on Wednesday was the exact same outcome as Everton’s most recent game. Graham Potter’s side are in much better shape than their opponents, however, with Danny Welbeck’s equaliser lifting them into the top half of the table. Simon Mail Sunday 2pm Venue Goodison Park Last season Everton 4 Brighton 2 Referee John Brooks This season G1 Y5 R0 5 cards/game Odds H 7-4 A 15-8 D 9-4 EVERTON Subs from Begovic, Tyrer, Lonergan, Kenny, Digne, Delph, Gbamin, Iwobi, Simms, Dobbin, Tosun, Whitaker, Onyango, Welch, Davies Doubtful Davies (knee), Digne (illness), Gray (illness), Delph (illness) Injured Richarlison (calf, 15 Jan), Miba (calf, unknown), Townsend (ankle, unknown), Rondón (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y35 R1 Form LLLWLD Leading scorer Gray 5 BRIGHTON Subs from Scherpen, Steele, Webster, Connolly, Welbeck, Trossard, Moder, Alzate, Ferguson, Richards, Duffy Doubtful None Injured Dunk (knee, 23 Jan), Sarmiento (hamstring, unknown), Locadia (Covid, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y40 R1 Form DDDLWD Leading scorer Maupay 7Four decades into a career as deep and arpeggiated as it has been long, self-taught guitarist Johnny Marr is currently in the midst of a flurry of EP releases – Fever Dreams Pts 1-4, set to be compiled as a double album in February. Since revolutionising the guitar band with his trademark ringing melodies in the Smiths in the 1980s, the prolific guitarist – born Johnny Maher – has rarely paused to retune. Alongside his solo output, Marr has also been one of the most fervent collaborators of his generation, doing time in bands including Modest Mouse and the Cribs, as well as his own outfit, the Healers, and Electronic with fellow Mancunian Bernard Sumner. Pals with Pet Shop Boys and au fait with Oasis, he worked on the score for Inception. Earlier this year Marr collaborated with Hans Zimmer – and Billie Eilish – on the Bond soundtrack, and next year he is set to tour with Blondie. Marr’s status as one of the most original electric guitarists of our time is, of course, laid atop a solid grounding in British folk, best seen in his work with the late Bert Jansch. This is your chance to quiz Marr. Perhaps: does being a straight-edge vegan help with his extraordinary work rate? What was he trying to achieve with that low-flying-aircraft intro to How Soon Is Now? To submit a question, please fill in the form below, email review@observer.co.uk or tweet @ObsNewReview by Monday 10 January. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The veteran educationist Sir Tim Brighouse is in an optimistic mood. This may be a period of “doubt and disillusion”, especially as Covid threatens to disrupt another school year, but in his view such times inevitably lead to change. With that in mind, he has just co-authored a sweeping 600-page overview of modern education policy, with suggestions he hopes will contribute to a new direction. Written with the curriculum expert Mick Waters, About Our Schools divides recent history into two eras: a postwar age of “hope and optimism”, in which teachers were pretty free to do what they liked, followed by a post-Thatcher age of “markets, centralisation and managerialism”, in which the influence of inspections and league tables became all-pervasive and individual ministers could decide how skills such as subtraction should be taught in every classroom in England. The language used to describe the two ages is so leading that you could be forgiven for thinking Brighouse was a fully paid-up member of what the former education secretary Michael Gove, who straddles the book like a malign colossus, used to dismiss as “the blob”, after a 1958 science fiction film in which a gelatinous life form (in this case the progressive education establishment) engulfs everything it touches. But he is adamant that he would fit into either age. “I don’t want anyone thinking we are just romantic oldies looking back at a forgotten period,” he says. “Many good things about that postwar period were poor. Teaching wasn’t good enough and there was a less clear definition of what a good school was. “But reforms that helped to bring improvement have been poisoned by over-emphasis on autonomy and a devil-take-the-hindmost approach. Accountability has gone too far and become punitive.” His own professional life is steeped in the old local education authority model – he was chief education officer (when such things existed) in Birmingham and Oxfordshire. He also led the London Challenge, arguably one of the most successful education initiatives of the past three decades, and was a reformer who published exam results in Oxfordshire well before they were a national reality. But, as the book painstakingly points out, schools in England now have too much central government control, an incoherent jumble of different academy chains and local authorities, exams with grading systems designed to write off a significant minority of children as failures, undervalued technical and vocational education, inadequate support for children with special needs, and performance measures that incentivise unethical behaviour, in particular exclusion and “off-rolling” of the most vulnerable pupils. It’s an accurate and disturbing picture – and should be a call to arms for anyone genuinely interested in effective policy-making. Brighouse and Waters’ numerous solutions, which range from taxing private schools – to subsidise poorer children’s education – to cracking down on admissions and exclusions “dirty tricks” and coaxing every school into some sort of local partnership trust (which sounds suspiciously like the mass academisation plan that had to be ditched by the Lib-Con coalition government), are logical and radical – so much so they seem unlikely to catch on, although Labour, with its current policy vacuum, might take note. Attempting to tease out why such sensible and fair policy ideas may never see the light of day should be the question of the moment. The book sheds light on this, too, thanks to interviews with most of the education secretaries of the past three decades, plus a handful of Ofsted chiefs. The problem is politics. When the former Labour prime minister Jim Callaghan made his famous Ruskin speech in 1976 challenging the lack of accountability in education, in effect the starting point of reform, the secretary of state had only three powers over schools. Today he or she has more than 2,500. Thousands of schools are now run from Whitehall through academy chains. Little real autonomy exists at a local level, and every head is at the mercy of whoever is in power and the appetite of Downing Street for dramatic change. So much so, that some professional interviewees were reluctant to be quoted for fear of the consequences. The average life span of an education secretary is just over two years – enough time for a few “launches and logos”, according to the authors – and this has inevitably led to most simply tinkering with the direction of travel of their predecessors. As the former Labour education secretary Charles Clarke explains, “realpolitik” interferes; ideas get abandoned or shoved into a “too difficult box” to be left to a successor, who then works through the same cycle. Dealing with the archaic system of grammar schools and the 11-plus test is just one example of this. And while some education secretaries – such as Ken Baker, who ushered in an era of choice, league tables and inspections; David Blunkett, with his drive on standards; and Ed Balls, who widened his department’s focus to include children and families as well as schools – made a tangible difference, none really questioned the underlying problems with the system. Talking to them for the book, “very few regretted anything they had done,” says Brighouse. “Most regretted things they hadn’t done and that they didn’t have more power. While all agreed that schools should be vehicles for greater equity, equality and social mobility, a lack of agreement about the purpose of schooling makes it very hard to define what those aims actually mean in practice.” And then there is Michael Gove. Even though he only answered questions from the authors in writing, and did express regret for the way he cancelled the Building Schools for the Future programme in 2010, the anecdotes of others are littered with his influence. Whether it is Gove’s own assertion that “there is no such thing as a smooth revolution” (reform is by necessity untidy), or his former adviser Sam Freedman’s regret that more consensus was impossible because of Gove’s (and no doubt Dominic Cummings’s) penchant for waging a public fight in the media, or the former Ofsted chief inspector Michael Wilshaw recounting that Gove did not want local authorities inspected because he wanted them to “wither on the vine”, Gove’s legacy is everywhere. It has not been a positive one, conclude the authors. “Many people interviewed for the book hold Gove responsible for some of the fundamental problems with schooling today – the fractured system, high exclusions and unsuitable curriculum,” they write. These are all problems Brighouse and Waters would seek to address at a post-Covid moment when people are yearning for what they describe as a “a new educational age – a time of hope, ambition and collaboration”. But how to translate that yearning into real policy change? The book contains a telling anecdote from Brighouse’s days as the London schools commissioner, when he was asked by the then prime minister, Tony Blair, if there was anything he wanted to add to the London Challenge prospectus. Brighouse’s suggestion that they should include something about the chaotic state of secondary school admissions in the capital was “greeted with an audible silence”, after which, he admits, he backed off the subject. “I have no idea how often I spoke truth to power; I am not sure I did enough. I didn’t fight hard enough over admissions, and I am conscious now that I should have done more,” he says. “I have never felt that I am pleased with what I have achieved because we didn’t address admissions or exclusions and you see the results of that now in the children who are effectively forgotten by the system.” This may explain why, amid all the “building back better” policy solutions that the book suggests, he instantly settles on a plan for the “open school”, a parallel version of the Open University, as his top priority. The open school would build on the pandemic’s lessons about digital learning and create a national virtual school to help offset disadvantage, include children who are out of school, and provide enhanced opportunities for all. It would wrap around a system guided by very different principles from the ones we see today: a new consensus on the purpose of schooling, a national cross-party commission to take a balanced 10-year view of education policy, schools being judged in groups rather than alone, with inclusion and wellbeing incentivised as well as exam results. Naturally there would be an enhanced role for the local authorities, which would be responsible for holding the new partnerships to account, in effect restraining central government power. Brighouse’s optimism is rooted in the parallels he sees between the moment of Callaghan’s Ruskin speech, a crucial starting point of the book’s journey, and today. “Everyone knew something had to change but it took a decade before the ideas were shaped into the 1988 Education Act,” he says. “Change comes from a conjunction of individuals, ideas and an environment that is conducive,” he suggests, pointing to an example from his own local community about how this might work in practice. His wife, Liz, has long been an Oxfordshire county councillor and is now part of the Fair Deal Alliance, a coalition cabinet of Labour, Liberal Democrats and the Greens. In his fantasy future he sees a closer alliance between the opposition parties in favour of electoral reform and consensus on some big policy ideas, hopefully including some from the book. “Today feels like 1976 when Callaghan made his speech. It took time, but change came in the end and this moment feels very similar, so even if it takes five to 10 years, we will have been happy to give these ideas a push and contributed to that.” • About Our Schools by Tim Brighouse and Mick Waters will be published on 7 January 2022 by Crown HouseI consider myself to be “transportationally challenged” – that is to say, I can’t drive a car, ride a bike, ice-skate, ski or swim (at least not in a way that doesn’t endanger others, given my aggressively flailing limbs). Any method of moving from one place to another aside from walking eludes me. It’s probably no surprise to hear that I can’t rollerskate, either. To me, rollerskating borders on black magic. I watch in awe as pros pull off precarious moves with the nonchalance of someone taking a stroll to the corner shop. It’s an enviable, effortless kind of cool, exemplified by the Berlin-based rollerskater Oumi Janta, whose videos went viral during lockdown. Last June, she posted a clip on Instagram that featured her rollerskating while dancing – backwards. It garnered more than 2.9m views and helped launch a cabal of rollerskating influencers. Google searches for “rollerskates” had already started to rise, with global searches for the word increasing by 77% between March and May 2020, when, months later, the fourth season of The Crown furthered the fervour with scenes of Diana, Princess of Wales whizzing her way through Buckingham Palace. So when thinking about how to escape my comfort zone, I plumped for the activity that had the potential to make me look the most stupid, but also, if I managed to pull it off, the coolest. I arrive at Roller Nation in north London on a damp and dreary afternoon, desperate to get my rollerskating lesson over and done with. Glimpsing knee pads on a table as I step inside, I am struck with thoughts of how inevitable it is that I’ll fall over, but my nerves are soon calmed by the venue’s sparkling disco balls and my unnaturally patient instructor, Nele, the founder of the rollerskating school Isle of Skating in London. My first topple comes about six minutes in and means Nele takes me back to basics, teaching me how to fall correctly – which is harder than it sounds. The trick is to land on your knees, rather than your bum. Having perfected the art of falling over, I feel slightly less worried about the likelihood of having to leave the venue on a stretcher. I am ready for more. The second rule of skating, it seems, is multitasking: something else I’m notoriously bad at. Keeping your feet in, knees low, chest high, bum low, and arms in, while propelling yourself forward by shifting your weight from side to side is … difficult. All the while, you must avoid looking at your feet – Nele takes to asking me how many fingers she’s holding up, in order to stop me gazing at the floor and, ultimately, falling towards it. After many unsteady laps around the rink, walking like a penguin on my skates with Nele holding my hand, I am surprised to see I am absentmindedly skating solo. Who would have thought the phrase “practice makes perfect” might have some truth to it? Leaving my comfort zone wasn’t exactly painless – I’m still nursing a bruised arm – but it was worth it. I probably won’t be signing up to a roller derby or showing off my moves at a roller disco just yet, but I wholly intend to keep learning. I leave feeling buoyed up by the experience and hoping that, next summer, I might finally have the confidence to take on my lifelong enemy: the bicycle.Whispers. Curfews. Never-ending military parades and shows of arms. Opponents’ bodies exposed for children to see as some sort of macabre art. And always, that nasal voice of “Papa Doc”, François Duvalier, chanting on all radio stations. Those were the days of my childhood under a dictator in Haiti. But on 1 January, Independence Day, there were three things that made a difference. Children in domestic service would visit their godmother and godfathers’ houses, where an envelope containing a few piastres (money) was waiting for them, probably the only gift they would receive during the year. Patriotic verses and folkloric songs slipped into the official ceremonies. A touch of art between long and scary diatribes against “the enemy” and unconditional pledges of allegiance to the “chief”. The third was the “joumou”, a soup traditionally shared on the first day of a new year. At the time, the soup only meant to me that my parents had not made new friends. The same faces were invited to eat it together every year: a very tall judge, a one-eyed lawyer who claimed to be able to communicate with the dead, and selected members of the larger family. When I was old enough to invite people to my place to share the 1 January soup joumou, I realised it was a difficult decision. I too had a very short list of people, with few changes from one year to another. I became my parents – no new friends, which was understandable if by “friends” one means people with whom you have shared ordeals and hopes, in the company of whom you feel not only happy but safe. Soup joumou, even for a confirmed atheist, is the centre of a sacred gathering. It would be among your worst memories to remember you shared the soup joumou with someone who was, in fact, a traitor. Between eight and 10 in the morning when it is served, soup joumou is a symbol of what we, as Haitians, bring to the world. Against the savagery of colonialism and modern slavery, we created Haiti, our language, and with it goods, ideas, ways of being, art and artefacts. What is soup joumou to me personally? I do not ask myself. The great poet René Philoctète wrote a beautiful poem about the questions he does not ask himself: “why I stay here, why I do the things I do”. The answer is too simple: because that is the way of being myself. Without my soup joumou, I would feel odd or incomplete. Now that everybody seems to want to talk about soup joumou, since its international recognition, the lack of confirmed historical references about its origins leaves the door open to recreations of the beginning of the tradition. But one thing, at least, is for sure – lots of Haitians, descendants of its creators, cannot afford it. We should not forget that the elites and oligarchies – with the complicity of dominant capitalist states – derailed a revolution of modern times and made of Haiti a country in which social injustice, economic exploitation and cultural exclusion prevails. Let us not be naive and make soup joumou the symbol of a togetherness that barely exists. The soup is waiting, but a true national feast celebrating equality among Haitians is yet to come. • Lyonel Trouillot is a Haitian novelist and poetHere are our bold predictions for 2022 in sports. Please note the bold (or should that be bold?) in bold predictions: these are to be taken with a pinch of salt. The Detroit Lions will win the NFC North Bold to the nth degree? Perhaps. Bonkers? Absolutely not. Dan Campbell’s squad has a lot of positives to build on heading into next season beyond the stunning win over Arizona. Detroit’s stellar offensive line returns all five starters next year. Jared Goff has settled in and should be a serviceable stopgap, allowing the Lions to spend their (probable) No 2 draft pick on a stud pass rusher or wideout. And Campbell, for all his game management flaws, has a roster that has fully bought into his culture shift. When Aaron Rodgers leaves for Denver or retires and the Bears muff their coaching hire and the Vikings underperform, the rapidly improving Lions will be ready to pounce. MJ Canada will reach the World Cup quarter-finals Canada haven’t even come close to qualifying for the World Cup since their first and only appearance back in 1986. That will change this year – they’re currently top of the Concacaf octagonal after going eight games unbeaten – owing to a glut of young stars who have developed into major contributors at European clubs, among them Champions League medal-holder Alphonso Davies (Bayern Munich), Jonathan David (Lille), Cyle Larin (Besiktas) and Tajon Buchanan (Club Brugge). As ever, so much is down to the draw. But if John Herdman’s side can manage to avoid a true group of death, look for Canada make it out of pool play and match Costa Rica’s Concacaf coming-out of eight years ago. BAG Formula 1 will overtake Nascar and IndyCar’s US audience It took a few decades, but F1 finally figured out the most direct path into an American TV viewer’s heart is through soapy drama. The messier, the better. Netflix’s Drive to Survive docuseries hooked us on these foreign characters, their base desires and the frustrating obstacles in between – to the point that the idea of missing a race (let alone qualifying or a practice session) would be like watching a season of the Real Housewives without also tuning into the reunion shows. The Abu Dhabi finale had an audience of a million, and its controversial ending (I’ll say it again: Lewis Hamilton was robbed) will go down as the sport’s Who Shot JR moment. Which is to say everyone and their mother will be tuning in mid-March to see how this cliffhanger resolves. While a million viewers might not sound like much compared to the NFL, that’s about half the audience for Nascar, the US’s most-watched motorsport, and their ratings have been in free fall for years. This year’s US Grand Prix attracted more than 400,000 people to Austin for the race weekend. Next spring a second USGP race comes to the streets of Miami, maybe the most F1 American city there is. (It has the glamor, the international flavor, the speed culture and a coastline that will look sumptuous in aerial shots.) To put it in terms a new F1 might understand: Nascar might be in the lead, but F1’s following close behind and about to enter the DRS zone. To put it even more plainly: I live in Nascar country, but more and more I find myself skidding into coffee shop conversations about Hamilton’s pet bulldog Roscoe or Lando Norris’s Twitch channel. Face it, Formula 1 is on the march. The only question is how long before it pulls away from Nascar for good. AL Dominic Thiem will return to the US Open final Instead of consolidating his place at the top of the sport after his maiden US Open title in 2020, this season was the nadir of Dominic Thiem’s career. After mental burnout early in the year, he suffered a serious wrist injury in June, had a major setback in August and then his comeback timeline was recently ruined by a cold. It will take a considerable amount time for Thiem to regain his form and trademark intensity, but he will finish 2022 back amongst the best. TC The NFL plots an 18th game … to be played overseas The NFL adding a 17th regular-season game was always a stopping point on the way to the much-desired 18th game. Pair that with the fact the league recently announced international marketing areas for 18 teams in 26 different markets across eight countries – an announcement that was light on details but large on marketing ease – and it’s not difficult to see the eventual blueprint: an international round (or a weekly individual game) played in each of those respective markets. Asking teams to travel and forfeit a home game has always been a sticking point for the league’s international series, making it tricky to consistently send some of the league’s most popular franchises to games held in London, Mexico City or Canada. The new marketing agreement adds Australia, Brazil, China, Germany and Spain to the league’s formal international agreements. With retirement nearing for commissioner Roger Goodell, it’s easy to foresee a proposal similar to the Premier League’s infamous 39th game serving as a legacy plan. OC US soccer players will overplay their hand Unbeknownst to many sports pundits, soccer federations are responsible for building the game in all its forms, from the grassroots upward, not just paying the men’s and women’s able-bodied full-field World Cup teams. The women’s team should have settled its “equal pay” dispute years ago but persists in pushing forward in court, where its case is flawed. The men’s team has paid lip service to “equal pay”, but the federation has called its bluff by insisting upon some way to figure out how to disperse World Cup prize money that’s far greater for men than for women – to Fifa’s disgrace. (Other countries have “equal pay” by offering the teams equal percentages of World Cup prize money, a solution that would make the US women’s team laugh.) These teams will reach a point at which they can’t just play on the sympathies of the misinformed, and they’ll end up negotiating from a position of weakness. BD The much-talked-about NBA in-season tournament goes up in smoke Compared to his peers, Adam Silver has had a relatively uncontroversial reign as NBA commissioner, however, his obsession with shortening the regular season in place of an in-season tournament feels like an all-time example of a person with power attempting to fix the unbroken. While recently leaked news suggests that opposition to the play-in tournament is lowering, it wouldn’t be at all surprising for there to be swift backlash, either from the players’ union, the owners or both. 2022 could very well bring us the most significant defeat of Silver’s tenure. HFThe debate was ostensibly over a stop-gap spending bill that would avert a government shutdown. But Chip Roy, a Republican congressman from Texas, seized the opportunity to accuse Democrats of supporting “unconstitutional” vaccine mandates, critical race theory, “woke gender ideology” and open borders. A vote to fund the federal government, he warned, was a vote to allow “tyranny over the American citizen”. The speech infuriated Congressman Tim Ryan, a Democrat from Ohio. “Tyranny?” Ryan fumed on the House floor. “What are you people talking about? We’re talking about universal preschool, and they have it as a communist indoctrination of the American student. It’s insane.” Ryan’s frustration crystallized a dilemma for Democrats as they defend paper-thin majorities in Congress next year: how to talk about their legislative victories when Republicans are talking about everything else. Emboldened by a string of off-cycle electoral victories, Republicans are embracing the culture war battles that Donald Trump waged from the White House as a strategy for winning back control of the House and Senate in the 2022 midterm elections. “Lean into the culture war,” was the title of a June memo from the leader of the House Republican Study Committee, Indiana congressman Jim Banks. The “culture war” offensive comes as Democrats, facing deep economic malaise and historical headwinds, race to deliver on the president’s domestic agenda, which includes an ambitious social policy package that faces serious legislative hurdles, hampered by Democratic holdout senator Joe Manchin. “We have a plan to give you a better country, and they have a ploy to win back power for themselves,” said New York congressman Sean Patrick Maloney, chair of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. “We are tackling the tough problems of the economy and the pandemic. They seek only to win power and will say or do anything to achieve that.” The party controlling the White House typically loses seats in the first midterm elections of a new presidency. With Biden’s plunging poll numbers, uncertainty over the centerpiece of his legislative agenda and Republicans’ redistricting edge, Democrats are increasingly dour about their chances. In the House, Democrats can only afford to lose a handful of seats; in the Senate they cannot afford to lose a single one. Maloney said selling their economic achievements – a popular, bipartisan infrastructure law and a poverty-reducing pandemic relief package – is critical for Democrats. But he said the party must also aggressively confront the Republican cultural assault. He urged Democrats to call out the opposition party’s embrace of “dangerous and reckless conduct”, which includes amplifying Trump’s false claims of a stolen election and downplaying the seriousness of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. On social issues, he believes that Republicans have pushed too far, particularly on the issue of abortion. As the supreme court considers whether to weaken or overturn the landmark Roe v Wade precedent, Democrats are loudly trumpeting their support for women’s reproductive rights, as they try portray Republicans as an increasingly extreme party determined to ban abortion. “We’re dealing with a Republican party that wants to ban abortion in all 50 states, bring back mass incarceration and burn books,” he added. “We’re not just going to respond, we’re going to be on offense.” Grievance politics is not a new strategy for Republicans. In 1968, Richard Nixon employed the “Southern Strategy” to exploit white racial grievances coded in language such as “law and order” and “states’ rights”. But as partisanship grows and the parties become increasingly hostile to one another, so too has the potential political benefit of cultural warfare that inflames division and energizes their base. A recent report by the Public Religion Research Institute and Brookings Institution, titled Competing Visions of America, found that 80% of Republicans believe that “America is in danger of losing its culture and identity”. By comparison, just 33% of Democrats agree. Meanwhile, 70% of Republicans say “American culture and way of life have changed for the worse since the 1950s” while more than six in 10 Democrats say it has changed for the better. As Democrats negotiate amongst themselves over how to pass Biden’s signature domestic policy bill, Republicans have been seeding outrage over – and fundraising off of – all manner of perceived injustices from cancel culture to Dr Seuss to the 1619 Project. They are hammering the administration over its handling of immigration at the southern border and Democrats over rising crime rates in cities. And Biden’s efforts to pursue racial equity as part of his governing agenda has drawn accusations of racism from conservatives who say the efforts discriminate against white people. Republicans are also leading the charge against the administration’s vaccine mandates for companies with more than 100 employees, which they say is an example of “radical” Democratic overreach. On that issue, Republicans are speaking to their base, which is disproportionately unvaccinated. An NPR analysis found that the stronger a county’s support for Trump in the 2020 election, the lower its Covid-19 vaccination rate. But Republicans are betting that opposition to vaccine mandates, terms of personal liberty, will resonate beyond their base. In legal challenges to the mandates, Republican leaders argue that the vaccine mandates will worsen the nation’s supply chain problems and exacerbate labor shortages that have arisen during the pandemic. But with the Omicron variant circulating, Democrats believe public sentiment is firmly behind them. Americans increasingly support vaccine mandates for workers, students, and in everyday public life, according to a recent CNN poll, which found 54% in favor of requiring vaccinations for employees returning to the office. The challenge for Republicans is to avoid alienating moderate voters in the suburbs with their efforts to energize their supporters who are deeply loyal to Trump and have come to expect their politicians to loudly voice their grievances. Republicans believe their unexpected success in Virginia, a state Biden won by 10 percentage points in 2020, provides a playbook. In November, Republican Glenn Youngkin won the race for Virginia governor after pledging to ban critical race theory from the state’s public schools. Democrats were surprised by the potency over culture war fight over education, allowing Youngkin to rev up the conservative base while appealing to suburban parents’ frustrations over Covid-19 school closures and masking protocols in classrooms. “It’s the oldest trick in the book,” said Anat Shenker-Osorio, a messaging expert and host of Words To Win By. “It’s creating some sort of an ‘other’ so that we don’t notice that they’re actually the cause of our problems.” In Virginia and elsewhere, she said Democrats were caught “flat-footed” by concerns over critical race theory, a concept that, until recently, few outside of academia had ever heard of. Instead of confronting it, she said Democrats’ instinct was to deny support and dismiss the charge as a right-wing talking point, neither of which satisfied voters. Democrats need “an explanation for the rightwing’s origin story of ‘this is why you’re suffering white man in the post-industrial midwest’,” Shenker-Osorio said. “Unless we can talk about race, about gender, about gender identity, our economic promise isn’t going to land.” Columnist Will Bunch, writing in the Philadelphia Inquirer, put it another way: “Once again, the Democrats showed up to a culture war gunfight brandishing a 2,000-page piece of legislation.” While Democrats agree they have a problem, they are at odds over how to fix it. Some argue that the party has moved too far left on cultural issues, a shift that has alienated non-college educated white voters and, increasingly, working-class Latino and Black Americans. Another cohort believes that instead of trying to recapture the voters who have abandoned the party, Democrats should find a message that appeals to a diversifying electorate. Proponents of this approach believe Democrats should respond to the right’s attacks by adopting what they call a “race-class narrative”, which Shenker-Osorio helped develop. The approach explicitly accuses Republicans of using racism or racial dog whistles as a divide-and-conquer tactic to sow distrust, undermine faith in government and protect the wealthy. When applied, the message not only defangs Republican attacks, it motivates and mobilizes voters of all races, its advocates argue. “Our task is to make the idea of joining together across our differences – the idea of multiracial solidarity, as a means to collectively get these shared values that we all want – sexier than the grievance politics that the right is selling,” said Jenifer Fernandez Ancona, the co-founder and chief strategy officer of Way to Win. In a recently published memo, advocated candidates use the “blows are landing because our agenda and accomplishments remain so far undefined in the minds of voters”. Among its messaging recommendations, the group urges Democrats to contrast the party’s economic vision with a “Republican party that is beholden to Maga extremism” while doing more to sell their legislative achievements and highlight the steps they’ve taken to combat Covid. “The good news is that these are not insurmountable challenges,” the memo states. An increasingly vocal coterie of liberal critics believe the outlook is grimmer: that Democrats are staring into the political wilderness unless they are able to win back some of the non-college educated voters who abandoned the party. Ruy Teixeira, a demographer and election analyst, believes Democrats have moved too far left on social issues like crime and immigration and is in need of a complete rebrand. He said Trump’s gains with non-college educated Hispanic voters was a “real wake-up call” that Democrats need to change course. “We need a durable majority,” he said. “You can’t build a durable majority by ignoring socio-cultural concerns and the values of these huge swaths of the population.” Where Democrats agree is that they must deliver on their promises while in power. “We’re really just at the beginning of what needs to be a substantial change in the way the American economic model works,” Teixeira said. “And to do that, it’s not enough to just win one election and pass some stuff. We need to win a number of elections and pass even more stuff … It’s not much more complicated than that.”A battle is brewing in SW19. Local residents, environmental and heritage groups are preparing to launch a public relations and legal salvo against Wimbledon’s plans to develop historic Capability Brown parkland into 39 new tennis courts for the championships. The campaigners claim the All England Lawn Tennis Club’s (AELTC) designs for a new 8,000-seat show court and 38 other grass courts on a golf course next to the world-famous SW19 club breaches a covenant that prevents building on the Grade II* listed parkland. When it bought the freehold of the golf course from Merton borough council for £5.2m in 1993, the All England club agreed to a legal covenant “preventing the use of the land otherwise than for leisure or recreation purposes or as an open space”. Despite the covenant, the All England club has submitted plans to Merton and Wandsworth councils for a 95-metre long, 28-metre high 8,000-seat “Parkland show court” on the land designed by Capability Brown for the first Earl Spencer in 1768. The club says it needs to build the new show court on the protected parkland because there is not enough space on its current site, and it urgently requires higher capacity courts to compete with the other grand slam tournaments. The club has promised the campaigners, who number in their thousands and include several prominent London lawyers, that the show court will be “a world-class building matching the beauty of its surroundings and paying tribute to the site’s rich history”. The plans, which the club said would enhance its “tennis in an English garden” image, also include 38 ground courts, several ancillary buildings and 9.4km of roads and paths. More than 1,200 people have submitted formal objections via the councils’ websites. Ahead of a planning decision expected in the spring, several local residents associations, heritage and environmental groups, and local politicians are forming a “non-political umbrella group” to begin a public and legal fight against the All England club’s plan. Chris Baker, director of the Capability Brown Society, said the plans would “destroy forever” land laid out by Brown 240 years ago. “This act of desecration will be a savage act of vandalism by the All England – who claim to have ‘heritage is in our DNA’,” Baker said. Baker said the coalition of interest groups aimed to “first fight the All England in the court of public opinion”, but has also asked lawyers to prepare for a legal battle over the status of the covenant if planning permission is granted. “The All England were good neighbours, but local opinion is fast turning against them,” Baker said. “The great majority of locals are scared to death that they are going to wreck the park. They are interested in only one thing and that is revenue and the extra income their new developments on the golf course will generate.” Thelma Fry, 96, who has lived in a block of flats overlooking the park for 30 years, said she was “devastated and heartbroken” by the proposals. “I am just one person against the endless wealth and influence of All England Tennis,” Fry said. “As I grow older, my pleasure in life is ever more dependent on the view from my window. The trees, grass and lake of Capability Brown’s landscape. I am devastated and heartbroken that it will be ruined by the All England plans. “They have assured me it will take years to build, which means that for the remainder of my life, instead of my present glorious view I will overlook a building site.” Iain Simpson, chairman of Wimbledon Park Residents Association, which represents more than 10,000 local households, accused the All England club of deceiving local people by submitting plans that breach the covenant it signed promising not to build on the land when it bought it in 1993. Simpson dug out Merton’s minutes from when the council agreed to sell the golf club land on the condition that the All England signed a covenant promising “not to use it except for leisure or recreational purposes or as an open space and not to build on it”. At the time, the then-chairman of the All England club, John Curry, said: “We completely understand and support everyone’s determination to keep the land open and we have purchased the land on that basis.” Tony Colman, leader of Merton borough council, said: “This council is resolute that the land will be retained as open space. All England has bought the land knowing this is our policy and is aware that we would not allow development of the site.” When Simpson recently wrote to Ian Hewitt, the current All England chairman, reminding him of the covenant and his predecessor’s promise, Hewitt replied that: “I am sure you can appreciate that the requirements of the club and the community have developed in the resulting 28 years and that the AELTC has needed to work to ensure that the championships remain a pre-eminent tennis tournament and continue delivering significant and improved socioeconomic benefits to the local area.” “Residents and the public have been deceived about their intentions,” Simpson said in letter sent to thousands of local homes earlier this month. “Why should we believe anything they say?” In a statement, Hewitt said: “Private land covenants do not form part of the public planning process but are to be dealt with outside that process. The AELTC’s view is that it would be appropriate for any discussion/consideration in relation to the covenants to take place once the planning application has been determined.” Hewitt said the proposed new courts were “vital to the future of Wimbledon – to the hampionships, to the people of Wimbledon, and to tennis in the UK and globally. We need to deliver on these aspirations in order to maintain Wimbledon’s position at the pinnacle of the sport.” A spokesperson for Merton borough council said: “A legal covenant is not a material planning consideration in a planning application assessment. “The All England Lawn Tennis Club’s application is currently under assessment and it will likely be decided by the planning committee: as yet we don’t have a committee date in mind as the application is still under assessment by officers.” The All England club rented the land to Wimbledon Park Golf Club on a lease due to expire in 2041. However, eager to expand the championships and accommodate preliminary matches on site, the tennis club offered the golf club members £65m to buy out the lease and expand its footprint. The golf club members, who included Piers Morgan, Ant McPartlin and Declan Donnelly, and former cabinet secretary Lord O’Donnell, voted in favour of the deal in 2018 and each collected a £85,000 windfall.I’m a literary agent and at the height of last year’s Black Lives Matter protests I was sent a list, with accompanying photographs, of the top editors working across the major publishing houses in the UK. When I read it I burst into tears. It showed a sea of almost totally white faces, some of whom had been approaching retirement when I started out as an editorial assistant 20 years earlier. The stagnation in the industry was stark and filled me with despair. Analysis of the industry since then, partly led by pressure from BLM and an open letter from the Black Writers Guild, has only further highlighted this imbalance. Two of the biggest global publishers, Penguin Random House and Hachette, revealed that just 2.7% of their staff – in both cases – are black; and the Guardian reported that you are eight times more likely to see an animal as lead character in a children’s book than a person of colour. In a modern, multicultural nation, the whiteness of the industry matters. This summer, the bestselling author Kate Clanchy chose to rewrite her memoir after an outcry over her portrayal of minority-ethnic children. Her book, Some Kids I Taught and What They Taught Me, used racialised terminology such as “chocolate-coloured skin”, it referred to one student as “African Jonathon”, a Somali child as having a “narrow skull” and described another as being “so small and square and Afghan with his big nose and premature moustache”. I’ve sat in weekly new business meetings across three of the five major publishing houses week in week out for decades, invariably surrounded by all-white teams who between them not only decide what should and shouldn’t be published but also give final signoff to books before they’re printed. For me, and other people of colour in the industry, this was the moment we’ve been sounding the alarm bell about for years. The furore about Clanchy on social media left me astonished. I watched in horror as posters argued ferociously over whether it’s OK or not to comment on the shape of a black child’s skull. People raged, asking how Clanchy’s use of language could have been published. For me, the answer could be found easily in that white-dominated editors’ list, and the fact that, for years, loud and growing calls to diversify its teams have been pretty much ignored. No wonder the industry today finds itself in a complete mess on race. There is a crippling and toxic silence around everyday racism and how it manifests in the media: erasure, sidelining, stunting of careers, the sheer mental exhaustion of operating daily in a predominantly white space and the routine grind of being marginalised. A couple of years ago I left one of the major publishers and now work from my two-up two-down in Wales, supporting talent behind the scenes. I focused instead on agenting David Harewood’s memoir and its important, groundbreaking discussion of black mental health. And I worked with Lenny Henry on his first novel for children, about a black child who is able to fly – helping to address that lack of black lead characters. I empathise with Vanessa Kingori, the black chief business officer at Condé Nast, who says that when she joined Vogue at the same time as editor-in-chief Edward Enninful, their joint aspiration “was always to normalise the marginalised”. Meanwhile, I’ve observed within publishing the increasing mention and use of “sensitivity readers”. What on earth are they, you might ask. Essentially a little freelance cottage industry of marginalised folk has sprung up, post-Clanchy, to check that books aren’t racist, disablist or any other -ist before they’re sent to print. What this means is that the predominantly white editors commissioning and publishing books featuring characters from diverse backgrounds are now checking these books with readers from these backgrounds in order to ensure publication does not cause accidental offence. And backlist titles, too, are being rethought – a recent example being that of an east Asian character from David Walliams’ The World’s Worst Children. It is now published without the character Brian Wong, Who Was Never, Ever Wrong, following a complaint from a reader who had picked up on the way Brian had been illustrated, wearing glasses and with “small eyes”. But, for me, “sensitivity readers” are an inadequate, sticking-plaster solution. Why use freelancers when you could actually fully employ commissioning editors and publishers of all backgrounds? Shouldn’t there be enough diversity within the industry itself to ensure work can be properly checked for sensitivity? Given the industry seems incapable of this, perhaps it needs an independent body to advise it on equality and monitor progress. As a black, straight woman who commissioned and edited a memoir by a white, gay man (that sold more than 450,000 copies with not a sensitivity reader in sight), I’d say that we have far more in common as human beings than differences. I don’t feel like a minority: there are lots of people around the world who look like me. Sharing all of our stories with respect and sensitivity really shouldn’t be this hard. Natalie Jerome is a literary agent, deputy chair of Literature Wales, and a former publisherIn a park opposite Belfast’s Saint Anne’s Cathedral, Jamie-Lee O’Donnell is being photographed. It is a small, unassuming shoot; she has only popped outside briefly, catching a short spurt of sunshine on an otherwise gloomy Saturday. Yet within minutes, passersby are stopping on surrounding streets: murmurs of excitement, fingers pointing. A steady stream of selfie-hungry teenage girls muster up the courage to edge closer. “Oh feck,” I hear from behind me, “that’s Michelle from Derry Girls!” Now filming its third and final series, Derry Girls has proved popular beyond all expectations. Critical acclaim was matched by nationwide public adoration: the show was Channel 4’s biggest new comedy in five years. And in Northern Ireland, the joyful sitcom set in 1990s Derry is a fully fledged sensation; the most watched series in the country since modern records began. Overnight, its lead actors were elevated to national treasure status. En route to meet O’Donnell, I had mentioned the purpose of my visit to my stoic, middle-aged taxi driver and he immediately turned giddy. Later, a mix-up over permissions to take pictures inside the gallery where we’re meeting was quickly resolved: one of the Derry Girls, is it? No bother, carry on. “It’s just so lovely,” O’Donnell says, taking a seat opposite me back inside the city’s Metropolitan Arts Centre (the Mac). “When we film outside in Derry, we often have to ask our audience to keep it down while we’re shooting a scene.” O’Donnell lived in the city for most of her life, although recently she has moved to another part of the country. She would rather not say where exactly. “I had a wee bit of trouble with people finding out where we lived and coming to say: ‘Hello, here’s my grandma.’” In Derry Girls, the 34-year-old plays the much-loved Michelle, a sexually liberated schoolgirl with a penchant for profanity. Her sharp one-liners are a series standout: “Do you think if I told him I had an incendiary device down my knickers he’d have a look?” she asks, when armed soldiers board her bus unannounced. In person, O’Donnell shares Michelle’s quick wit. She is also thoughtful and warm, and if anything a little nervous, a far cry from the abrasive over-confidence she exudes in the show as Michelle. We are here today to talk about her upcoming show, Screw, a gritty drama set in the wing of a men’s prison. O’Donnell takes on the part ofplays Rose, a freshly hired trainee guard. “She’s a really strong, tough young woman,” O’Donnell says of her character. “There’s something about her which just spoke to me: she undervalues herself a lot, and doesn’t see the strength inside her.” In almost every way, Michelle and Rose are polar opposites. “Although,” she adds, straight-faced, “they do happen to have the same curly hair.” O’Donnell is fiercely proud of being a true Derry girl. She grew up on the border between County Derry and Donegal; the north and the Republic. Despite being a generation on from the character she plays in Derry Girls, set in the years before the Good Friday agreement was signed in 1998, she too was raised in the shadows of the Troubles. “It’s such recent history, and a vital part of who people in Derry are,” she says. “It shapes our outlooks, our humour, our personalities. How we feel things so strongly, and love so fiercely.” Creating characters through her childhood allowed her to imagine other possibilities. “I was such a little weirdo,” she recalls with a grin. “I had so many outfits to dress up in. I’d make up these personas, each with different hats. I’ve no idea where I got them.” Every evening, she would come to dinner with a show to perform at the table. Drama school was never on the cards, in part because of the cost, but it also wasn’t on the family’s radar. That is not to say that her creative side wasn’t encouraged: she would write poetry, plays and songs, and stand in Derry city centre, ready to perform intense immersive theatre to any unsuspecting shopper who would catch her eye. After a brief stint at Leicester’s De Montfort University, O’Donnell dropped out and set about trying to find herself an agent. She found gigs as a self-taught nightclub dancer and performed in pantos. She moved around in search of work – London, Belfast, Manchester – taking on whatever she could, be it retail or restaurant work, or on-street promotions. “I managed a Santa’s grotto for a while,” she says. “I had to fire two elves for coming in drunk, stinking of booze, after clubbing all night at the Warehouse Project. I could hear them wobbling towards me because of the bells on their hats and shoes.” One of them threw up in a bin while Santa was with a group of toddlers. “Around then was the first time I really realised where I was from,” O’Donnell says. “I got a job working at a coffee shop in Manchester. I remember flicking through my contract and asking the other staff: why doesn’t it say whether you get paid for bomb scares? Back at home, this was a standard question: will I lose wages if we’re forced to close for an evacuation? But they all looked back at me like I had two heads.” By 2017, O’Donnell had returned to Derry and bought a corner shop. “It was good craic,” she says. “I was eating crisp sandwiches constantly. I didn’t make any money, if anything I lost a bit.” It was then, finally, that acting work started to come in regularly. She shut up shop when she was cast in a touring production of I Told My Mum I Was Going on an RE Trip, a play about young women’s abortion experiences. “We actually performed it right here at the Mac,” she says. “There were people protesting outside, saying it was an abomination.” Access to abortion services remains difficult in Northern Ireland today, but back then abortion rights were almost nonexistent in the country, except in the most extreme of cases. “I’m very proud of that show,” O’Donnell says. “To have helped continue the conversation. In my opinion, it’s healthcare for women. It’s really close to my heart. It affects me directly.” Around the same time, O’Donnell read an article about a new Channel 4 sitcom written by the Derry-born writer Lisa McGee. “Right away I knew it would be hilarious,” she says. “I was desperate to be a part of it. As soon as I read the scenes, I felt something. I knew every single one of these girls.” There were eight months between O’Donnell’s first audition and casting, during which time she presumed it simply wouldn’t happen. When she got the call to say she had bagged the part, the years of graft felt worth it. During filming – on intensive Belfast shoots, and on location in Derry – cast and crew would laugh constantly. “We all had this feeling,” she adds, “but we didn’t want to jinx it. Then the first episode came out, and everything went crazy. It hasn’t stopped since.” There is magic, certainly, in the show’s performances and writing. But it’s the personal, heartfelt portrait of a place so rarely seen or heard of outside the context of conflict and tension that truly casts a spell. “We’ve been able to show the world the real Derry,” O’Donnell says. “Not the one from the news, but our one. Not a conflict zone, but a community. It’s such a huge responsibility …” O’Donnell, tears in her eyes, takes a second. “Sorry,” she sniffs, smiling. “It’s just nice to show the Derry we know. Why am I getting upset? This is ridiculous.” Saying goodbye to Michelle was always going to be sad. Derry Girls has changed her life for ever. “When you step on set as Michelle,” she says, “the gloves are off and you can just go full-throttle ballistic. There’s this freedom whenever I’m playing her.” With Screw about to be released and Derry Girls ending, O’Donnell is in a state of transition. On screen, she is going from schoolgirl to working woman, but her own life is also evolving. Initially, when things took off, she felt out of place at red-carpet events; enjoying her successes felt indulgent, but that is changing. “It’s almost turning to guilt now,” O’Donnell says. “Maybe that’s too strong a word. It’s just my identity was shaped entirely by being a working-class woman focused on a single goal.” She is still that person, she’s quick to add. “But once you start to achieve it, then what happens? Being a struggling actor was a huge part of who I was. Now I’ve realised I’m not terrified of what comes next any more. And that’s great, but in its own way, scary, too.” That is why, even when Derry Girls wraps, O’Donnell won’t say goodbye to Michelle completely. She will continue to channel her no-shits-given energy from time to time: “I hope Michelle will live on in me. Although, only a wee bit. She’s totally nuts.” Screw starts Thursday, 9pm, Channel 4.Trying to learn AP physics over Zoom. Cancelled standardized tests. The end of Ds and Fs. Masked proms with no slow dancing. While Covid undeniably changed the world for everyone, one place that was truly upended was high school. What started as a short break from in-person class has now affected three different school years. Some changes have been hard: hybrid schedules, masking through eight-hour days, suspended extracurriculars. But the drastic changes have also posed the question: what else could be possible? Could school be more fun, inclusive, different? Here, six seniors across the US offer their best ideas on how high school could be better. I have cerebral palsy, and I use a wheelchair. At my school, awareness about special needs has grown. But still, some things aren’t accessible. I can get into every classroom on campus, but in some, I can only access the front right corner. At lunch, there are tables that fit my chair, but only some of them, and if my friends don’t sit at one of those, I can’t join them. Honestly, it’s kind of upsetting. I have an outgoing personality, and I like to talk to people. But most of the time, I eat lunch by myself. It’s really important for schools to be inclusive, because they can open up a whole new world for students in wheelchairs. At my school, we have a wheelchair basketball team, and when our team plays a home game, we can fill one side of the bleachers. After we were runners-up at the state championship, the mayor shut down the traffic circle in Tallmadge and gave us a police and fire escort on our way back. It made us feel happy, special and a part of the community. People recognized our accomplishments! I’m also the manager for the football team. I go out and shake hands with the other players, and hang out in the locker room. Being part of the team has been really helpful for making friends. Everyone knows me. We joke that I could be the next mayor of Tallmadge. High schools need to make sure a special needs student is part of the committee preparing for homecoming and prom. This year, I’ll be able to go to graduation because my school moved it to a football stadium with a ramp, which the old location didn’t have. My goal is to walk across it with my walker, not in my chair. Most of my classmates and teachers have only ever seen me in my chair, so their minds will be blown away when I start walking. I don’t think high schools should push college as much as they do. The college route isn’t always the right one. A lot of people don’t have the finances to pay for school and won’t be able to afford the debt. But the program I’m in, it’s free. I believe it’s going to help me with my future. I was going to a regular school my freshman and sophomore years. I thought it would be just like middle school, but I got a rude awakening. My grades weren’t the best, and I didn’t have a relationship with my teachers. I was ashamed to ask questions. One day, my mom got an email about career and technical education programs. I did my research, andapplied to the program. Now, I love school. I’m really good with hands-on things – working with tools and knowing how things work. I want to be great at my craft. That’s what I stand for. I have now learned how to braze copper pipes. I have an internship at a heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) supply store. I’ve been there about a month and a half, and I have to learn all of the parts, so I can help customers. I’m on track to graduate in the spring, and I want to join the union – Steamfitters 602. I’ll be working and going to school at night, two nights a week, 15 Saturdays per year. You go to college, you do your four years and then you graduate, but you still have to find a job. With this program, I’ll get a job like that. I’ll get a fair shot at providing for my family straight out of high school. Eventually, I want to start my own business. But right now, they’re teaching me how to do the work. There are 15 people in my class, and it feels like a family. Schools should really consider starting later and offering more flexible schedules. Students will have more downtime, and be more focused when they get to campus. I’m an extrovert, and I did not like doing online school. But I’m also self motivated, and I was able to create my own schedule, so I could do the things I like – like yoga – during the school day. I feel like I grew up a lot during that time. Having school start at 8.05am again this year was rough. I get up at 5.30, but I’m really busy, so it limited what I could get done before class. Lots of my friends sleep until the very last minute and roll out of bed and come to school without even brushing their hair. Even an extra half hour would have made the adjustment easier. Going back to school and having to ask to use the restroom also felt odd. My friends were feeling it, too. I work in an after-school program. During quarantine, a lot of kids got jobs during the day, and did school work late at night. One friend of mine works at Starbucks. His school lets him take a free period first period of the day, and he works from 4.30 until 7.30am, then goes to school I’m the child of a single mother who is an immigrant. My mom only got a middle school education, and when she came to the US, she got a job cleaning houses so I could pursue a better life. I always thought higher education wasn’t an option for me. But programs at school have made me realize it is possible. Right now, I’m one of the 10 students sharing my input and my experiences within the public school system to help create an intensive, one-year program for students at different high schools in San Francisco looking to get into Stem-focused careers called the Mission Bay Hub. We’re hoping it will offer tools and equipment that actual scientists use. I’ve told them that it’s really important to have a big open space, because many of our classrooms are cramped. When volunteers come into the hub, they should be a diverse and representative group – like us. Honestly, being part of the program feels awesome – I feel like I’m doing something positive for my younger siblings and cousins in this system. I feel like I’m creating a change in our education. Schools should allow students to meet with the principal and board members, instead of having one-minute, once a month opportunities. Last year, I started community college classes during high school. Next spring, I’ll graduate from community college three weeks before I graduate from high school, with 62 hours of college credit. The state of Oklahoma covers a lot of the tuition for concurrent enrollment students. And the Creek Nation, which I’m a member of, covered most of the rest. My mom estimates that my parents paid for the cost of a couple of books – that’s it. Everyone should have opportunity to study the same way I did. It helps students become familiar with the college application process, how to navigate the different departments at college, and the difference between high school and college classes. In high school, you’re with this same group of kids, and the teacher is pushing you to do your work. In college, it’s all on you. I have a head start on my future. I should graduate in two and a half years – and save my parents about $50,000. It prepares students for college, and is a huge self esteem booster. I look at it and think, “I did that.” A lot of kids my age don’t even know how to sew on a button. If I were going to change high school, I would make sure that students learn the basic life skills you need outside of school. Personally, I don’t know anything about cars. Something happened to my tire when I was at school, and my boyfriend and I had to call another friend to show us how to change it. So I’d make the first quarter of the class automotive – how to check your oil and your coolant, change a tire – things like that. In the second quarter, you could teach students how to cook from scratch. It’s cheaper than fast food, healthier too. And I would know. One of my three jobs is working at McDonald’s as a shift leader. I’ve been a member of a youth organization called Future Farmers of America that prepares students for careers in agriculture since I was a freshman, and it has had a huge impact on my life. Now, I know different breeds of pigs and cattle, and what they’re all for. The third quarter would focus on sewing. I only learned how to sew recently when I made masks with my grandma during the pandemic. I don’t want to have to pay a fee every time I want to get something fixed. The fourth quarter would be more about financial literacy, and setting up a savings account. My freshman year, a teacher taught us how to write a check. But here I am about to graduate, and that’s as far as I’ve gotten.Scotland Disconnect on the impeccably green island of Eigg In both ethics and aesthetics, Eigg is remarkable. In sustainability terms, it’s unique: the first island, indeed region of the UK, to be self-sufficient in renewable energy. Eigg disconnected from the mainland back in 2008. By balancing solar, water and wind power, the community-owned Eigg Electric provides enough power all year round to supply the 100 or so permanent residents and the 10,000 visitors who come every summer. The wind turbines were positioned on the slopes of Eigg’s landmark mountain, An Sgurr, not only to maximise wind exposure and minimise turbulence, but to fit into the spectacular setting. Even the solar panels on a flowery south-facing hillside look good. Ownership of Eigg was transferred to a Heritage Trust in partnership with the Scottish Wildlife Trust in 1997, with contributions from thousands of members of the public. With empathy and commitment, the community has organised its island so that we can enjoy it too. No visiting cars or campervans are allowed, but it’s small enough for a day trip (from Arisaig on the mainland, a one-hour ferry ride). The redeveloped An Laimhrig community hub with cafe – designed by Hebridean architect Will Tunnell, will open in time for the 25th anniversary of the community takeover this summer – and the annual celebratory party takes place on 12 June. Nowhere on Eigg is more than a two-mile hike and Charlie’s taxi is usually by the pier. Next door to the cafe, the shop has a surprisingly eclectic range of goodies and essentials, and bikes to hire. Despite Eigg’s size (five miles by three), it has several places to stay, including a guesthouse and a great hostel, and campers are welcomed. A new (sustainable) shower block and cool camping pods (from £45 a night for four) by the pier opened last year, and the Isle of Eigg Brewery, a cooperative operating along impeccably green lines, will open in 2022. The climb up An Sgurr is rewarded with one of the best views in the Highlands. Walks around Laig Bay, with views across to Muck and mighty Rum, could be taken every day, and the ethereal interplay of sand, sea and sky would still mesmerise. Last summer I visited a lot of Scottish islands for a new photo guide to be published in the spring, but none has its act as consummately planned and holistically together as Eigg. isleofeigg.org Pete Irvine, author of Scotland the Best: the Islands, published on 3 March Greece Thessaloniki’s cosmopolitan and tolerant energy I spent the best part of last summer lying on idyllic and isolated Greek island beaches thinking about a very different place and time: the rich and complicated urban history of Thessaloniki, Greece’s second city. British historian Mark Mazower’s thought-provoking book, Salonica: City of Ghosts, transported me from the Byzantine to the Ottoman era, the city’s integration into the new Greek state in the early 20th century and the fallout from the second world war. As much of the region continues to tread a dangerous path of deepening nationalist hostility, Thessaloniki’s history of diversity and coexistence is a sobering reminder that things do not have to be this way: Christians, Muslims and Jews lived side by side in peace for hundreds of years. Salonica, as it is is also called, was the only city in Europe with a majority Jewish population – the “Jerusalem of the Balkans”, though few survived the Nazi occupation and Holocaust. However, Thessaloniki’s cosmopolitan and tolerant energy survives today, with a vibrant culinary and cultural scene. It was recently named Greece’s first Unesco city of gastronomy I will be going for the Thessaloniki Documentary Festival in March on one of the high-speed trains from Athens which launch this month. From the UK, get a train to Bari or Ancona in Italy, then ferry to Patras and continue on Greek railways (OSE) via Athens to Thessaloniki (with a short substitute bus on the first, Patras-Kiato, section). Alex King France Cycle Grenoble’s riverside parks The city of Grenoble, in south-east France, has been named Green Capital of Europe for 2022, and while it’s well known to skiers, it makes a great destination year-round. Head there in spring, when the train via Paris whizzes through Burgundy’s blooming vineyards and on into the mountains. Grenoble sits at the point where three valleys meet, and is surrounded by the Belledonne, Vercors and Chartreuse mountains. Getting around is easy: the city’s cycle-share scheme, Métrovélo, has 7,000 bikes, and there are 200 miles of cycling routes in and around the city. Visitors can ride between parks and out along paths that follow the rivers Drac and Isère. For the best views, take the cable car from the city centre up 500 metres to the 19th-century Fort Bastille. Hikers are spoiled for choice with trails that zigzag around the mountains. The food scene has long embraced sustainability, and several restaurants use only local produce. Book a table at Jeanette, where chefs Manon Bocquentin and Thaïs Giannetti use suppliers from within 20 miles of the restaurant and forage for mountain herbs for their delicate and inventive dishes. To rest weary limbs after hiking and biking, check into the bright and modern Okko Grenoble Jardin Hoche Hotel (doubles from €98 room-only) in the ecodistrict of Zac de Bonne. The first of its kind in Europe, it’s a former military brownfield site that was transformed into a sustainable community. Carolyn Boyd Italy Molise is waiting to be discovered Molise, a sparsely populated region of southern Italy, is so off the radar that many Italians joke that “Molise non esiste” (Molise doesn’t exist). But after visiting for the first time in 2019, I realised the mockery is unfair. Molise contains the very best of Italy, from the scenery to the food. But best of all, it feels like uncharted territory. Being someone who enjoys travelling by train, I am now looking forward to returning in 2022 on board the Molise Express, a vintage train that will show visitors the best of the region’s mountains, coastlines and ancient villages. “Molise is among the least-known regions in Italy,” said Fabrizio Minichetti, president of Le Rotaie-Molise, the association that helped launch the initiative. “But we have mountains, the sea, wonderful scenery and many beauty spots that deserve to be discovered.” The service will be rolled out this year and take passengers through the Biferno valley, from the coastal town of Termoli to the regional capital of Campobasso, stopping off at the villages of Casacalenda and Larino before returning to Termoli. The day trip, costing €24, will give passengers ample time to explore the historic towns, including a trip to the Kalenarte open-air contemporary art museum in Casacalenda. The train carriages, with wooden interiors, date back to the 1920s. The initiative is one of several vintage train routes planned in Italy as the country seeks to promote train tourism. In 2023, the Dolce Vita train will be launched: it’s a luxurious sleeper that will show passengers the best of the Italian landscape, from north to south, with stops in more than 100 cities. The service plans to introduce visitors to lesser-known spots, such as the Sila mountains in Calabria. Angela Giuffrida Czech Republic A monastery and brewery under one roof in Prague It’s one of the greenest cities in Europe when it comes to parks and open spaces, but Prague has been sluggish on the uptake of sustainability – aside from the newly installed pink city bikes and a sprinkling of zero-waste grocery stores. That’s what makes the Břevnov Monastery such a great spot. Founded in 993, this still-active Benedictine friary is a fascinating U-shaped complex, enveloped in a tangle of trees, lakes and winding little paths. The embedded Adalbert Hotel (doubles from €75 B&amp;B) is an award-winning guesthouse, and its recent eco-revamp has seen it embrace a number of sustainable, planet-saving practices, such as waste reduction, energy saving and using environmentally friendly products. As well as the hotel and monastery (tours available), the complex also rather brilliantly houses a brewery – the oldest in the Czech Republic, no less. You can sample their lagers, IPAs and wheat beers from the bottle shop-cum-beer hovel, or even better, head to their rustic, fire-heated tavern opposite and combine it with a bowl of delicious mushroom soup. Mark Pickering Greece Ancient theatres get back in the act The Epirus coast is one of the prettiest in Greece, yet one of the least visited, despite having the most accessible stretch of beaches for those who prefer to avoid flying, as it starts south of Igoumenitsa, terminus of the ferries from Italy. I went on holiday to Parga when I was 12 and have vowed to return ever since. Not a resort on everyone’s radar, Parga is built over a double-curve bay. Memories of its transparent waters, fringed as they were by jungle-thick vegetation, merge in my mind with those of Brazil’s, a later love of mine. Syvota, further north, presents an incongruous sight to Greece aficionados: a mountain village lording it over a magnificent coast, whose low treeline resembles a Norwegian fjord. I have long yearned to explore its archipelago of tiny offshore islands and their pristine sandy beaches. It’s ancient history, though, that grabs me this year, associated with five ancient theatres restored and promoted as part of a new archaeological route. I’m particularly curious about Gitana, with its carved seat names – unusually one reserved for a woman, called Filista – and romantic Dodona, built by Pyrrhus, him of the “pyrrhic” victory which inspired Lord Byron to write a poem. I won’t miss the theatre at ancient Nikopolis, founded by Octavian after his victory against Anthony and Cleopatra. Its successor, Preveza, is a delightful, laid-back town worth exploring that serves both as a cultural springboard and as a holiday choice in its own right, with a good share of pleasingly uncrowded beaches. John Malathronas Slovenia The beaches and cosmopolitan backstreets of Piran I had spotted it on the map a few years ago: Slovenia has a coastline. Who knew? The region around the Italian port of Trieste is full of such geographic curiosities; the borders having ebbed and flowed with the tides of empire ever since the Romans lost the plot at the close of the sixth century. At the end of the second world war, Tito’s Yugoslavia occupied the wider area, but later agreements pushed back, snipping all but 29 miles of coast from what was, until 1991, the Socialist Republic of Slovenia, sandwiched between Croatia and Italy. Last year I managed to snatch a brief look at one of the towns, Piran, a gorgeous labyrinth of old Venetian architecture around a lovely harbour. It’s the sort of town where you get lost, discover some fantastic back streets, then emerge totally disoriented close to where you started. Despite swapping countries and empires with baffling frequency, it retains a laid-back cosmopolitan ambience. In high summer, I am told, it gets over-populated with visitors, so I’ll avoid those months: I just want to wander in those shady slot canyons of ancient houses, emerging occasionally by the sea to eat a seafood platter or some of the excellent prśut (cured ham) with a glass of a Slovenian wine. The hills behind the town are known for their teran reds and malvazija whites, but don’t miss the other local speciality, dry white rebula. The nearby town of Izola looks interesting and Portorož is said to have a good beach. For cycling tours check out Visit Good Place. Kevin Rushby Germany Cycle all the way to the Black Sea An unusual, but highly sustainable way to explore some of Germany’s lesser-touted regions is to hop on your bike – or rent one locally – and follow part of the Iron Curtain Trail. Officially called the EuroVelo 13, the trail stretches over 6,000 miles along the former cold war divide between east and west, from the Black Sea up to the Barents Sea. The Germany section combines two separate routes: the Baltic Sea Cycle Route, where you can experience stunning coastal landscapes and beach-peppered holiday islands like Usedom and Rügen; and the German-German Border Trail, whose former depopulated zones have been transformed into a major green belt. As you make your way down past the border areas with Poland and the Czech Republic, you’ll find plenty of nature areas, including the Lauenburg Lakes and Harz mountains, plus dense forests and sights like Wartburg Castle. If it’s not far enough, continue all the way down to the Black Sea. If it’s too far, try the Iron Curtain Gravel Trail. Paul Sullivan Spain Temptation overload on Galicia’s dramatic west coast Beyond Santiago de Compostela, Spain’s beautifully green north-west corner remains one of the country’s less-visited pockets. On Galicia’s west coast, where the mist-shrouded Costa da Morte gives way to the deep inlets of the Rías Baixas, fabulous fresh seafood, silky Atlantic surf beaches, clifftop hiking trails, up-and-coming albariño wineries and pristine offshore islands are just some of the temptations. Opened in 2020, the sustainability-driven Parador Costa da Morte (doubles from €150), near Muxía, ups the appeal, with design inspired by Galician culture and landscapes; it’s part of a years-in-the-making regeneration project after a 2002 oil spill. Or stay at an inspiring rural hotel such as Casa Fontequeiroso (doubles from €70 B&amp;B)– a stone-built 100-year-old home above off-the-beaten-track Nemiña beach, where Mari Carmen Leis Calo serves home-cooked meals. A quick ferry ride from Vigo (Easter week and May to September) lie the stunning Cíes Islands, whose plunging cliffs and pearly beaches are the stars of the Illas Atlánticas (Atlantic Islands) national park. Take the ferry to Santander or Bilbao with Brittany Ferries, from £101pp) then road-trip or train west to Galicia Isabella Noble Wales A pilgrimage to Bardsey Island Bardsey Island, or Ynys Enlli, a lump of Precambrian rock in the Irish Sea off the Llŷn peninsula in north-west Wales, has been a place of tranquil worship since the sixth century, and a place of dedicated pilgrimage since the middle ages. I feel as if I have been trying to get there for almost as long. Over the years, I have been foiled by storms twice (the two-mile ferry crossing from the mainland through strong tidal races is frequently disrupted), misadventure and even the birth of one of my children. Going on a “pilgrimage” has seen renewed interest recently, with people seeking meaning and adding purpose to a trip – and in the spirit of the steadfast pilgrimages our forebears made to Bardsey, known as the “Island of 20,000 saints”, I am going to cycle there in 2022 – 150 miles from my home in the Black Mountains, following winding green river valleys and crossing the hauntingly empty moors of mid-Wales. Training for this will help fulfil another key goal for this year: to finally slough off the lockdown laziness and get seriously fit once again. Rob Penn Portugal Algae, almonds and an eco retreat near Olhão An “old sea dog” known to his family as the Champ, Joaquim Modesto de Brito inspired his grandchildren to build Casa Modesta (doubles from €120 B&amp;B) converted into an ecoretreat from the old family home on the edge of the eastern Algarve’s Ria Formosa, a natural park. The renovation by grandson Carlos Fernandes used locally sourced and sustainable materials, and an organic garden was sown so that the harvest could be enjoyed by guests. A partner of FEE (Foundation for Environmental Education), it has nine rooms, decorated by Fernandes’s sister, Vânia, making features of the original vaulted ceilings and terracotta floors. Local olives, almonds and algae are used in the spa treatments, and bikes are provided for guests to explore the cycle paths along the estuary, as well as the nearby fishing town of Olhão. The family says: “Our door is always open to welcome those who arrive with the same joy with which we would run to our grandparents’ arms when we were little.” Audrey Gillan Belgium Cutting-edge culture in Antwerp Whether art to you means a directional Dries Van Noten outfit or a dark and dramatic Rubens painting, Antwerp will appeal. The city combines an artistic pedigree dating back to the Flemish masters in the city’s 16th-century golden age with a thriving fashion scene, forward-thinking back-street galleries and edgy warehouse clubs. This year is an especially important year for the city, with the reopening of the Fine Arts Museum (KMSKA) in September after a 10-year renovation. The revamp of its beautiful historic building includes a new wing over four painstakingly restored courtyards. Two halls will be dedicated to Antwerp’s most famous painters: Rubens and Van Dyck. KMSKA is conveniently located in the trendy Zuid neighbourhood, handy for Antwerp’s more recent cultural contributions. Here you’ll find MoMu, a world-famous fashion museum, alongside Ann Demeulemeester’s airy flagship store and Dries van Noten’s Het Modepaleis, which mixes cutting-edge design with vintage furniture. For up and coming designers, try Nationalestraat and Kloosterstraat. For an insight into the future of Antwerpian culture, visit Het Eilandje in the northern docklands. There are forward-thinking restaurants in the Felix Pakhuis warehouse and contemporary galleries along the Artland trail, as well as MAS, a maritime museum with spectacular city views. Borgerhout, near the central station, is popular among a younger, artier crowd – try Pekfabriek, a club in a former pitch factory that hosts Belgium’s best underground DJs. Rachel Hall Portugal Sustainable luxury in one of Europe’s top surfing towns The town of Ericeira, north of Lisbon, may be famous as a world-class surfing spot, but until now it had no five-star hotel. There is an abundance of hostels and guesthouses, but Immerso (doubles from €175 B&amp;B), built into a green valley just outside the town, will be the first high-level destination hotel aiming to combine a concern for the environment – on local and planetary levels – and luxury. The owners say sustainability is at the heart of the project and that the design and colour palette will reflect the landscape and the sea. Due to open in early summer, Immerso will have 37 rooms and a restaurant – Emme – under the consulting guidance of Michelin-starred chef Alexandre Silva of Lisbon’s Loco restaurant. There will be a vegetable garden, in-house beer production (one Pilsner, one ale) and plans are afoot to host surfboard workshops. Audrey Gillan England Clock up your steps on the Lake District’s Ullswater Way In late 2020 a new bridge opened at the northern end of Ullswater, five years after Storm Desmond destroyed the old one, and first across it was a flock of sheep. Leave the car behind and go off-season for spring flowers, autumn colours or crisp winter hikes. Penrith station is half an hour away by bus: the 508 rolls from there, past the green fells that rise out of Ullswater’s misty, island-dotted water. Ullswater Steamers from Pooley Bridge run to remote Howtown Pier on the eastern shore of the lake or to the 150-metre-high Aira Force waterfall on the west. The Ullswater Way is a weekend-ready, 20-mile circuit of the lake. It climbs to the iron age circle of Maiden Castle, with views that stretch east to the Pennines, and heads down again through rugged, ferny woods. Fellwalking author Alfred Wainwright called Ullswater “loveliest of lakes, curving gracefully into the far distance”, and opined that the seven mossy waterside miles from Howtown to Glenridding formed the “most beautiful and rewarding walk in Lakeland”. The Ullswater Way opened in 2016; its daffodil waymarkings flag up that this is the lake where Wordsworth wandered past his verse-inspiring flowers. A new five-mile loop from Pooley Bridge leads to the Dalemain Estate, for tea by a log fire in the medieval hall; another detour, added in 2019, takes in Lowther Castle. Stay in a hobbit hole or a cabin with a stargazing roof at green-award-winning glamping complex the Quiet Site (from £85 a night for two adults and four children). It’s right on the Ullswater Way, and there’s a zero-waste shop and off-grid cafe. New pet- and family-friendly, carbon-positive Gingerbread Houses with wooden walls, heat pumps and beech hedges, opened in 2021. Phoebe Taplin Croatia 700km of waterways for the taking in a Unesco biosphere They’re calling it the “Amazon of Europe” – which might be overselling it a tad – a vast, newly declared Unesco biosphere reserve that follows the routes of the Mura, Drava and Danube rivers as they meander through Austria, Slovenia, Hungary, Croatia and Serbia. It’s the biggest protected river area in Europe, covering over 400 miles of waterways, and I’ve got my eye on a couple of areas in Croatia and along its border with Serbia. The first is Kopački Rit nature park, a huge area of wetlands between the Drava and Danube rivers by the Serbian border. You can take a small boat tour along its waterways to watch the birdlife, and hire a bike to cycle along the park’s beautifully flat trails. You could also hop across the border into Serbia and hike through the forested trails of Gornje Podunavlje nature reserve which runs along the Danube. The second area isn’t quite so well known to British visitors. Where the Mura meets the Drava river by the Hungarian border near the village of Legrad, there’s the specially protected nature reserve of Veliki Pažut, where a solar-powered boat runs along the river to spot rare birds, including the little tern. I’d then hire a bike and cycle along the Drava and head inland along the old Iron Curtain EV13 bike trail to the pretty baroque town of Koprivnica. I’d carry on to the village of Hlebine, birthplace of Croatian naive art, which I’ve always found fascinating. And then finish with a swim in Šoderica, a lake formed by the Drava, and a cold beer in one of the lakeside cafes. Mary Novakovich Spain Red wine and Roman ruins in Tarragona Once the capital of Roman Spain, Tarragona tends to get overlooked, but there’s something for everyone in this elegant Mediterranean city, from ancient monuments to the bars and restaurants of the old town. The city was founded by the Scipio brothers, both Roman generals, in 217BC and their legacy includes a largely intact Roman amphitheatre and circus as well as the spectacular Devil’s Bridge aqueduct two miles north of the city. The city was declared a Unesco world heritage site in 2000. The town is dominated by a 13th-century cathedral, built on the site of a mosque and before that a Roman temple. Unlike Barcelona’s gothic quarter, Tarragona old town hasn’t been lost to tourism. There are excellent restaurants serving local specialities such as romesco de peix, a Catalan fish stew. It’s also a treat to eat in the restaurants by the port, where the fish is cooked more or less straight off the boat. People associate the region with cava, Catalonia’s sparkling wine, but some of Spain’s best reds also come from Tarragona, notably priorat and montsant, and the local Yzaguirre vermouth makes a great aperitif. Tarragona also has a fine city beach, Platja del Miracle. A nine-mile coastal walk runs along beaches and through umbrella pines to Altafulla, a good lunch stop before catching a train back to the city. Those with strong stomachs and no fear of heights might prefer the Port Aventura theme park and its 65mph rollercoaster. Trains to Tarragona leave from Barcelona Passeig de Gràcia every half-hour, taking time 1¼ hours Stephen Burgen England Celebrate the 1,900th birthday of Hadrian’s Wall This year marks exactly 19 centuries since Emperor Hadrian oversaw the start of work on the 73-mile wall to guard the Roman empire’s remote north-western border – and a year-long festival is planned to celebrate. From the banks of the Tyne in Newcastle to the Solway Firth, west of Carlisle, this Unesco-listed frontier has a national trail tracking it from coast to coast. You can walk beside sections of wall or follow its former course, snaking over grassy hills, past turrets, milecastles and whole Roman towns. There are huge views across the landscapes of Northumberland and Cumbria from ruins like Housesteads fort with its barracks, hospital and communal loos. Fragments of ancient life here – a hobnailed leather shoe or a bowl with a carved soldier’s name – survive in the museum. Hadrian’s Wall 1900 Festival kicks off in late January and will include new site-specific artworks, summer evening concerts, re-enactments, walks, Roman-themed light trails and a travelling Saturnalia. It’s a great time to explore – I intend to walk it in stages over the course of the year. Phoebe Taplin Sweden Rock up at a skyscraping wooden hotel on the east coast International visitors usually head for Sweden’s big southern cities or the mountainous north, where local companies offer a flurry of wintry outdoor experiences, from ice-carving to snowy horseback safaris. But it’s sometimes the less obvious destinations that offer a true taste of Sweden. Take Skellefteå, 430 miles north of Stockholm along the sand-fringed east coast. By international standards, this former gold-mining outpost is tiny, with a population smaller than Scunthorpe’s. Its eco-credentials are world class, though: Skellefteå is leading the way in sustainable timber construction, and The Wood Hotel (doubles from £150 B&amp;B), with Scandi-minimal and a rooftop terrace, has just opened inside a new cultural centre. This 20-storey architectural triumph is one of the world’s tallest timber buildings, with epic views of the surrounding forests. Skellefteå is not a tourist hub, but it should be. During winter you might see the northern lights, and there are tons of eco-friendly activities to try in the forests nearby, from hiking to elk-spotting. Photographers can snap golden eagles in the wild right through until March, and in summer pristine beaches are perfect for evening swims. Steve Vickers, editor of Routes North Scandinavia travel guide France Brittany’s enchanting coastline and seaweed spas On a fine sand beach in the small seaside town of Brignogan-Plages on Finistère’s dramatic north coast, Hôtel de la Mer (doubles from €90 room-only) reinvented itself as an ecologically responsible hotel in 2016. The spacious 18-room residence is warmed and powered by renewable energy; it harvests rainwater and recycles as much as possible; and its owners are passionate about the local crop – seaweed. With foraging workshops, seaweed-based spa treatments and seaweed-themed menus in the restaurant, there is much to enjoy, but it is the hotel’s position on this enchanting and little-visited coastline that steals the show. After a day exploring Finistère’s pretty islands and broad sweeping Atlantic beaches, head back to the hotel for a drink, then enjoy a pre-dinner paddle among the rocks in the shallows as the tide creeps in, enjoying the stillness of the evening. And as this region is just an overnight ferry ride away – on Brittany Ferries’ Plymouth-to-Roscoff route – the journey there is stress-free. Carolyn Boyd England A living artwork in Cornwall’s Eden Project The huge greenhouse domes that form the Eden Project have gardens inside and out: valleys of spring bulbs, hothouse-pungent rainforests, an oasis of rose and jasmine, and a treetop walkway overlooking palms and papayas. Eden has just announced a new 55-metre-long living artwork. An autumn-planted, bee-friendly Pollinator Pathmaker by artist Alexandra Ginsberg will be a permanent installation, due to be in flower for human and insect visitors by June. You can arrive by train at St Austell station and catch the new Daytripper bus or cycle four miles through wooded valleys. St Austell is also an easy bus or bike ride from sandy beaches, village pubs and the subtropical Lost Gardens of Heligan. It’s a five-minute stroll from the station to St Austell’s Victorian brewery, where seagulls call, the air is heavy with hops and tasting tours have just restarted. Phoebe Taplin Ireland Unwind in a hot seaweed bath in County Waterford Waterford is curiously overlooked and under-appreciated as a destination. The star destinations of Dublin, Kerry and Galway grab the headlines and by far the greater number of visitors, but the small southern county has an abundance of attractions – and some serious sustainable travel credentials. From historic, walkable and rapidly regenerating Waterford City – recently voted “best place to live in Ireland” in the Irish Times – venture out on the Waterford Greenway, the country’s longest dedicated cycling and walking trail, which runs for 28 miles to Dungarvan using a former railway track that features 11 bridges, three viaducts and a 400-metre tunnel. Alternatively, hug the scenic and secluded Copper Coast, a 15-mile stretch of rugged shoreline between Tramore and Dungarvan that is one of only three Irish Unesco-designated Geoparks. Stop off for seaweed foraging, tastings and beach picnics with Marie Power, or the Sea Gardener (three-hour trips €35). A little further on at Helvick pier is Sólás Na Mara, a wellness centre offering one of Ireland’s oldest natural therapies – hot seaweed baths. Lismore, in the west, is possibly the prettiest town in Ireland and celebrated for its charming cathedral, imposing castle and beautiful River Blackwater views; downstream, in Villierstown, is Blackwater Eco Tours, a not-for-profit community enterprise that has four family-size eco-pods (from €95) and activities such as self-drive boats and canoeing. Hikers heading to the peaks, plateaux, moorlands and corrie lakes of the unexplored Comeragh and Knockmealdown mountains should stay at Nire Valley Eco Camp (from €125 a night for two) which boasts five “bedrooms in a meadow” – stylish solar-powered cabins with dedicated wetlands to process wastewater. “People who stay with us soon realise that Waterford has this fabulous mix of mountains and sea, woodlands and rivers – all within easy reach of each other,” says Hilary Britton, owner of the Getaway (pitches from €20), a new motorhome and glamping eco-park near Dungarvan that provides “clear-conscience camping”. Britton adds: “For most visitors to Ireland, it’s a forgotten county.” Philip Watson Austria Lech-Zurs aims for more sustainable skiing breaks As a sector that will be hugely affected by global warming, the ski industry is making progress towards a more sustainable model. Pyha, in Finland’s eastern Lapland, wants to become the world’s “cleanest” ski area, and was the first Scandinavian resort to go carbon neutral, back in 2011. Laax, in Switzerland, wants to do the same by 2030 – making the entire resort self-sufficient, not just the mountain infrastructure of lifts and restaurants; many resorts, including Ishgl in the Austrian Tirol, have already achieved this. In Italy’s Trentino region, Pejo 3000 claimed it was the “world’s first plastic-free ski resort” when it banned disposable plastic in 2019. Also aiming to impress with its eco credentials, and with an epic ski area to boot, is Lech-Zurs in Austria’s Arlberg. Depending on Covid restrictions, it’s worth a visit in 2022. Linked to St Anton, which has some of the best off-piste riding in Europe, and with its own extensive freeride terrain (which gets tracked out far less rapidly thanks to the popularity of long lunches at its mountain restaurants), it is working hard on the green front. The number of guest beds is capped at 10,000 to curtail development, lift pass numbers have been limited, local biomass heaters provide heat and communal hot water, and so on. On the white front there’s plenty of steep off-piste, cruisy pistes to tiny mountain villages, plus shopping for traditional Austrian boots and clothes on Lech’s twinkling main drag. The Alpenland hotel (doubles from €195 half-board) is great value, but better still, escape the glitz in the peaceful riverside hamlet of Zug, staying maybe at the family-run Schafberg (doubles from €125 B&amp;B). Riding a classic off-piste route that drops 1,000 vertical metres from the Madloch-Joch to Zug is a pleasure one hopes will continue. The nearest station is Langen am Arlberg (trains from Innsbruck and Munich) or St Anton (trains from Zurich), both linked by bus Gemma Bowes* * * January Nonfiction Everything Is True by Roopa Farooki, Bloomsbury The novelist and doctor shares her story of love, loss and grief through the Covid-19 crisis. Abolition. Feminism. Now. by Angela Davis, Gina Dent, Erica Meiners and Beth Richie, Hamish Hamilton This manifesto is published alongside a new edition of Davis’s 1974 memoir this month; three more books by Davis are to come. I Came All This Way to Meet You: Writing Myself Home by Jami Attenberg, Serpent’s Tail Not your average writer’s memoir, this one takes in wanderlust, independence and the creative life. Smile: The Story of a Face by Sarah Ruhl, Bodley Head The US playwright’s witty and moving memoir of what happened when her face was paralysed by Bell’s palsy. We Need Snowflakes: In Defence of the Sensitive, The Angry and the Offended by Hannah Jewell, Coronet An incisive look at the reality of “woke” culture, and who gains from demonising a generation. * * * Fiction To Paradise by Hanya Yanagihara, Picador The follow-up to A Little Life explores the urge to protect what we love across three eras: a genderfluid 19th century, the height of the Aids crisis and a totalitarian, pandemic-ridden future. A bravura achievement. Free Love by Tessa Hadley, Cape It’s 1967, and a woman’s suburban existence is rocked when she meets a younger man, in the British author’s story of intellectual and sexual awakening. Harrow by Joy Williams, Tuskar Rock The return of an American original: in Williams’s first novel for more than 20 years, a teenager roams a corporatised landscape as environmental apocalypse bites. Odd, witty and original. The Love Songs of WEB Du Bois by Honorée Fanonne Jeffers, 4th Estate The US poet’s debut novel is a big, ambitious multi-generational family saga, ranging from colonial slavery into present times, set in the deep south. The Anomaly by Hervé le Tellier, translated by Adriana Hunter, Michael Joseph A plane flies through a storm and inexplicably duplicates, along with all the passengers ... A mind-bending, prize-winning speculative thriller that has been a runaway bestseller in France. Our Country Friends by Gary Shteyngart, Allen &amp; Unwin A witty, humane psychodrama from the author of Super Sad True Love Story, about a group of friends holing up to wait out the pandemic. The Last One by Fatima Daas, translated by Lara Vergnaud, Small Axes This French prize winner is an autobiographical debut of growing up with conflicting identities: French, Algerian, Muslim, lesbian. The Twyford Code by Janice Hallett, Viper Constructed from audio transcripts, the follow-up to The Appeal looks for a code in the work of a children’s author. How High We Go in the Dark by Sequoia Nagamatsu, Bloomsbury Spanning countries and centuries, an ambitious speculative debut of humanity adjusting to a plague unleashed by melting permafrost in the Arctic. The Sentence by Louise Erdrich, Corsair Following the Pulitzer-winning The Night Watchman, a funny and involving story of ghosts and bookshops from “the poet laureate of the contemporary Native American experience”. * * * Poetry Refractive Africa by Will Alexander, Granta First UK publication for the American poet, with three long poems focusing on colonialism and resistance. * * * February Nonfiction Control: The Dark History and Troubling Present of Eugenics by Adam Rutherford, W&amp;N The bestselling geneticist turns his attention to a sinister subject that is not just in our past. Out of the Sun: Essays at the Crossroads of Race by Esi Edugyan, Serpent’s Tail Five challenging essays on identity, experience, race and art by the twice Booker-shortlisted Canadian writer. Please Miss: A Heartbreaking Work of Staggering Penis by Grace Lavery, Daunt A smart and funny memoir spanning addiction and gender transition, queer theory and standup comedy. In Search of Mary Seacole: The Making of a Cultural Icon by Helen Rappaport, Simon &amp; Schuster A timely biography of the British-Jamaican medic who nursed British soldiers on the frontline during the Crimean war. The Island of Extraordinary Captives by Simon Parkin, Sceptre Painstaking research among first-hand accounts reveals a shameful episode in Britain’s history: the internment of 30,000 second world war refugees. How to Solve a Crime: Stories from the Cutting Edge of Forensics by Angela Gallop, Hodder &amp; Stoughton Stories from a 45-year career, including when Gallop helped identify the man who stabbed George Harrison. The Stasi Poetry Circle by Philip Oltermann, Faber The remarkable and ripe-for-the-movies story of how – and why – East Germany’s secret police learned to write lyrical verse. * * * Fiction Love Marriage by Monica Ali, Virago The first novel in a decade from the author of Brick Lane is a portrait of contemporary society built around a wedding set to bring two families and two cultures together. Pure Colour by Sheila Heti, Harvill Secker Is this world just God’s first draft? Playful philosophical musings on art, love and crisis from the author of How Should a Person Be? Run and Hide by Pankaj Mishra, Hutchinson Heinemann The nonfiction author’s first novel for two decades dramatises global turmoil through a group of friends in India who are determined to make it big. Again, Rachel by Marian Keyes, Michael Joseph Twenty-five years on, a sequel to the beloved Rachel’s Holiday. Rachel, who was a mess back in the 90s, finds her now settled life threatened by the reappearance of a former love interest. Devotion by Hannah Kent, Picador A journey from 19th-century Prussia to Australia is life-changing for two young women, in the new novel from the author of Burial Rites. Brown Girls by Daphne Palasi Andreades, 4th Estate A sensation in the US, this lyrical debut focuses on a group of young women of colour in Queens, New York. 7 ½ by Christos Tsiolkas, Atlantic A writer is determined to celebrate beauty and the pleasures of the senses in a novel about the power of the imagination. * * * Poetry Ephemeron by Fiona Benson, Cape From the author of Vertigo &amp; Ghost: poems about transitoriness – whether insect lives or teenage emotions – plus a retelling of the Minotaur myth. * * * March Nonfiction Burning Questions by Margaret Atwood, Chatto Atwood turns her sharp eye on 50 burning questions “from debt to tech, the climate crisis to freedom” in an “exhilarating” essay collection. The Instant by Amy Liptrot, Canongate The bestselling nature writer explores the streets, clubs and parks of Berlin, encountering goshawks, raccoons and hooded crows on the way. Mother’s Boy: A Writer’s Beginnings by Howard Jacobson, Cape A “funny, revealing and tender” memoir of the Booker winner’s Manchester childhood and his path to becoming a writer. You Don’t Know Us Negroes and Other Essays by Zora Neale Hurston, HQ The first comprehensive collection of the American author’s “provocative” essays, spanning more than 35 years. In the Margins: On the Pleasures of Reading and Writing by Elena Ferrante, translated by Ann Goldstein, Europa A collection of original essays reflecting on some of her favourite activities, by the acclaimed author of My Brilliant Friend. A Line Above the Sky by Helen Mort, Ebury The deeply physical acts of climbing and motherhood are explored by the prize-winning poet and novelist. Holding Tight, Letting Go: My Life, Death and All the Madness in Between by Sarah Hughes, Blink The late journalist’s memoir treasures the small pleasures that make up a life. Constructing a Nervous System: Cultural Reckonings by Margo Jefferson, Granta Jazz and movies, art, race and class come under the microscope in this mix of memoir and cultural criticism. * * * Fiction The Slowworm’s Song by Andrew Miller, Sceptre The acclaimed historical novelist delves into more recent times, with an inquiry into an incident during the Troubles in Northern Ireland. Booth by Karen Joy Fowler, Serpent’s Tail The author of We Are All Completely Beside Ourselves returns with a novel set against the tumultuous backdrop of 19th-century America charting the fortunes of the Booth family – including the man who shot Abraham Lincoln. Homesickness by Colin Barrett, Cape The long-awaited second collection from the Irish short-story writer, whose debut Young Skins won the Guardian first book award. Moon Witch, Spider King by Marlon James, Hamish Hamilton Second in the Booker winner’s fantasy series drawing on African mythology. Paradais by Fernanda Melchor, translated by Sophie Hughes, Fitzcarraldo Misfit Mexican teenagers hatch a terrible plan, in the follow-up to the blistering Hurricane Season. Run Rose Run by Dolly Parton and James Patterson, Century Written with the prolific Patterson, who previously teamed up with Bill Clinton, Parton’s debut thriller about a young singer-songwriter in peril will be accompanied by a tie-in album. The Exhibitionist by Charlotte Mendelson, Mantle A welcome return for a witty chronicler of family secrets, with a tale of art, ego and the sacrifices of marriage. Our Wives Under the Sea by Julia Armfield, Picador Following her electric short story collection saltslow, a debut novel about love, loss and the secrets of the ocean. These Days by Lucy Caldwell, Faber Last year she won the BBC National short story award; this novel about two sisters living through the Belfast blitz will be one to watch. Chivalry by Neil Gaiman and Colleen Doran, Headline A graphic novel in which an elderly woman goes on a quest after buying the Holy Grail in a secondhand shop. * * * Poetry Vinegar Hill by Colm Tóibín, Carcanet Written over several decades, the Irish author’s debut book of poems reflects on private and public life. Bless the Daughter Raised by a Voice in Her Head by Warsan Shire, Chatto The first full-length collection from the Somali-British author known for her collaborations with Beyoncé. * * * Children Where the Heart Should Be by Sarah Crossan, Bloomsbury Love and survival during the Irish potato famine, from the award-winning YA author. * * * April Nonfiction This Woman’s Work edited by Kim Gordon and Sinéad Gleeson, White Rabbit A rousing hymn to women in music, with contributors including Anne Enright, Maggie Nelson, Ottessa Moshfegh and Yiyun Li. The Palace Papers: Inside the House of Windsor – The Truth and the Turmoil by Tina Brown, Century Promising top sources and intimate access, an account of 25 years since the death of Diana. Gathering Blossoms Under Fire by Alice Walker, W&amp;N Forty years of The Color Purple author’s journals, collected for the first time, explore her developing thoughts and feelings as a writer, a woman, an African-American and citizen of the world. The Lives of the Saints: The Laureate Lectures by Sebastian Barry, Faber Three lectures – delivered as part of Barry’s tenure as the laureate for Irish fiction - reflect on his life and extraordinary career so far. Finding Me by Viola Davis, Coronet A memoir of overcoming obstacles to become the most nominated Black female actor in the history of the Oscars. In Love: A Memoir of Love and Loss by Amy Bloom, Granta Bloom’s staggeringly honest account of taking her husband Brian to Dignitas in Switzerland, where he was helped to end his life. Big Snake Little Snake: An Inquiry Into Risk by DBC Pierre, Profile Booker winner’s typically mercurial meditation on the ever-constant allure of risk, his obsession with gambling and a Trinidadian parrot. * * * Fiction Young Mungo by Douglas Stuart, Picador The follow-up to Booker winner Shuggie Bain tells of a dangerous love between two young Glaswegian men – one Protestant, one Catholic. The Candy House by Jennifer Egan, Corsair A Visit from the Goon Squad characters reappear in this “sibling novel” – a meditation on technology, privacy and the need for connection. People Person by Candice Carty‑Williams, Trapeze A big-hearted story of a young woman coming to terms with her complicated London family from the author of the game-changing Queenie. Villager by Tom Cox, Unbound The amiable nature writer’s debut novel, delving into the landscape and folklore of a moorland village. Companion Piece by Ali Smith, Hamish Hamilton The follow-up to the Seasonal quartet is a “celebration of companionship” in all its forms. Elizabeth Finch by Julian Barnes, Cape Barnes considers history, philosophy and literature through a student’s recollections of an inspirational teacher. Glory by NoViolet Bulawayo, Chatto From the author of We Need New Names, and inspired by the fall of Robert Mugabe, a parable of oppression and revolution told through the animal kingdom. Bolla by Pajtim Statovci, translated by David Hackston, Faber Finnish prize-winner of forbidden attraction between an Albanian and a Serb, as war threatens in Kosovo. Sea of Tranquility by Emily St John Mandel, Picador An ambitious time-travelling panorama of pandemics and parallel worlds from the Station Eleven author. Emergency by Daisy Hildyard, Fitzcarraldo From the acclaimed essaysist, a philosophical novel about a Yorkshire childhood that explores the interconnectedness of the climate crisis era. * * * Poetry Time Is a Mother by Ocean Vuong, Cape The author of On Earth We’re Briefly Gorgeous faces up to the aftermath of his mother’s death. Orlam by PJ Harvey, Picador The musician’s book-length poem about a young girl’s last year of childhood innocence, written in Dorset dialect. * * * May Nonfiction The Last Days of Roger Federer: And Other Endings by Geoff Dyer, Canongate A book about late-life achievement by a master of dry humour, author of Yoga for People Who Can’t Be Bothered to Do It. I Used to Live Here Once: The Haunted Life of Jean Rhys by Miranda Seymour, William Collins This biography promises to “dig deeper” than any other, particular into Rhys’s upbringing in Dominica. Good Pop, Bad Pop by Jarvis Cocker, Cape Inspired by a collection of objects found in his loft, the Pulp singer’s memoir is billed as “funny, revealing and surprising”. Buried: An Alternative History of the First Millennium in Britain by Alice Roberts, Simon &amp; Schuster A cutting-edge account of ancient history takes in Roman cremations, graveside feasts and “deviant burials” with the heads rearranged. The Premonitions Bureau by Sam Knight, Faber The fascinating true story of John Barker, the maverick psychiatrist who set out to study “precognition”. Regenesis: How to Feed the World Without Devouring the Planet by George Monbiot, Allen Lane The Guardian columnist makes an urgent and ambitious argument for revolutionising the way we grow food. * * * Fiction Here Goes Nothing by Steve Toltz, Sceptre More high-octane black comedy from the Booker-shortlisted author of A Fraction of the Whole: a story of love, murder and revenge related from the afterlife as the pandemic hits Australia. The Schoolhouse by Sophie Ward, Corsair Her philosophical debut Love and Other Thought Experiments made the Booker longlist; this follow-up uncovers buried childhood secrets. The Perfect Golden Circle by Benjamin Myers, Bloomsbury A Falklands vet creates crop circles across England at the tail end of the 80s, in an investigation of trauma, class, healing and male friendship. Either/Or by Elif Batuman, Cape Batuman’s latest comic novel sees her heroine dive into student life at Harvard and trace her roots in Turkey. Ruth &amp; Pen by Emilie Pine, Hamish Hamilton Pine came to attention for her personal essays in Notes to Self; this first novel explores the stories of two women over one day in Dublin. You Made a Fool of Death With Your Beauty by Akwaeke Emezi, Faber Holiday romance with a twist from the author of The Death of Vivek Oji. * * * Poetry More Fiya: A New Collection of Black British Poetry edited by Kayo Chingonyi, Canongate An anthology of celebrated and emerging names, such as Inua Ellams and Warsan Shire. * * * June Nonfiction An Immense World: How Animal Senses Reveal the Hidden Realms Around Us by Ed Jong, Bodley Head Why shrimps’ eyes are like satellite technology, and more awe-inspiring animal facts. The Sister by Sung Yoon Li, Macmillan A fascinating and somewhat frightening biography of Kim Jong Un’s sister and probable successor. What Are You Doing Here by Floella Benjamin, Macmillan From Trinidad to the House of Lords via children’s TV – a unique memoir from an inspirational figure. Old Rage by Sheila Hancock, Bloomsbury The much-loved actor candidly shares the fear, joy and frustration she has found in her ninth decade. I Heard What You Said by Jeffrey Boakye, Picador Relating the racism the author has experienced as a student and teacher, and calling for the diversification of schools and the decolonisation of the curriculum. Access All Areas: A Backstage Pass Through 50 Years of Music by Barbara Charone, White Rabbit The fearsome journalist-turned-press officer for Madonna has some stories to tell from inside the music industry. * * * Fiction The Men by Sandra Newman, Granta The follow-up to The Heavens imagines another parallel world, in which every male person suddenly vanishes. Fight Night by Miriam Toews, Faber The Canadian author focuses on a household of fierce and eccentric women who know how to survive. Murder Before Evensong by Richard Coles, W&amp;N The broadcaster, memoirist and vicar turns his hand to cosy crime, with the first in a planned series of 80s-set mysteries. Happy-Go-Lucky by David Sedaris, Little, Brown Short stories from the king of bittersweet comic writing. Lapvona by Ottessa Moshfegh, Cape Murder, cannibalism, occult forces: a pitch-black take on fairytales set in a medieval fiefdom from the author of My Year of Rest and Relaxation. Ghost Lover by Lisa Taddeo, Bloomsbury Short stories from the author of Three Women and Animal. Nonfiction: A Novel by Julie Myerson, Corsair Playing with the borders of fact and fiction, this is an exploration of creativity, addiction and mother-daughter relationships. * * * July Nonfiction Ten Steps to Nanette by Hannah Gadsby, Allen &amp; Unwin The comic behind the stunning standup special Nanette tells her story. Pictures by Janet Malcolm, Granta In her final book, the award-winning biographer looks at her own life, with the help of 12 family photographs. The Boy in the Boat by Mir Rahimi, Trapeze The story of a boy who fled the Taliban and made it to the UK. The Twilight World by Werner Herzog, Bodley Head A master storyteller relates the bizarre tale of a Japanese soldier who defended an island in the Philippines for 29 years after the second world war ended. * * * Fiction The House of Fortune by Jessie Burton, Picador A sequel to the 2014 bestseller of love and artistry in 17th-century Amsterdam, The Miniaturist. * * * Children Sadé and Her Shadow Beasts by Rachel Faturoti, Hachette For nine-plus, a hotly tipped debut about grief and the power of the imagination, as a young girl is gripped by anxiety after the death of her mother. * * * August Nonfiction Dust: A History and a Future of Environmental Disaster by Jay Owens, Hodder How this overlooked substance is at the heart of deep entanglements between people, capitalism and the natural environment. Black and Female by Tsitsi Dangarembga, Faber Essays by the Zimbabwean Booker nominee that explore the intersecting aspects of her identity. Lost Realms: A History of Britain from the Romans to the Vikings by Thomas Williams, William Collins This ambitious history of how warring kingdoms shaped Britain will appeal to history buffs and Game of Thrones fans alike. None of the Above by Travis Alabanza, Canongate The performer and theatre maker, who is one of Bernardine Evaristo’s “ones to watch”, explores life outside gender boundaries. * * * Fiction Sojourn by Amit Chaudhuri, Faber A fable of memory and freedom about a man exploring Berlin’s legacy of division. Malarkoi by Alex Pheby, Galley Beggar The follow-up to the weird and wonderful Mordew, set in the same Gormenghastly fantasy world. The Night Ship by Jess Kidd, Canongate Based on the true story of the shipwrecked Batavia, a novel of mutiny and imagination connecting two children hundreds of years apart. Venomous Lumpsucker by Ned Beauman, Sceptre The author of Boxer, Beetle returns with a near-future thriller about the extinction of the natural world. The Long Knives by Irvine Welsh, Cape Another instalment in his Crime series. * * * Poetry The Arctic by Don Paterson, Faber A new collection from the winner of the Whitbread and TS Eliot prizes takes on grief, translation and the pandemic. When My Brother Was an Aztec by Natalie Diaz, Faber The debut collection from the Pulitzer prize-winning author of Postcolonial Love Poem explores family and myth. * * * September Nonfiction And Finally by Henry Marsh, Cape The bestselling neurosurgeon turns his expert eye on his own brain and mind. A Visible Man by Edward Enninful, Bloomsbury How Enninful, a Black, gay, working-class refugee, became editor-in-chief of British Vogue. The Story of Art without Men by Katy Hessel, Cornerstone A big full-colour history that puts female artists back in the picture. Faith, Hope and Carnage by Nick Cave and Sean O’Hagan, Canongate Based on hours of conversations, this intriguing joint enterprise will cover big ideas, from art and music to faith, grief and more. Title TBC by Adam Kay, Trapeze While its contents are still mysterious, Kay’s next adult title promises all the “humour and insight” of his 2.5 million-selling This Is Going to Hurt. Decolonising Healthcare: The hidden history of medicine by Dr Annabel Sowemimo, Wellcome Sharing her own experiences as a doctor, patient and activist, Sowemimo uncovers systemic racism, healthcare myths and the colonial roots of modern medicine. Toksvig’s Atlas: Eclectic Ramblings Around the World by Sandi Toksvig, Trapeze From Maori boxers to the bikers of Marrakesh, Toksvig’s unique voice lifts up the stories of women from around the world – and the odd man. The World by Simon Sebag Montefiore, W&amp;N A disarmingly ambitious project revealing humanity in all its glory from prehistory to the present day. * * * Fiction Act of Oblivion by Robert Harris, Hutchinson Heinemann Globe-trotting historical thriller about the two men found guilty of regicide in the wake of the execution of Charles I. Best of Friends by Kamila Shamsie, Bloomsbury Friendship and power collide in the new novel from the winner of the Women’s prize. Nights of Plague by Orhan Pamuk, translated by Ekin Oklap, Faber Historical novel from the Nobel laureate, set in the last decades of the Ottoman empire. Is Mother Dead by Vigdis Hjorth, translated by Charlotte Barslund, Verso Mind games between a middle-aged artist and her mother, as the Norwegian author returns to the themes of Will and Testament. * * * Poetry Untitled by Kathleen Jamie, Picador A new collection from Scotland’s current Makar. * * * Children Unraveller by Frances Hardinge, Macmillan A new novel for 12 and up from the Costa winner, set in a fantasy world where anyone can inflict a curse, but only one person has the power to lift them. Dogs of the Deadlands by Anthony McGowan, Rock the Boat From the Carnegie-winning author, a novel about the pet dogs left behind in Chernobyl after the disaster, and their struggle to survive in the wild. * * * October Nonfiction Title TBC by Malorie Blackman, Merky The long-awaited autobiography of one of the world’s greatest children’s writers. Silence All the Noise by Caster Semenya, Merky The Olympic gold medallist’s courageous story, a passionate ode to the joy of running. The Storm by Luke Mogelson, Quercus The war correspondent’s eye-witness account of the storming of the Capitol was widely acclaimed as a first draft of history. This is his record of a year that changed America and shook the world. The Diaries of Alan Rickman, Canongate A collection taken from 27 handwritten volumes of the late actor’s “witty, gossipy and utterly candid” thoughts, spanning 25 years. The East was Red by Pankaj Mishra, Verso The multi-award-winning essayist and novelist offers portraits of authors from Edward Said to Zadie Smith, to celebrate the intriguing dance between life and art. Endless Flight: The Life of Joseph Roth by Keiron Pim, Granta The first English-language biography of a writer who lived in the shadow of war. Hannah Arendt: An Intellectual Biography by Thomas Meyer, Williams Collins The first major biography of the philosopher since 1982, drawing on new archival research. The Good Drinker: How I Learned to Love Drinking Less by Adrian Chiles, Profile An extension of Chiles’s honest and revealing TV documentary about drinking and cutting back. * * * Fiction Illuminations by Alan Moore, Bloomsbury The first collection of short fiction from the comics legend. Dinosaurs by Lydia Millet, Norton The follow-up to A Children’s Bible, about an Arizona man whose neighbours live in a glass house, investigates the nature of goodness. The Secret Diaries of Charles Ignatius Sancho by Paterson Joseph, Dialogue The debut from the actor most recently seen in Vigil is based on the life of the Black writer and composer, who was born on a slave ship in the Atlantic and became a toast of Regency London. The Pothunters by PG Wodehouse, Hutchinson Heinemann A new edition of the comic genius’s first novel, set in a boarding school and written when he was just 20, published to mark its 120th anniversary. Blind Owl by Sadegh Hedayat, translated by Sassan Tabatabai, Penguin Classics A new translation for the most famous Persian novel of the 20th century. * * * Children The Ministry of Unladylike Activity by Robin Stevens, Puffin From the much-loved Murder Most Unladylike author, a new crime series set during the second world war, in which children are trained as spies. * * * November Nonfiction Title TBC by Quentin Tarantino, Orion A top-secret new nonfiction book from the film-maker and author of Once Upon a Time in Hollywood. Novelist as a Vocation by Haruki Murakami, Harvill Secker The Japanese author offers his thoughts on finding your own style, creating characters and the links between literature, music and art. Follow the Money by Jonathan Wilson, Little, Brown The Observer football columnist’s book about the Charlton brothers digs deeply into their backgrounds. Unlearn by Rachel Cargyle, Vintage What could we achieve if we unlearned the things we take for granted and took action based on reality instead? The Omniscient Cell by Sid Mukherjee, Vintage The Pulitzer-winning cancer physician and geneticist tells the story of the humble and wonderful cell. * * * Fiction Our Share of Night by Mariana Enriquez, translated by Megan McDowell, Granta Chunky father-and-son gothic roadtrip novel set against the backdrop of Argentina’s military junta, from the author of the International Booker-shortlisted The Dangers of Smoking in Bed. Untitled by Nino Haratischvili, translated by Charlotte Collins, Scribe The follow-up to 2020’s bestselling Georgian family saga The Eighth Life will be a Wuthering Heights-style romance. The Peasants by Wladyslaw Reymont, translated by Anna Zaranko, Penguin The first translation in nearly a century of a Polish classic: an epic story of dangerous love and rural life, set at the end of the 19th century, when revolution is in the air. * * * Poetry Untitled by Sean O’Brien, Picador A new collection from the multi-award-winning author of The Drowned Book.In 2019, the UN named Finland the happiest place in the world, and Manuel Vazquez and journalist Ana Alfageme were sent by a Spanish magazine to find out why. Saunas are a big part of life there; the country has more than 2 million in residential and public settings. The pair agreed that they’d be good places to find locals to interview. This photo was taken on a sub-zero November day, when only six hours of light can be expected. The pair had already tried out a swanky coastal sauna. “I didn’t think I’d be able to do it,” Vazquez laughs. “But it really does liberate the endorphins. It’s exhilarating.” Next, Vazquez wanted to seek out a more authentic, traditional version that used wood. He had heard of a particularly popular one in the Helsinki neighbourhood of Kallio. “In winter, the practice is to alternate between the sauna and a body of water, like a lake or the sea,” he says. “But because this sauna is in the city, patrons just go and sit on the icy street.” Vazquez was drawn to the retro neon sign, the way the red light tinted the wet ground, and the myriad details. “They create a narrative, tell a story. The empty chairs next to the men seem to be inviting you to sit with them. “I intended to shoot properly with my digital camera, but first I quickly took this on my Pixel 3, almost like a test shot. Then we went over to break the ice.”New restrictions on freedom in England “must be an absolute last resort”, the health secretary has said. The record-breaking wave of the Omicron Covid variant will, however, “test the limits of finite NHS capacity even more than a typical winter”, Sajid Javid said, as hospital admissions in England climbed to their highest since last January. Writing in the Daily Mail, Javid said England had “welcomed in 2022 with some of the least restrictive measures in Europe”, after the government decided against ramping up protective rules while the devolved countries opted for restrictions on nightclubs, hospitality and new year celebrations. “Curbs on our freedom must be an absolute last resort and the British people rightly expect us to do everything in our power to avert them,” Javid wrote. “Since I came into this role six months ago, I’ve also been acutely conscious of the enormous health, social and economic costs of lockdowns. “So I’ve been determined that we must give ourselves the best chance of living alongside the virus and avoiding strict measures in the future.” The health secretary did emphasise, however, that the time lag between infections and hospital admissions meant it was “inevitable that we will still see a big increase” in the number of Covid patients over the next month and warned that the pandemic was “still far from over”. A record 189,846 daily new Covid-19 cases were logged in the UK on Friday, according to the government. However, Prof Sir David Spiegelhalter, a Cambridge University statistician, said the actual number could be closer to half a million new infections a day in an “unprecedented wave”. Spiegelhalter, who is chair of the university’s Winton Centre for Risk and Evidence Communication, said the UK’s daily Covid-19 infections could be closer to 500,000 as a result of the testing regime being overstretched and reinfections not being counted in the UK government data. “This is a huge, unprecedented wave of infection and very daunting,” he told the BBC, adding that deaths were “not yet going up” and that the country could be “fairly optimistic” about avoiding the kind of crisis seen during the last winter wave, which reached its peak in mid-January 2021. “It looks like we are going to have a huge wave of cases and that is going to cause big disruption, in hospitals, of course, and other services, but in terms of translating to the very serious outcomes, I think we can be fairly optimistic,” he said. “Things will get worse but it will be nothing like the previous waves.” Hospital admissions in England are currently higher than at any point since last January, with 2,370 people admitted to hospital with Covid-19 on 29 December, a 90% week-on-week increase. Reports have suggested that the government’s current work-from-home guidance in England may remain in place for most of January in a bid to slow the spread of the new variant. The Daily Telegraph reported that the guidance, which is in place as part of England’s plan B measures alongside mask mandates in many public places and mandatory Covid passes for large events, may be extended by another three weeks. Boris Johnson initially said he wanted the measures, which expire six weeks after implementation, lifted “no later than early January and possibly before”. A review of the restrictions is expected on or close to 4 January. • This article was amended on 2 January 2022. An earlier version referred to Prof Sir David Spiegelhalter as a government adviser and member of its Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage). Although he is officially listed among the Sage participants, he says he attended only one meeting, in April 2020. Also Spiegelhalter told the BBC that “infections” could be close to 500,000, not “cases” as the article previously reported.1) Brennan Johnson, 20, Nottingham Forest At times it is hard to remember that this is the electric winger’s first true taste of the Championship. Johnson, the son of the former Forest striker David, has lit up games with direct bursts forward, providing five assists and five goals this season, the first an equaliser at local rivals Derby. Johnson scored an 11-minute hat-trick on loan at Lincoln in League One last season and is primed to play a part in Wales’s play-off quest to reach Qatar 2022. He is not short of top-flight admirers but Forest are determined to keep the academy graduate. 2) Isaiah Jones, 22, Middlesbrough It has been an incredible rise from eighth-tier Tooting &amp; Mitcham United, where West Ham’s Michail Antonio started his career, to Middlesbrough, for whom he made his league debut in August after returning from a productive loan at Queen of the South. Jones, who once trialled at Charlton, bypassed the under-23s at Tooting to become a non-league regular at 18. At his best driving forward, he has developed the defensive side of his game playing as a right wing-back for Boro. Wanted on loan by League Two clubs in the summer, he is now at the heart of Boro’s push for the Premier League. 3) Keane Lewis-Potter, 20, Hull City Locals no doubt knew they were witnessing someone a bit special when he finished one season with 128 goals for Hessle Rangers in the Hull &amp; District Youth League. Lewis-Potter joined his hometown club at 14, played for the under-23s at 17 and last season scored 15 times as Hull were promoted to the Championship. A winger who likes to dance off the left flank, he is quick and composed. At a time when Jarrod Bowen is drawing praise in high places, Hull have another tricky winger destined for big things. 4) Jordan Zemura, 22, Bournemouth The defender has proven influential since impressing on his league debut in August in the Championship’s curtain-raiser, with Scott Parker entrusting him with being his first-choice left-back. This month Zemura, who spent three years at QPR, is set to represent Zimbabwe at the Africa Cup of Nations, three years on from working as a glass fitter after his release by Charlton. His biggest asset is surely his athleticism given the way he bounds up and down the flank. “It feels like my superpower,” he says. 5) Alex Scott, 18, Bristol City Socks rolled down towards his ankles, no wonder the midfielder has been labelled the “Guernsey Grealish”. “I try to model my game on him,” Scott says. He travelled from the Channel Islands to Southampton, who released him at 12, and then Bournemouth as a youngster but while at eighth-tier Guernsey FC, for whom he played regularly aged 16, he impressed Bristol City on a week’s trial, scoring a perfect hat-trick in an under-18s game. Made his Championship debut as a 17-year-old in April and he signed a new four-year contract in August, a month before his England Under-19s debut. 6) Ronnie Edwards, 18, Peterborough United Thrust into the heart of the Posh defence after promotion, the centre-back, who turned 18 in March, has admirably dealt with what Neil Warnock would term the “muck and nettles” of the Championship. Edwards, who signed from Barnet as a 17-year-old, impressed Darren Ferguson in pre-season and is developing all the time in a team fighting relegation, showing aggression and a touch of class, while the chairman, Darragh MacAnthony, has tipped him to reach the top flight. Made his England Under-19s debut in October. 7) Scott Twine, 22, MK Dons No player has more goal involvements in League One – 11 goals and seven assists across 21 games this season – and those numbers are even more impressive when considering he was on loan at sixth-tier Chippenham Town as recently as 2020. That summer a swerving strike for his hometown club, Swindon, in pre-season caught the eye of the then Newport manager, Michael Flynn, and the attacking midfielder has not looked back since. A specialist in the spectacular – long-range rockets and free-kicks are his forte – Twine, who wears the No 9 shirt at MK Dons, has added a poacher’s instinct to his palette. 8) James Hill, 19, Fleetwood Town Such is the centre-back’s burgeoning reputation, a Barcelona scout paid Fleetwood a visit in October to cast an eye over the teenager. Hill made his first-team debut aged 16 against Blackpool who, along with Bolton, released him as a youngster. More than 50 senior appearances later, he is attracting interest from top-flight clubs. Lee Carsley, the England Under-21s manager, watched Hill against Wycombe to see how he would cope with the brawn of Adebayo Akinfenwa and was suitably impressed, calling him up to his squad in November. Hill, son of the former Bristol City full-back Matt, had to withdraw because of a knee injury, but more opportunities beckon. 9) Dan Neil, 20, Sunderland The academy graduate has enjoyed a breakthrough season under Lee Johnson, earning an England Under-20s call-up in November – alongside his club-mate Dennis Cirkin – after starring in midfield. His first professional goal, a delicious left-foot strike against Accrington from outside the box in September, provided a snapshot of his ability and craft. Sunderland view Neil as a future captain and he has already worn the armband in the EFL Trophy. “He’s got that lovely dribbling technique, a little bit like a young Paul Gascoigne,” says Johnson. 10) Ayoub Assal, 19, AFC Wimbledon Perhaps the pick of the bunch when it comes to the Dons’ exciting youngsters, the attacking midfielder has excelled since scoring on his league debut in March. The Dons’ head coach, Mark Robinson, who was formerly academy manager, has nurtured the development of the No 10, who started his career at Millwall. Assal, whose parents are Moroccan, has scored six goals in all competitions this season, impressing alongside Jack Rudoni, 20, Luke McCormick, 22, and the left-back Nesta Guinness-Walker, 22.The sun has risen from its slumber, its light reflecting on the still water. I go outside, attacked by the icy winds blowing hard. I retreat into my home to fetch my coat. December days are the coldest of all. I pass the hours skimming stones and making fires – watching the flames dance always helps me relax. I watch as my brothers play with the rocks, seeing how far they can throw. I join them, throwing stones until my arm becomes sore. Lunch now. My stomach growls as my mum hands me my food. I sit outside, watching the waves of the Channel, eating my ham sandwich and drinking a juice box. After, I go for a walk, climbing over big rocks and exploring caves. I look at the cliffs, searching for treasure. But what’s this? I see small shells embedded into the rocks. I pick at the shells, prying seven from the cliff. Ammonites, I tell myself, recognising the twisted shape. Fossils as old as the dinosaurs. I turn towards the sea. I think of the shells floating in the water, not rocks, but alive. I put an image in my head of them drifting in the ever-blue, tiny tentacles limp and lifeless, like in the books. I put them in my pocket and set off for home. The sun sets as I reach my house, the stars shimmering above my head like little lights in the dark sky. James, 12 • Read today’s other Young Country Diary piece, ‘Now I know loads about bullfinches’ • Footnoted added 27 January 2022. The West Dorset fossil hunting code of practice states that there should be no digging in situ in cliffs, except in special circumstancesMoney plays a key role in many people’s new year’s resolutions to change their lifestyle, so we asked five people to tell us about their financial goals for 2022 and how they plan to achieve them. The rising cost of living and the uncertainty over the pandemic are just two of the challenges that people are having to deal with, so what are some of the things that individuals are planning to do differently this year? ‘I’m hoping to support my activism through Patreon’ Natalie Evans’s financial goal relates to 2020, when her life changed after she filmed a racist incident on a train. The video went viral and Natalie, 32, and her sister Naomi ended up setting up the Instagram account Everyday Racism to help educate people about the issue, teach them how to become anti-racist and offer resources they have created. After accruing 190,000 followers, it has become such a huge platform that last month Natalie quit her job at a youth charity, while Naomi went down to three days a week in her role as a teacher to focus on the account. To help her survive financially, Natalie’s focus for 2022 is to attract people to their newly set-up Patreon account, where people can donate to support their work on Instagram. Patreon is an online platform used by musicians, artists and others where people can fund someone’s creative work via monthly membership. “People kept telling us to set one up. I wasn’t sure but it takes time to write up resources and do the things we want to do, and we need support,” Natalie says. “It’s a great way of having a safety net.” The Patreon platform will enable the sisters to create more exclusive content. “It would be great if there was enough of an income from it for me, and then potentially for Naomi for the two days she’s working for Everyday Racism,” she says. Their Patreon membership has various tiers of access with different prices. Those signing up for the £3 a month tier receive a monthly newsletter plus resources, while a £10 subscription gives supporters access to a monthly Zoom Q&amp;A focused on different topics. There are guest speakers and the chance to ask questions about anti-racism work and discuss current affairs with the sisters. As a result of quitting her job, Natalie says that another goal is to rein in her spending this year. “I’ve gone from a full-time wage to being freelance, so I need to cut down as much as I can in terms of personal spending. I’ll be cutting down on things like buying new clothes, meeting people for coffee, eating out and other subscription services.” ‘I’m going to give away 10% of my income’ Martin Hall, 25, has made a big commitment for 2022 – and beyond. The data engineer from Manchester has signed up to give away 10% of his income to charities for the rest of his working life. Hall has joined Giving What We Can, an organisation that encourages members to give 10% or more of their income to charities that have been found to have the most impact. It offers information to help members choose causes and organisations to donate to, and provides a list of charities it says are effective. A calculator on the site shows you how much impact your 10% donation could have. Everyone who has made the pledge – including Hall – is listed on the site, to encourage other people to add their name. “I’ve understood the arguments to do this for a while but now I feel like I’m at the point where I can commit,” says Hall, who will organise the payments directly from his bank account. “It feels like the right thing to do. I am fairly comfortable and my needs are met, so 10% doesn’t make much difference – a nicer car or more takeaways doesn’t make much difference to me, whereas the money could have a huge impact on someone else’s life. I’ll stick to the pledge through continued belief in the value of what I’m doing, budgeting, and having a wider community around me that have taken the same pledge.” Hall has picked six organisations – which he can change later – including the Global Health and Development Fund and GiveDirectly, a non-profit organisation that allows donors to send money directly to people in poverty with no strings attached. “It’s a nice balance of global health and development but also long-term solutions to reduce global catastrophes such as reducing the risk of human extinction,” he says. What did friends and family think of his pledge? “My parents said it was a good idea. But for me, it’s primarily a thing you do for yourself and decide on your own.” Giving What We Can is part of the Centre for Effective Altruism, a charity. ‘I’m going to manage my finances better and scale back spending’ After recently switching from being a sole trader to setting up a limited company and hiring her first employee, Leila Hrycyszyn, 32, says that this year she plans to be more rigorous with her finances and set aside money for her tax bill. “I’m usually frantically saving for my tax bill at the end of the year,” says the owner of a PR agency. “I often find I’ve spent most of the tax bill rather than putting money aside throughout the year. I need to manage my finances a lot better, so at the start of 2022 I’m planning to pay myself a salary and then put the rest in savings accounts for the tax bill. I know I need to deposit money into different accounts as, at the moment, everything goes out of the current account.” Hrycyszyn, who lives in Alton, Hampshire, says she has been focused on spending rather than saving during the past few months. “I plan to cut back and put some real plans in place, like monthly goals to stop my spending,” she says. To help her cut back, she plans to track her spending on a finance and spending calendar. “This will make me more mindful about what I’m buying and make me think twice about purchasing things in one click online.” She adds: “I’ll be thinking about whether it’s really an essential purchase or not, and if not, won’t buy it. I spend quite a lot on platforms like Asos’s Premier Delivery, and Amazon Prime. I need to stop thinking I need six different things today. I’m going to cut back as much as I can. I’ll be looking at subscriptions and whether I need them. I don’t think I’ll stop using Amazon – I find it incredibly useful but what I have done is removed the app from my homepage.” Looking ahead, she is feeling positive. “Marketing budgets have kicked off again and I’m the busiest I’ve ever been,” she says. “Even if there’s another lockdown, I don’t feel like budgets would go again like they did last time. I’m hoping the business will continue to thrive.” ‘I’m looking to focus more on using cash’ Tristan Verran, 49, a performer and educator living in Plymouth, wants to spend 2022 exploring alternative ways of transacting. For him, this means going against the cashless trajectory and paying more with notes and coins. “I like cash,” he says. “There’s no privacy issues. It’s not really traceable, there’s more anonymity with it, and it’s not micromanaged by some unseen AI somewhere.” “Although spending cash might be tough as more places are turning card-only, especially after the pandemic. I’m an academic and I deal with books but this is a social project I’d like to do. I know little in the way of finance but all I know is that it’s become clear that the global finance system is incapable of meeting the material needs of the majority and is instead committed to systemically transferring wealth upwards.” Verran is keen to explore negotiation and exchanging services, and see who is willing to participate. “I’m definitely going to step up and be more vigilant, and look at where things come from, and shop local more,” he says, adding: “I’ve started bartering. I taught someone’s kids in exchange for their parent sorting out the plumbing.” He says he would also like to look into creating a local version of the Bristol pound, the city currency that is in the process of transforming into a new scheme called Bristol Pay. “That model has been interesting. I’ve already started putting feelers out about creating something similar in Plymouth,” he says. “I want to invest in communities, not extracting wealth and giving it to some unseen billionaire to build spaceships. I’d like to push for that kind of model in Cornwall and possibly Devon. I just think what is happening right now isn’t working – we need different ways of doing stuff and exchanging services. We need more community engagement.” Verran hopes to knock £10,000 from his £27,000 student loan debt in the first six months of the year. “This is optimistic to manageable as I am seriously curtailing my weekly expenses on food and travel,” he says. “I will be baking more, and all bills are included in my studio, so I know exactly how much my monthly spend will be. However, [any] lockdowns are going to mean that I rely more heavily on online teaching. I will still be required to complete teaching courses online, so that money is guaranteed, but it’s becoming increasingly difficult to find new teaching work, or even venues to perform live. I’ll be performing outside with rural sites for free, regardless of lockdowns, and hoping to get some donations from patrons.” Verran expects to pay off about £1,500 to £2,000 a month from his student loans. ‘I’m setting up a green and ethical pension’ A committed environmentalist, Alexis Bushnell, 33, is on a mission to make her finances green. After moving from northern France to St Athan, south of Cardiff, last year, Bushnell needed to open a bank account but, rather than choose one of the traditional high street banks, she opted to open one with Monzo. “The big banks are known for not being green, so I opened a business account with Monzo, but in 2022 I plan to open a savings account with Triodos Bank and spread my money between the two,” she says. “I like the fact that Triodos’s website is very upfront about the fact they care about people and the planet, and they’re clear about who they invest with.” Bushnell’s goal is to invest in a pension for the first time. “It’s incredibly difficult to live off a state pension, so it would be nice to have something to top it up with, so I know I’m not going to be working until I die. I don’t want to reach my late 50s and realise I don’t have any way to support myself outside the state pension.” Adhering to her strong principles, Bushnell is going to scout out an ethical pension provider to help her save for retirement. She says she will be seeking advice via Facebook groups for ethical business owners, and asking on Twitter and LinkedIn for recommendations from people who already have ethical pensions. “I’m looking for a pension provider that doesn’t invest in fossil fuels or things I’m morally opposed to, and isn’t helping to destroy the planet,” says Bushnell, whose company offers social media services. “I’m vegan, I buy from zero-waste shops, I don’t drive … I try to do everything from a personal level, which has a limited impact, but where I invest my money makes a bigger impact. Money talks.”After more than a year of Covid cabin fever, the landscapes of the west called out to cooped up Americans, who arrived in greater numbers than ever before. As a result, 2021 saw bucket-list parks – including Yellowstone, Grand Teton, Zion, Arches, Canyonlands and Glacier – smash their previous visitation records. But the mass exodus into the outdoors has come at a cost. The 1960s-era wastewater system in Yellowstone was pushed to the brink. Arches temporarily closed 120 times because all the parking lots were full. The Grand Canyon struggled to cope with a record number of rescues, and an influx of remote workers have driven rents sky high in gateway towns such as Jackson Hole, Wyoming. Interviews with park supervisors, staff and guests paint a picture of a system under increasing strain and struggling to adapt to this new reality. National parks have become the go-to destination for vacationers craving dazzling sights at a social distance, but the surge has collided with a host of existing problems on public lands, including years of underinvestment. That has left staff overwhelmed and guests frustrated. “The whole country had been pent up and everybody decided to come to the American west at the same time,” says Jason Williams, chair of the Jackson Hole chamber of commerce and owner of a wildlife tour company. “Last summer people were rolling into town without reservations or a plan but they had very high expectations.” Now that the chaotic tourism season is over, park superintendents are taking a deep breath and examining how Covid has changed America’s relationship to the outdoors. The record turnout has been a phenomenon largely affecting parks in the western US, and marks a shift from 2020, where people were more likely to visit parks closer to home. That changed when the relaxing of Covid restrictions made wild, celebrated landscapes more accessible, and park authorities say that will continue. For Chip Jenkins, the superintendent of Grand Teton, which saw a record 3.8 million visitors in 2021, that means balancing the benefits of more people heading outdoors with the logistical challenges of accommodating them. “I am thinking about what this means for 2022 but also for 2042,” says Jenkins. “How are we going to preserve a high-quality visitor experience?” It’s not Disneyland: park staff strained by larger crowds Inspired by well-funded state tourism campaigns and an endless feed of beautiful photos on Instagram, Americans headed to crown jewel parks expecting a picture-postcard experience. But the upbeat marketing pitches glossed over the fact that Covid coincided with a period of chronic underfunding. According to the not-for-profit National Parks Conservation Association, National Park Service staff has shrunk by 14% over the last decade, primarily due to federal funding cuts. Total visitation to all national park properties has increased by 20% during the same period. Making the situation even more difficult were staff housing restrictions and supply chain problems created by Covid. While visitors would find the Tetons or Delicate Arch as spectacular as ever, they would also discover there were not enough park employees to shoulder the increased demand for basic services like cleaning bathrooms or answering questions at visitor centers. Tourists in gateway towns also encountered closed restaurants due to lack of staffing, empty store shelves caused by supply chain problems, hotels that were booked out for months, traffic jams and frazzled local residents. In Yellowstone – where visitation hit 4.4 million in 2021, a million more than in 2020 – the sudden influx created a kind of operational whiplash. “Historically, we had 20 years between each additional million visitors and there was plenty of time to adjust,” says Cam Sholly, Yellowstone’s superintendent. “But getting that increase in just a 12-month period made it hard to react fast enough.” Sholly says the primary impact of last year’s visitor increase was the extra stress placed on park infrastructure and staff rather than on the wild landscape. “All of a sudden we are having to clean the bathrooms five times a day instead of three,” he says. “And we are needing to empty 2,000 trash cans more often.” Supply chain problems caused food to run low at even the most highbrow Yellowstone restaurants and hotels. And staffing shortages often left dining rooms without enough servers. Chris Schultz and his wife visited the park’s Old Faithful Inn in late September. Given the hotel’s historic reputation and $500-a-night price tag, they had high expectations but came away disappointed. “The only thing you could get for breakfast was a cold bagel that was being served out of a cooler,” says Schultz, who lives in Tennessee. Yellowstone visitor activity traditionally tapers off in the fall when snow arrives, but last year the park set a September visitation record of more than 9,000 people. Park managers say attractions like Old Faithful and Mammoth Hot Springs are now just as packed in the fall as they are during summer. “Yellowstone reached the point several years ago where there are more visitors inside the park than there are services to accommodate them,” says Mike Keller, general manager for Yellowstone National Park Lodges. But Keller, who has worked at Yellowstone for 30 years, does not think adding more hotel rooms or camp grounds is going to solve the problem. He is more interested in educating new park visitors about how Yellowstone’s rustic atmosphere is very different from places like Disneyland – and he wants it to stay that way. “I saw more visitors come to Yellowstone who were unprepared for what the park experience is like,” he says. “We have never had TVs or swimming pools in our hotels. But there were so many times when guests would complain about it to our employees, saying they didn’t know what to do with their family at night. There was a real fatigue for staff caused by visitors wanting services that we don’t offer.” Danger for visitors who are ‘underestimating the challenges’ Park staff say a lack of preparedness, particularly among newcomers who may underestimate the extremes of these wild places, has driven up search and rescue costs and monopolized ranger time. In Grand Canyon national park, the strain of backcountry rescues has become especially acute. Though visitation decreased in 2021 due to a drop in international tourism, park rescues increased by 30% compared with the annual average. The park carried out at least 400 backcountry evacuations in 2021, the most in 20 years. The park informs people about the challenges of hiking in the canyon, where temperatures routinely climb into the triple digits and trails are relentlessly steep, but Grand Canyon superintendent Ed Keable says many of last year’s first-time visitors to the park did not heed those warnings. “They were underestimating the challenge and overestimating their physical abilities,” says Keable. “They were just so eager to get out and hike but they were not as fit as they had been before the pandemic.” While the rescue data from Grand Canyon and other parks show that the new visitors are often lacking in preparation or a sense of caution, they also share other characteristics, according to a recent study conducted by social scientists at the University of Montana, Penn State and the Leave No Trace Center for Outdoor Ethics. The study surveyed nearly 5,000 adults across the United States during May and June 2021 to find out who was recreating outdoors during Covid. The results revealed a fairly homogeneous group: people who are predominantly white, middle aged and have slightly higher than average disposable incomes. “It turns out the new outdoor recreationists are not very different demographically from the existing recreationists,” says Peter Newman, a co-author of the study and a professor with Penn State’s department of recreation, park and tourism management. The survey found that 76% of the outdoor recreation newcomers were white; 73% of people who had been going outdoors before Covid were white. Meanwhile, people who had been recreating outdoors but dropped that activity during Covid were predominantly people of color and lower income. These demographics mirror a longstanding lack of diversity among national park visitors. According to a 2015 National Park Service report, only 20% of domestic national park visitors were people of color despite the fact they make up 40% of the US population. “The new visitors going to parks during the pandemic were people who had fewer constraints economically and more flexibility related to work,” adds Rice. Squeezing out locals Remote working has played a large role in bringing more people into gateway communities that surround national parks. Outdoor recreationists and wealthy families fleeing cities during the pandemic for scenic rural communities have sent rents spiking in destinations such as Jackson Hole, Wyoming, which is just outside Grand Teton and is near Yellowstone. Residents in Jackson Hole say that many of the houses in the 10,000 population town that had been rentals for service industry workers and ski bums have been bought to be torn down for new construction. The average price of a house in Jackson Hole is $2.5m, more than double what it was a decade ago, and rent for housing set aside for service industry workers over the summer started at $3,000 a month for a 400 sq ft apartment. The result is an inflated housing market that’s priced out longtime residents. “Tourism drives interest in Jackson Hole, and that interest drives real estate investment, which then raises the cost of living and changes the labor market entirely,” says Chris Dickey, who has lived in Jackson Hole for 17 years and owns a digital marketing agency. “People visit the area a few times and then decide they want to move here. There are plenty of people out there willing to pay $3m to $5m for a home in Jackson Hole, but the problem is that’s not a price locals can afford.” Dickey has observed that many new residents in Jackson Hole come from urban centers like San Francisco and New York City. They are tech executives, finance industry professionals and successful entrepreneurs. Dickey acknowledges that park visitors are an essential part of the thriving Jackson Hole economy but all the attention can also pose an existential threat. “The real problem is not the crowds or traffic but the loss of our community because no one can afford to live here any more,” he says. “That is the true cost of tourism.” Park leaders are hopeful that a watershed of new federal funding set aside for parks will at least begin to tackle some of these challenges. Joe Biden’s infrastructure bill includes $1.7bn for roads, bridges and other improvements inside national parks, while a bill currently under consideration in Congress contains a proposed $2.93m for National Park Service operations that would facilitate hiring more than 1,000 additional Park Service rangers and other employees, as well as funding for diversity and inclusion programs. “The politicians in DC now know the public really loves these places and wants more investment in them,” says Kristen Brengel, senior vice-president of government affairs for the National Parks Conservation Association. As for managing crowding, parks that experienced the most congestion during Covid are looking at ways to require online reservations before arriving. Arches national park is implementing a timed entry system, while Zion will soon require permits for its popular day hike to Angels Landing. Online entry reservations that were implemented during 2020 at Rocky Mountain and Yosemite national parks as Covid precautions will probably stay in place. But national park advocates and managers worry that these systems could further alienate the people who are not visiting America’s crown jewels. “What park managers are doing to control impacts from increased visitation could make the parks less accessible to people of color or lower income,” says William Rice, a professor of outdoor recreation and wildland management at the University of Montana and a co-author of the study on Covid-era park visitation. Rice points out that problems with internet speeds, digital literacy and knowledge about new requirements can pose additional barriers for certain groups. For example, the primary National Park Service reservation site, Recreation.gov, is only in English. “Our research serves as a note of caution to land managers and the tourism community at large,” he says. “Covid had negative impacts on efforts to create a more inclusive outdoors. We need to figure out how to distribute our nation’s recreation resources more equitably.” This article was amended on 4 January 2022 to correct that the number of backcountry evacuations conducted in the Grand Canyon in 2021 was the most in 20 years, not in the park’s history.The weekend before Christmas we were in a holiday cabin in the forest. We saw lots of birds. My brother and I fed them so we could get a good look. When we were getting ready to go home, my dad shouted: “Come upstairs, now!” We ran up to the bedroom. We looked out of the window, and in the fog stood a little bird! My brother found the bird book and flicked through it. “It’s a bullfinch!” he cried, and he was right. It was amazing! There were a lot of facts I learned. It’s only 15cm long – that’s half a ruler! These birds’ chests can be orange or pink. Sometimes they look like a robin or a chaffinch. The males have bright colours but the females have dull brown feathers. They feed voraciously on seeds, buds and insects. Their tune is a soft whistle noise. They are endangered so they need help. They breed in May to July and lay up to four or five eggs. They make their nest on the ground. It was amazing that on a cold winter day one was hopping about in front of my eyes. Seeing the bullfinch made my holiday. Orla, 8 • Read today’s other Young Country Diary piece, ‘Ham sandwiches for lunch, ammonites for afters’If you made a film of Mark Bracewell’s life, audiences would probably look on sceptically and think: “That’s a bit extreme.” Bracewell grew up on an estate in Moss Side, Manchester, in the 1980s. When he was 13, he watched members of a gang hack a man to death in a pub with a machete. The following year, his friend Benjamin was murdered in a takeaway. The killers were never found. Bracewell thinks it was probably a case of mistaken identity. He was with Benjamin on the day he died. He found out about his murder on the news. “We were kids,” says Bracewell, who is now 44 and lives in Stoke-on-Trent. “But we were living in a war zone.” He began breaking into cars and selling drugs for the older kids on the estate. “We were manipulated,” he says. “Today you’d call it county lines. Police wouldn’t stop kids.” He joined a gang when he was 13 and became addicted to cocaine four years later. “As I grew older,” he says, “my heart got tighter and smaller. When you’ve seen someone hacked to death with a machete, you grow numb. It was easier to brush everything under the carpet than deal with it. I took drugs as my way out of reality.” Aged 26, he robbed a taxi driver at knifepoint – he was high on cocaine at the time and needed money for drugs – and spent three years and nine months in prison. “It’s embarrassing,” says Bracewell, “but it’s part of my journey.” In 2010, he got out of prison, and started to rebuild his life. He worked as a bar manager but still occasionally used drugs, despite his best efforts to quit. Then, on New Year’s Eve 2016, he got involved in a nightclub fight. “I saw the knife coming towards me,” Bracewell says. “And that was the last thing I ever saw out of that eye. Instantly I knew I was blind in my left eye.” The stabbing was a turning point. As Bracewell was taken to hospital, he cried out to God. “I said,” he remembers, “‘I don’t want to die.’ And I heard God say, ‘You won’t die. I need you to see.’” After his release from prison, Bracewell moved to Stoke, where he was supported by a Christian charity called Walk Ministries, which works with ex-offenders. “I was at a crossroads in my life,” he says, “and I knew I didn’t want to continue doing what I was doing.” The experience reawakened Bracewell’s dormant faith. “I was a Christian growing up,” he says, “but I never followed it.” Now he is committed. At Bracewell’s request, Walk Ministries got him a placement doing youth volunteer work, and he became an anti-knife crime campaigner. He sees a certain symmetry in his new line of work. “The crime I went to prison for involved a knife,” he says, “and I was stabbed with a knife. God is using me as a tool.” He goes into secondary schools to speak about his life, and the mistakes he made. “You get a few kids,” says Bracewell, “who think they know it all, and talk all the way through.” Bracewell has an unorthodox way of grabbing their attention: “I walk up to them,” he chuckles, “and pop my glass eye out, so they get a shock.” That usually quietens them down. The message of these speeches is a serious one. He talks about the statistics of knife crime, and walks them through the consequences of his own mistakes. “I tell them that every decision has a consequence,” Bracewell says. “What do you want that consequence to be?” In the past week, he tells me, he’s spoken to over 4,000 children in just four days, and is absolutely knackered. “It definitely connected with the kids,” says Marc Inchley, who recently invited Bracewell into his further education college. “They sat up and listened to him. Not all the speakers we get in have that impact. He’s doing this for the right reasons.” Bracewell also cofounded an organisation called Blinded Faith, which works with local authorities to mentor at-risk children. He does one-to-one sessions with children who are vulnerable to knife crime. “I can’t get anywhere without building trust,” he says. “If I say to the kids, ‘I’ll be there’ and something happens to them, I have to come through. If they don’t trust me, they won’t give anything back.” When the kids run away from home, or get arrested, Bracewell is often the person they call. He’s driven to Leeds and Wales in the early hours of the morning to collect them. “There are no bad kids,” he says. “Just kids who are making bad choices.” With all his talks at schools, or driving to meet with his mentees, Bracewell spends a lot of time away from his wife and baby. “That’s the hardest thing,” he says. So for his treat, he asked for a night out in London with his wife Kelisha and son Zion. He loves architecture and she loves food. The Ting Shangri-La restaurant in the Shard skyscraper near London Bridge offered to host the family – but it’s on the 35th floor, and Bracewell is afraid of heights. “It’s all about conquering those fears,” he laughs. They spent quality time together for the first time in weeks. “I can only do what I do with my wife by my side,” says Bracewell. “So it was for both of us.” He particularly enjoyed seeing his baby in the Shard, looking down on the world below from on high – “that was amazing”. Want to nominate someone for Guardian angel? Email us – with their permission – and suggest a treat at guardian.angel@theguardian.comI have a little outdoor table by the french windows that houses an ever-changing display of pot plants. In summer it has pomegranates, citrus and, towards the back, some ivies. In winter, when the lemons are indoors, I move the ivies to the foreground. Their curtain of leaves distracts from the real reason the table is there: to hide all the pots and seed trays underneath it. I don’t own a shed because I can’t bear to part with the space in the garden, so I am forever finding ways to squirrel away the unsightly parts of gardening. I am not generous to these ivies – they survive in 30cm pots. In spring and autumn I top them up with a little fresh compost, but that’s about it. And yet they thrive. Come winter, I dot pots of early-flowering bulbs between them – reticulata irises, miniature daffodils and snowdrops – so small hints of spring bring a little cheer. Ivies can spread and climb great distances, but there are many varieties suited to life in cramped, hard conditions, whether that’s a north-facing window box, a sliver of soil along a side return, a shady basement courtyard or an unheated porch. Just don’t try to keep them indoors: ivies are often touted as good houseplants, but you’d need a very cold and damp house to keep them happy. That said, I have visited some very cold bathrooms where they might thrive. On the whole, variegated forms are bred to be vigorous, so there are only a few that will do well in pots. The cream-and-yellow Hedera helix “Little Luzii” is compact and doesn’t spread or climb much. Its mid-green leaves are speckled and splashed with cream. Likewise, H. helix “Midas Touch”, with its heart-shaped leaves and white-and-gold variegation around the edge that turn a lovely pink with a little frost, is good at brightening a dull corner. There are numerous pretty deep-green types – my tabletop variety is H. helix “Koniger’s Auslese”, which has narrow, star-shaped leaves that look good against a painted wall. The same goes for “Ivalace” or “Parsley Crested”, which have crinkled, glossy leaves and do well even in deep shade. The miniature-leaved “Duckfoot”, with its wedge-shape light-green leaves will fill out a pot quickly, which makes it particularly good for hanging baskets. Fibrex Nursery and the Plantsman’s Preference both have an extensive collection. Ivies are not particularly fussy about soils, but do better in slightly alkaline soils, and thrive in composts with good water-holding capacity. This can be achieved by adding composted bark to peat-free compost. Finally, do allow the plants to dry out between watering. A dry plant can make a miraculous recovery, but an overwatered one rots away quickly.1 Exercise on a Monday night (nothing fun happens on a Monday night). 2 On the fence about a purchase? Wait 72 hours before you buy it. 3 Tip: the quickest supermarket queue is always behind the fullest trolley (greeting, paying and packing take longer than you think). 4 Bring fruit to work. Bring fruit to bed! 5 Consider going down to four days a week. It’s likely a disproportionate amount of your fifth day’s work is taxed anyway, so you’ll lose way less than a fifth of your take-home pay. 6 Everyone has an emotional blind spot when they fight. Work out what yours is, and remember it. 7 Plant spring bulbs, even if they’re just in a pot. 8 Send a voice note instead of a text; they sound like personal mini podcasts. 9 Keep a bird feeder by a window, ideally the kitchen. It’ll pass the time when you’re washing up. 10 Always bring ice to house parties (there’s never enough). 11 Get the lighting right: turn off the overhead one, turn on lots of lamps (but turn off when you leave the room). 12 Sharpen your knives. 13 Feeling sluggish at work? Try the Pomodoro technique: 25 minutes on, five-minute break, and repeat. 14 Buy a cheap blender and use it to finely chop onions (it saves on time and tears). 15 Keep your children’s drawings and paintings. Put the best ones in frames. 16 Set aside 10 minutes a day to do something you really enjoy – be it reading a book or playing Halo. 17 Don’t be weird about how to stack the dishwasher. 18 Reuse all plastic bags – even bread bags. Much of the packaging you can’t reuse can be taken to larger branches of supermarkets for recycling. 19 Take a photo of the tag you are given when leaving your coat in a cloakroom. 20 Can’t sleep? Try a relaxing soak with lavender bath oil before bed. 21 Add the milk at least one minute after the tea has brewed. 22 Laugh shamelessly at your own jokes. 23 It might sound obvious, but a pint of water before bed after a big night avoids a clanger of a hanger. 24 Start a Saturday morning with some classical music – it sets the tone for a calm weekend. 25 Look closely. 26 Set time limits for your apps. Just go to the settings on your smartphone and add a limit – for example, if you have an iPhone turn on Screen Time. 27 If possible, take the stairs. 28 Always be willing to miss the next train. 29 Eat meat once a week, max. Ideally less. 30 Be polite to rude strangers – it’s oddly thrilling. 31 Ask questions, and listen to the answers. 32 Connect with nature: stand outside barefoot for a few minutes – even when it’s cold. 33 Join your local library – and use it. Find yours here. 34 Go for a walk without your phone. 35 Eat salted butter (life’s too short for unsalted). 36 Stretch in the morning. And maybe in the evening. 37 If you’re going less than a mile, walk or cycle. About half of car journeys are under two miles, yet these create more pollution than longer journeys as the engine isn’t warmed up yet. 38 Sleep with your phone in a different room (and buy an alarm clock). 39 Send postcards from your holidays. Send them even if you’re not on holiday. 40 Instead of buying new shoes, get old ones resoled and buy new laces. 41 Buy a plant. Think you’ll kill it? Buy a fake one. 42 Don’t have Twitter on your phone. 43 If you find an item of clothing you love and are certain you will wear for ever, buy three. 44 Try taking a cold shower (30 seconds to two minutes) before your hot one. It’s good for your health – both physical and mental. 45 Text to say thank you. 46 Read a poem every day. Keep a compendium, such as A Poem for Every Day of the Year, by your bed. 47 Take out your headphones when walking – listen to the world. 48 Buy secondhand. 49 Buy in person! 50 Learn how to floss properly. 51 If something in the world is making you angry, write (politely) to your MP – they will read it. 52 Say hello to your neighbours. 53 Learn the basics of repairing your clothes. 54 Always bring something – wine, flowers – to a dinner/birthday party, even if they say not to. 55 Learn the names of 10 trees. 56 Call an old friend out of the blue. 57 Every so often, search your email for the word “unsubscribe” and then use it on as many as you can. 58 Buy a newspaper. (Ideally this one.) 59 Always have dessert. 60 Drop your shoulders. 61 Make something from scratch. Works best if it’s something you’d normally buy, such as a dress or a bag. 62 Go to bed earlier – but don’t take your phone with you. 63 Volunteer. Go to gov.uk/government/get-involved for ideas. 64 Dry your cutlery with a cloth (it keeps it shiny). 65 Instead of buying a morning coffee, set up a daily transfer of £2 from a current into a savings account and forget about it. Use it to treat yourself to something different later. 66 Don’t save things for “best”. Wear them – enjoy them. 67 Sing! 68 Think about your posture: don’t slouch, and don’t cross your legs. 69 Hang your clothes up. Ideally on non-wire hangers (it’s better for them). 70 Skinny-dip with friends. 71 Switch your phone off on holiday (or at least delete your work email app). 72 Always use freshly ground pepper. 73 Thank a teacher who changed your life. 74 Respect your youngers. 75 Keep your keys in the same place. 76 Ditch the plastic cartons and find a milkman – The Modern Milkman has a comprehensive list. 77 Rent rather than buy a suit/dress for that forthcoming wedding (even if it’s your own). 78 Always book an extra day off after a holiday. 79 Ignore the algorithm – listen to music outside your usual taste. 80 Mute or leave a WhatsApp group chat. 81 Learn a TikTok dance (but don’t post it on TikTok). 82 Cook something you’ve never attempted before. 83 Join a local litter-picking group. 84 Handwash that thing you’ve never cleaned. 85 Don’t get a pet/do get a pet. 86 Nap. 87 Learn how to breathe deeply: in through the nose, out through the mouth, making the exhale longer than the inhale. 88 Buy a bike and use it. Learn how to fix it, too. 89 Politely decline invitations if you don’t want to go. 90 If you do go, have an exit strategy (can we recommend a French exit, where you slip out unseen). 91 If in doubt, add cheese. 92 Don’t look at your phone at dinner. 93 Do that one thing you’ve been putting off. 94 Give compliments widely and freely. 95 Set up an affordable standing order to a charity. RNLI and Greenpeace spring to mind … 96 Keep a book in your bag to avoid the temptation to doomscroll. 97 Listen to the albums you loved as a teenager. 98 Make a friend from a different generation. 99 Staying over at a friend’s place? Strip the bed in the morning. 100 For instant cheer, wear yellow. • This article was inspired by a similar exercise in Weekend magazine in January 2000. See the original list at theguardian.com/100-tips-from-2000 • This article was amended on 2 January 2022 to remove advice in point 23 that is not applicable in all circumstances.Everton have confirmed the signing of the Dynamo Kyiv defender Vitaliy Mykolenko for an undisclosed fee, with the Ukraine international agreeing a four-and-a-half-year deal. The left-back has won 21 caps for Ukraine and was a key part of the team that reached the quarter-finals of Euro 2020. Mykolenko said: “Moving to Everton is a big and important step in my life. I am 22 but I don’t feel like a youngster. I have experience of playing at European level and hope I will continue to improve as a player.” Mykolenko can also operate in central defence and as a wing-back and made his Dynamo debut aged 18, making his senior international debut a year later. He added: “I like to play on the front foot and get forward when I can. Modern football demands that full-backs are able to attack as well as defend. I think I am a versatile defender who can get up and down the pitch. But I believe desire and commitment are the most important attributes and I will aim to bring those qualities.” Mykolenko is expected to replace Lucas Digne, who has fallen out of favour with Raphael Benítez in recent weeks and has been strongly linked with Brighton and Chelsea. Meanwhile, Benítez has likened Dominic Calvert-Lewin to a new signing as the striker prepares to make his first appearance since August. The England international scored in the first three matches of the season, but a thigh injury and subsequent setback in his recovery has denied Everton his services until now. There will be a temptation, especially with Richarlison still sidelined by a calf problem, to put Calvert-Lewin in from the start at home to Brighton on Sunday. However, while Benítez is delighted to have last season’s leading scorer back, he has sounded a note of caution about placing too much expectation on him. “He’s a massive signing for us in the second part of the league,” he said. “If we bring him back and, a few weeks later, Richarlison, we have more options there, we can think of the second part totally different. I’ve explained before that one thing is match fitness that you can improve by playing games and the other thing is fitness. “Fitness-wise he is getting better. Match fitness, we will see. Maybe he scores three goals in the first half and we don’t need to worry about his match fitness, but I think the issue will be how long he can play if he starts the game or, if he comes from the bench, how much impact he can have on the game. “We are considering all of these things but he is training really well and he is really happy because he is with the team and is ready to play and score goals.”From mince pies and biscuits to lipstick and soap, palm oil grown on deforested land in south-east Asia will have been hard to avoid this Christmas. The vegetable oil is found in almost half of all packaged products in UK supermarkets, according to WWF. But a growing number of towns and cities are trying to use only sustainable palm oil, helping orangutans, tigers, Sumatran rhinos and many other threatened species. Led by Chester in north-west England, the world’s first sustainable palm oil city, restaurants, small businesses and arts venues are joining forces to eradicate deforestation-linked forms of the vegetable oil from their supply chains. A school dinner provider in Chester has even signed up, the first to be certified by the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO). Oxford, Plymouth and the village of Mochdre in north Wales are following Chester’s lead, with more expected to follow. “The palm oil situation is a big problem,” says Catherine Barton, a field conservation manager at Chester zoo, who has led the sustainable city campaign after a visit to Malaysian Borneo. “Populations of forest elephants and orangutans are separated by plantations. You get human-wildlife conflict when they move into those areas. It was from working with communities that we thought as users [of palm oil], we can try to change the industry.” The UK is a small consumer of mainly sustainable palm oil. Globally, most palm oil is produced in Indonesia and Malaysia and is not sustainably certified by the RSPO. While companies such as Iceland have stopped using palm oil, Barton says an outright ban isnot the answer and making sustainable palm oil the default ingredient in products, from baby formula to shampoo, would have a much bigger impact on conservation, while supporting communities that rely on the palm fruit crop. Chester zoo has helped businesses such as a small Welsh fudge producer and an animal food provider to review and adapt their supply chains with the goal of removing all products containing non-RSPO certified palm oil. “If you go palm oil free in the UK, you’re not going to have an impact on orangutans or influence the industry,” says Barton. “So, as an NGO, we feel that we have to be part of that conversation. And we use the UK and Europe as that influencer to change the industry rather than remove ourselves from it.” Barton emphasises that palm oil is a far more productive crop than alternatives such as rapeseed or maize. Large areas of Indonesia and Malaysia have been deforested for palm oil plantations, including carbon-dense peatlands that have been drained and burned, causing enormous greenhouse gas emissions. At Cop26 in Glasgow, world leaders pledged to halt and reverse deforestation and degradation by 2030. Greening global supply chains will be key to achieving that goal. To help protect standing forests, RSPO certification accredits producers and consumers of sustainable palm oil. The UK government is consulting on plans to ban large companies from using products grown on illegally deforested land. Jason Ellison, proprietor of a French restaurant, Chez Jules, was among the first businesses to sign up to the campaign in Chester. He says reviewing his supply chain meant searching for palm oil in unusual places. “I’m not a scientist. The zoo was very helpful. They gave us a list of all the places where you’d find palm oil – in bread, cake mixes, baking products … We use digestive biscuits as a base for one of our desserts, for example. That’s where we were zooming in.” Ian McGrady, managing director of Edsential, a social enterprise that provides school dinners in Chester, says becoming the first RSPO-certified school food provider in England has helped teach children about where their food comes from. “What we want to do is link the school meal to field conservation, so children get to see that if they make a decision, they can make a difference on the ground. Cost tends to trump any kind of ethical sourcing, even within schools,” he says. “We worked with main suppliers to see where they were in terms of palm oil and certification. It absolutely can be done.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresBorn in Chicago in 1968 and raised in New York, Anastacia Lyn Newkirk is the multiplatinum star known for her mezzo-soprano voice. Anastacia became one of the best-selling female singers of the early noughties with her debut album Not That Kind – featuring the career-defining I’m Outta Love. She went on to release six more albums and had No 1 hits in more than 20 countries. She was diagnosed with breast cancer for the second time in 2013, 10 years after the first, and has the heart condition supraventricular tachycardia. Her 20th anniversary tour, I’m Outta Lockdown, arrives in the UK in autumn 2022. This was taken in 2000, and I’m almost positive I was in France, promoting something. Looking at it now, I see a little cherub face and a girl who did her own hair and bought her own clothes. In my head I looked really fancy in my shrug, princess fur and T-shirt. And those white pants! I thought white was the colour of fancy people. I didn’t get signed to a label for a long time because I didn’t fit in. It was the era of Britney and Christina and there was nobody to model myself on. In the end, not fitting in was also the thing that got me signed. My A&amp;R guy embraced who I was and understood how to bring out the best in me in terms of the way I liked to look and sound. It was a journey getting there, though. When I was trying to get a deal, people would say, “Can you sound more like Celine?” I tried. I even tried to sound like Mariah, but couldn’t hit her high notes. I looked different, too – I wore glasses. Men who were trying to pick me up would say stuff like: “Oh – you look like a sexy librarian!” which I thought was gross. With a tint in the lenses, though, I felt cooler. Photographers would say: “You need to take them off” and I said: “If I take them off, I literally can’t see you. The whole world looks like it’s covered in Vaseline.” So I always kept them on. If you don’t stand up for yourself, nobody else is going to. Because my career took off in Europe first, I never felt that sense of validation, as if I’d proved everyone wrong. Every time I’d come back home, I would just be a person walking down the street. I’d arrive at the airport and be like, hey, where’s my car? There were no bodyguards with me the minute I got off the plane. One of the most delicious moments of my career happened in New York, though. Elton John is my total idol and we were introduced in 2000. He told me he was filming a show at Madison Square Garden and asked me if I’d duet Saturday Night’s Alright for Fighting. At the end of the song, he got down on his knee and kissed my belly button. I was like, “Wait, what am I supposed to do here? He’s a Sir.” I ran off stage when the song was over and screamed backstage. Did that just happen? Did I sit on a piano stool with Sir Elton John and jam out? When I was 12, I was diagnosed with Crohn’s disease. It frightened me as I’d never had a boyfriend and I thought: Oh my god, I have a scar [from a stomach operation] and no one’s going to want to get close to me, because it’s just not a pretty disease. There were a few interesting guys who would say: “Oh is that a caesarean?” I’d be like: “Yeah! It was a sideways baby.” But over time, I got used to the scar and started showing my abs. I ended up embracing my body so much that I went full monty, wearing the bare minimum of what I was allowed to show on screen, basically from the ribcage down. It became a talking point. I didn’t care when male presenters made references about my body, as I never felt they were more powerful than me. I totally didn’t feel objectified. I was like – my boobs are freaking amazing and they’re huge! But you touch them? Then you have a problem. Guys goggle and ogle all the time. That was [American broadcaster] Howard Stern’s character. He is very sexual as a person on his show, but in reality he is such a nice guy. And Jonathan Ross was the same. You get him on camera for his talkshow and he turns into a character, it’s something for the boys. Plus, it’s hard to forget that they’re there when I displayed them like that. Of course, those guys should probably have the decorum not to mention it, but I never saw myself as being invaded in any way. If I hadn’t gone for a breast reduction in 2003 I wouldn’t have found out about my cancer until much later, but it was barely in its first stage. Plastic surgeons don’t ask for a mammogram, they normally just go in and do their job, but mine did. I was lucky, but the diagnosis was shocking, and my career was at one of its highest points. My first thought was: wow, is this how I’m going to die? I thought I’d go in a plane crash. I never stopped writing during treatment. But when I started radiation, it made me tired, forgetful and lifeless. It was torturous when I’d have an idea and it would leave my brain before I had time to get it down. The second time [in 2013], I had a double mastectomy, which was really tough for me to bounce back from. Doctors removed muscles from my back to rebuild my breasts, so certain postures are difficult, and I have terrible neck issues. Rather than dwell on it, I’ve decided my job is to pass on a message to other people: don’t freak out, go get mammograms earlier than the doctor says. Go check out that thing you’re worried about so that we can have you around longer. I don’t think any woman really thinks their body is the best thing in the world. There’s always stuff you want to change. But as I’m getting older, I understand there’s nothing I can do to stop the ageing process. It’s tough for women – the 50s were bad with all the bullet bras and strapping yourself into corsets – but nowadays with all these filters on social media, I think it’s even worse. At the same time, I see the really young generation coming out with so much confidence and diversity: “I’m they/them and I have green hair – accept it”! And they’re 12. It’s exciting – we need those kinds of rock stars out there. I don’t even know how many surgeries I’ve had in my life. But every time I’ve gone through crap, instead of feeling like it’s an obstacle, I see it as a detour. You may have a longer road to get to where you want to be, but trust in the universe and have faith that it’ll lead to something great. Find hope in a terrible situation and just keep going.Last year I stood in the shallows of my house, a place now ankle-deep with books, pots, pictures and lamps, and I thought: I want more. More books, more pots, more pictures, more lamps. I’d barely left the house in months but still I’d managed to accumulate a warehouse-worth of new tut. I say new – it was all old, nothing made after perhaps 1989, nothing that had not been through at least two previous owners, at least one of those owners now long deceased, the other having woken one day and found themselves a minimalist. Everything was bought, you see, at auction. Specifically at auctions that pre-pandemic I would not have thought to visit, but (after viewings became online-only) I found myself walking through at night, panting. My local auction house is a place out of time, a room Tetris-stacked with chests of drawers and boxes of Beatles magazines, the smell a specific combination of vape and dust. Every weekend I squeeze through the aisles, marvelling at the collections of erotic art or antique computers or nesting tables that have nested so long they have almost hatched. And every weekend I return home with another object that I didn’t need but needed immediately. My boyfriend looks on with a combination of affection and disgust. His birthday card to me this year was a painting of a 70s lamp he is particularly unfond of, claiming its volcanic glaze looks like semen, and inside a poem which began, “Eva went to auction house, debit card in hand, to feed a strong compulsion that she couldn’t understand. For nightly on the internet and in person once a week, she would browse their sad collection of ugly furniture in teak.” There are five verses, he hates it this much. We live in a home of compromise, pottery and thick-spread affection: “Eva scooped the jizz lamp up as though she were its mother, and rushed it home to meet its ceramic sisters and brothers. Her partner was agog to see this totem of bad taste and asked her why she’d said she was just shopping for toothpaste. But even though he rolled his eyes he knew it was his duty, to love a thing that she loves, and to try and find its beauty.” I’ve tried to explain to him why I’m drawn to these things, and why they continue to fill our shelves. Partly, I say, because they are imbued with memory, partly because their quality is so much better than their Ikea alternatives, partly because there is no fixed price, partly because of the thrill of discovering treasure. You don’t buy things from auction – you win them. I try to bring home only things I know will bring me joy, but the problem is, so much does. I urge him to understand my love of auctions not as a problem but as a hobby. One that leaked online from real life, in that way things do today. I’m reluctant to encourage others to join me as an auction hobbyist because, of course, there is only one fabulous lamp for sale at a time, and there might be a wait of many months before a similarly jizzy one becomes available. But if I were to, if I were a better person and less worried by the competition, then I would recommend approaching the-saleroom.com (where auction houses the world over list their goods) as if visiting a gallery rather than a shop. I’d advise people to relish the artfully random selection of tchotchkes and design, prioritising the pleasure of looking over the desire to purchase. Sometimes it’s exciting to type in an offensively low bid, because sometimes you win it – on the wall by our front door hangs a painting I bid £10 on, and after picking it up from an office piled with Matisse prints and Dalí objects, discovered the artist’s work hangs at the Whitney in New York. But on the rare occasion when you see something you want – something you absolutely must have – I’d recommend calling the auction house directly (to avoid the online commission) and if possible bidding live. Though that is a dangerous game, one that can leave you quite sick and poor. At night I scroll slowly through abstract landscapes and modernist chairs and mourning rings and haunted dolls, bidding low and often. What is lost when viewing virtually rather than walking through an auction house – the ability to pick things up and turn them over, to enjoy the dissonance of seeing an antique truncheon balanced on a meticulously carved Buddha, or a vintage Chanel hat perched on a very large bear – is gained by the many miles you can travel with your thumb. This week I bought another lamp. How to do it The Saleroom is used by more than 2,000 auction houses worldwide to sell art and antiques online. Live Auctioneers is a similar service and includes jewellery and fashion in available lots. This site features auctions from more than 50 countries. The online design platform 1stdibs also launched a seven-day auction system in December 2021. The site focuses on furniture, home décor, art. For other good secondhand homeware, try Retrouvius, a salvage company which stocks everything from chairs to fireplaces. Or for bargains and to support a good cause, most charities now have eBay shops for furniture and ornaments.Every January, the same old battle cry: this will be the year that I get thin. Last January, I did a week-long juice cleanse, and the year before that, I fasted for three days. It wasn’t quite nil by mouth, but almost. At the time, I told myself the science interested me (the fervour with which fasting evangelists assure you that a few days without food can reset your microbiome or stave off cellular ageing is compelling enough to make you ignore the health warnings). Really, though, what I wanted was rapid weight loss, minimum one dress size. I made it to 81 hours. Practically levitating with hunger, I ignored the advice to reintroduce food slowly (soups and juices before solids) by bingeing on a cheese sandwich, which I promptly threw up. Happy new year to me. This January, though, I have brokered peace with myself – and I am determined to live inside my body as it exists now. No diets, no fasting, cheese sandwiches whenever I want. It won’t be easy at a time when body fascism is taken as common sense. An estimated 26 million British people will vow to lose weight for the new year. As psychoanalyst Dr Susie Orbach tells me, “It makes it very, very difficult to feel OK about your body when the assault on you is so intense.” But I’m going to give it a go. My body is, by most people’s standards, average – a fact that I apply like a balm whenever my thoughts become too barbed. Revelling in one’s “averageness” might not sound like much in a world of declarative self-love, but after a lifetime of body shame, this is a hard-won detente. I realised a toxic attitude to my body had accrued over time. Much like rocks washing downstream will catch on the bough of a fallen branch, the thought that my body was not acceptable built up incrementally, pebble by pebble, until one day all other thoughts were stopped up by it. One of the earliest diets I remember embarking on was at age 12, when I decided I’d eat only tinned peaches. I can’t quite recall where my concept of fatness and thinness came from at that time – I just remember feeling that I took up a lot of space, in a particularly grotesque way, with soft, dimpled thighs and a vast, unacceptable, rounded stomach. Even now, I rarely look at photos of myself from that time. But when I do come across one I see a perfectly normal-looking child. As a teenager, when I gained weight because of various factors (including the discovery of junk food), embarrassment bloomed into horror. This was the early 00s, the era of objectification as empowerment, when most of the girls at my school dreamed of being glamour models. Culture was dominated by lads’ mags and weight-loss transformation TV shows, both deeply concerned with policing the female body. In fashion, the trend for “heroin chic” – lithe, narrow-hipped – would soon be supplanted by size zero, as seen on Paris Hilton, Lindsay Lohan and Nicole Richie, who were all dressed by super-stylist Rachel Zoe; they were catnip for women’s magazines. It was a look so ubiquitous that even as a 13-year-old living in a mining village in Yorkshire, I had to engage. Like most women of my generation, I internalised that particular body type as the ideal and became determined that I’d bring my own body to heel by any means necessary. In my 20s, this included such a vast array of diets – South Beach, Atkins, 5:2, a paid-for subscription to a food-tracking app – that I’d struggle to name them all. And all along, hyper-aware of my size regardless of what that size actually was, I lived with that same sense of shame, a feeling I experienced physically, as a tension in my chest. (It can’t have helped that I walked around with my stomach sucked in, which meant that I rarely drew full breaths.) No one single thing has happened to take away this feeling. I’m yet to have an epiphany about my body like the ones we read about from mothers (“it grew a life!”) or those who survive grave illnesses. But after the fasting incident two years ago, I started to question why I was still so obsessed with thinness. I followed “body positive” accounts on social media (the brilliant Jessamyn Stanley and Megan Jayne Crabbe among them) – but found their brand of self-love too difficult to put into practice on myself. I admired their stance but the fact was, I did not love my body, and found that my critical inner voice could not be corrected by force. Then I came across the idea of body neutrality, where your body is not something you either love or hate; you just accept it. It’s a theory that speaks to much of what Orbach has been writing about since the 1970s. “You have to ask yourself, who would I be if I wasn’t focused on my body the whole time? What is this preoccupation getting in the way of and what could I achieve without it?” she says. And so, I have begun gently to question the effort I’d put into my obsession over the years. It wasn’t so much the health foods, calorie-counting apps or hours in the gym I began to resent; it was the brain space that body shame was taking up. From the moment of waking to the moment I closed my eyes at night, the idea that my body was wrong had reverberated through my mind like the vibrations from a struck gong. Self-loathing coated every decision I made, from the obvious – what I ate and wore; how I exercised – to the oblique. I’d felt, for instance, that I should not apply for certain jobs (and these were run-of-the-mill office jobs rather than fashion magazines) as my body would not allow me to fit in. In her 2010 book Bodies, Orbach points out that “eating problems and body distress now constitute an ordinary part of everyday life”. Women in particular – but increasingly men, too – accept displeasure (or worse) as their baseline emotion when it comes to their bodies. In 2019, the Mental Health Foundation found that almost a fifth (19%) of UK adults felt disgusted by their bodies, while more than one-third were anxious or depressed because of their body image. The everyday nature of body dissatisfaction leads some people to dismiss the gravity of it, but, as Orbach writes, it now “constitute[s] a hidden public health emergency, showing up obliquely in the statistics on self-harm, obesity and anorexia – the most visible and obvious signs of a far-wider-ranging body unease.” Never having been diagnosed with an eating disorder, I can’t claim to understand the pain of feeling so deeply alienated from your body, but I understand “unease”. The basic tenets of body neutrality include being grateful for what your body can do: its strength in carrying you from A to B; its skill in keeping you alive. You aim to avoid conversations about food, weight and how your body does (or should) look. You wear clothes that feel good and allow you to move freely and joyfully. And you opt to engage in activities you find fun, rather than ones that promise to “transform” your body. It’s harder than it sounds. Personally, I try not to think about it – a small act of resistance in a world that constantly tells us our bodies need to be refined, reworked, tweaked or transformed. Obviously, 30 years of discomfort cannot be undone in a few months. This chimera of emotions that rears up whenever I think about the way I look, or the size of my clothes, cannot be killed by logic alone. But I am going to keep trying; to accept that I, a very average woman, am absolutely fine as I am.Twice a week, in rural Cambridgeshire, Rebecca Lee hires a private field for her dog, Moscow, to run about in for an hour. “Moscow is the world’s most difficult dog,” she said. “If you’ve got a dog like him, who is reactive – he barks and lunges at stuff, mostly because he’s actually quite fearful – then every walk can be traumatic.” By contrast, when she rents the field, she can relax, knowing they are not going to encounter any of Moscow’s “triggers”. These include other dogs, bikes, cars and children. Lee is just one of the thousands of dog owners across the country who regularly hires private land to exercise their pet. The website, dogwalkingfields.com, estimates that about 2,270 acres – the equivalent of 1,700 football pitches – is being used for this purpose via the 756 fields in its directory, with more added each week. “During the pandemic, enclosed fields became a refuge for people who wanted to exercise their dogs away from other people, socially distanced,” said Katherine Shields Smith, co-founder of Dog Walking Fields. “Open spaces were crowded, especially with travel restrictions in place. As restrictions lifted a little, the fields became safe havens to meet up with friends and family and exercise safely.” The fields typically cost about £10 an hour and are usually surrounded by secure fencing. They are used by owners whose dogs are anxious, injured, disabled, reactive, small, elderly, in season or in training. “The owners of these dogs all appreciate somewhere safe to relax off lead without being approached by other possibly well-meaning but exuberant dogs,” said Shields Smith. In a public place, unsolicited and often unwelcome approaches can cause some owners and dogs distress, leading to conflict – but there is a lack of awareness about this and other aspects of “dog walking etiquette”, she said: “There are lots of dogs who are friendly but whose owners have no control over them.” This problem has worsened during the pandemic, with a lot more inexperienced owners around. Parks and open spaces have become crowded with “pandemic puppies” – many born during lockdown, when puppy training classes were closed and most dog owners were social distancing. Many of these dogs are now poorly socialised adolescents with behaviour problems: over the past six months, animal charities have seen a substantial increase in “lockdown pet regret”, with the RSPCA reporting abandonments are up by 20% in 2021 compared with the previous year’s figures. Ben Webster, a farmer in Coton, near Cambridge, spent £15,000 turning one of his fields into a secure dog field last year. He used to rent it out for sheep grazing for £300 a year. Now, during the summer peak, he can earn up to £400 a week. “You get a whole mix of people. As well as the owners of dogs who are a bit nervous or not terribly well trained, you get dog-training classes. And you get people in the summer who want to just come, have a glass of wine in the field and let their dogs run around while they sit with friends on the bench and chat for an hour, knowing their dogs will be safe and secure.” The field has a tunnel dogs can run through, tyres they can jump over and a water tap. “In the summer, some people brought paddling pools for their dogs and we had dog parties,” said Webster. Moscow was born during the first lockdown and given up to a rescue centre by his previous owners when they stopped working from home. “He hadn’t had a lead or a collar on him until he was six months old,” said Lee, an author. “I don’t think he’d ever been walked on the pavement. And I think that led to a lot of his issues.” Lee sought the help of a dog behaviourist and started using secure dog fields near her home. This gave her a large, safe space for Moscow. “We are making lots of progress. He can now go on group walks with a dog walker and is great with other dogs he knows.”The mother of two sisters who were murdered in a London park said she wants to meet one of the police officers who took selfies at the scene and shared the images. The Ven Mina Smallman, the first black woman to become an archdeacon in the Church of England, who was guest editing BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, also spoke of the pain of losing her daughters Nicole Smallman, 27, and Bibaa Henry, 46, in June 2020. Deniz Jaffer, 47, and Jamie Lewis, 33, who were serving Metropolitan police officers, had been ordered to guard the murder scene. However, it emerged they had taken photos, some showing the bodies, and shared them in two WhatsApp groups. Jaffer resigned from the Met in August, while Lewis was sacked by a disciplinary tribunal. Last month Jaffer and Lewis were each jailed for two years and nine months. Danyal Hussein, 19, was jailed for life in October – with a minimum of 35 years – for the murder of the sisters. Smallman said she had forgiven him. Since her daughters’ deaths, she has campaigned on violence against women and for equity on how victims are seen. When asked what she felt about a police system that produced and allowed two serving officers to photograph her daughters as they did, she replied: “I’m repulsed by them, if I’m honest, and I can’t wait to meet Jaffer. “He said he’d like to meet with the family and I don’t believe he thought that that could happen, but it will because he said he wants it to happen. I’m going to give him that invitation.” The family have planted a cherry tree at Fryent country park in north-west London, where the women were murdered. In October, following an investigation by the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC), the Met police apologised to the family for failing in the way it responded when the two women were reported missing. The IOPC found that a missing persons log was incorrectly closed and inquiries were not progressed. The Met commissioner, Dame Cressida Dick, said a better response would have saved their family and friends “immeasurable pain”. Smallman told the Today programme “having to fight to find your own children” was horrendous. Asked by the presenter Mishal Husain if the guilty verdicts had allowed her now to “turn a page in some way”, Smallman said: “No, not yet. I think it is probably too soon. I’m looking forward to that time when we can just start grieving. But we don’t know what that looks like yet. “I’ve said once before, it’d be great to have no news, good or bad. We just would like a flat line, just to gather speed and to find our way through the grieving process.” She added that there had been times when she no longer wanted to “be here” and that they had been “dreading” Christmas, but added that her campaigning had helped her. “If anything, this has kept me going,” she explained. “This has given me a reason to stay with it and try to ensure that another family doesn’t have to go through what we’ve been through.”Pope Francis has used his new year’s message to call for an end to violence against women, saying it was an insult to God. Celebrating mass in St Peter’s Basilica in the Vatican, on the day the Roman Catholic church marks its annual World Day of Peace, Francis wove his new year’s homily around the themes of motherhood and women, saying it was they who kept the threads of life together. He used the message to make one of his strongest pleas yet for an end to violence against them. “And since mothers bestow life, and women keep the world [together], let us all make greater efforts to promote mothers and to protect women,” he said. “How much violence is directed against women. Enough. To hurt a woman is to insult God, who from a woman took on our humanity – not through an angel, not directly, but through a woman.” Francis, 85, has spoken out in recent times about domestic violence. Last month, during an Italian television programme, he told a woman who had been beaten by her ex-husband that men who commit violence against women engage in something that is “almost satanic”. Francis appeared to be in good form on Saturday following an unexplained incident on New Year’s Eve where he attended a service but at the last minute did not preside over it as had been expected. At the start of the mass, he walked the entire length of the central aisle of the basilica, as opposed to Friday night, when he emerged from a side entrance close to the altar and watched from the sidelines. The pontiff suffers from a sciatica condition that causes pain in the legs, and sometimes a flare-up prevents him from standing for long periods. Public participation at the mass was lower than in past years because of Covid restrictions, according to reports. In the pope’s message for the World Day of Peace, issued last month, Francis said countries should divert money spent on armaments to invest in education, and lamented growing military costs at the expense of social services. The annual peace message is sent to heads of state and international organisations. The pope also gives a signed copy to leaders who make official visits to him at the Vatican.Valley PTA Paul Thomas Anderson’s ninth cinematic symphony hits UK screens next week: Licorice Pizza returns the director to his native LA’s San Fernando Valley in the 1970s, previously seen in his 1997 breakout Boogie Nights. The latter tackled the era’s porn scene, the new effort is a more wholesome coming-of-age story (Funny! Relaxed! Delectable! says the Guardian) – some have dubbed it “Boogie Days”. Newcomers Cooper Hoffman and Alana Haim lead the line. Phantom threads Alana Haim is a member of the sister-based pop rock group Haim. The trio has long been associated with Anderson, who has directed several of their music videos. But it turns out the sisters’ mother, Donna Rose, was his elementary school art teacher – “a huge influence”, he says. Inherent gong As well as inspiring a modern auteur, Donna was a winning entrant on The Gong Show; she sang a Bonnie Raitt number – no gongs! (Husband Moti, meanwhile, was once a professional footballer; those Haims contain multitudes.) There may be blood Chuck Barris was the host of The Gong Show and creator of other trash telly: in 1984 he infamously wrote an “unauthorised autobiography”, dubiously claiming he had been a CIA assassin. With Confessions of a Dangerous Mind, George Clooney turned the tall story into his underrated 2002 directorial debut(rent it everywhere). Charlie Kaufman wrote the screenplay – though later voiced his disapproval. The masters Kaufman’s own directorial debut was the mind-bending Synecdoche, New York, with Philip Seymour Hoffman as a theatre director whose work swallows his world. Hoffman was also a muse to Anderson across several films (is Punch-Drunk Love quietly their best?), until his death in 2014. Now his son Cooper has picked up the PTA baton (usually we’re dubious of nepotism, but maybe we can wave this through). Pairing notes Read Masterworks is the understated title of a survey of Paul Thomas Anderson’s work by film critic Adam Nayman, who has also turned his hand to elegant monographs about David Fincher and the Coen brothers. Eat Licorice Pizza doesn’t refer to an unusual topping; it’s an old chain of record stores. But if you want to try it on a slice, what’s to stop you?I have asthma, and there’s a fairly major respiratory disease going around, as you may have heard, and also I am a smoker. A quick inventory of my coat pockets: inhaler, face mask, Marlboro Gold. I never fell into smoking as a teenager when everyone else seemed to think it was cool, but took it up in my 30s, as others might develop an interest in birdwatching, or CrossFit. Four or five a day, for the best part of a decade, and more at the weekends. This piece is anonymous because my mother cannot know. I don’t have the words to express how unbelievably stupid I feel about all this. There’s quite a lot going on here, and not all of it is solely of interest to me and my therapist. You might imagine that a continuing and lung-buggering international emergency which a study says is specifically more dangerous for smokers would mean there were fewer idiots like me. But in fact, stress and boredom are more than a match for serious health concerns: research published in August last year suggested that the number of young adults smoking in England went up by about a quarter during the first lockdown. There was a spike in the number of people across all ages giving up smoking in England during that same first lockdown period – but no sign of the plummeting rates you might rationally expect. Then again, nothing about this habit has ever been rational. For my own part, I don’t know exactly what kind of smoker I am, but I know I’m not casual, or social: I’m highly committed to something very unpopular. The persistence of the packet in my pocket is not for the want of trying. It’s more for a want of wanting. My figurative heart just isn’t in it, although my literal heart would probably have quite strong opinions in the opposite direction. (Unlucky, literal heart, only sentient organs get a vote!) I don’t suppose I speak for the other 1.1bn people still grimly puffing away, but it feels as if my problem is that I still, somewhere in my lizard brain, think this habit that makes me smell awful and look desperate is … cool, a deftly executed little ritual that makes me a more compelling figure to people at a party. Did you feel cool when you were a teenager, my therapist asks, and it’s obvious to us both that the question is a rhetorical one. That makes a grim sort of sense, but it’s probably also a crutch, and a way to ignore the obvious fact that I’m addicted. After all, I’ve barely been to any parties for quite a long time and, apart from the neighbour’s terminally unimpressed cat, there’s no audience when I’m huddled in the back garden on a rainy Tuesday morning getting ash on myself. I started, for reasons I don’t fully understand, as some sort of warped, bloody-minded reinvention shortly after a breakup. I should have known from my permanent inability to leave half a pack of sweets in a cupboard for the next day that it wouldn’t work; before long I had slipped from a pack a month to one every few days. I wish I had properly understood then how insidious an addiction nicotine would turn out to be, how misleading and unhelpful the term “craving” would prove, at least for me: it suggests a siren in your brain when you go without, when the truth is something more like the little fillip you get when it occurs to you that you’d like a cup of tea and a biscuit. I don’t often leave it long enough to be faced with a more powerful compulsion than that, but because it doesn’t seem especially intense, I almost always give in to it. I think I have a constitutional weakness for treats. I still don’t think I really, deeply, want to stop, or understand how urgently I have to. But I know I don’t want this bleak internal monologue motoring in my head any more: an endless, boring chunter that slides into my mind any time I’m not thinking about anything much. It may be that the pandemic’s additional opportunities for mental drift has helped me reach at least this caveated breakthrough, because in 2021 I started Juul-ing. Whereas previous attempts failed spectacularly – the time I lit up while chewing Nicorette is a particular low point – this time, I’ve gone more than a week between cigarettes, at the cost of an umbilical attachment to a mysterious little obelisk whose long-term impacts remain unknown. I buy menthol vape pods in bulk and feel nervous if the battery light blinks red. I always come back to smoking in the end, but the gaps are getting a bit longer, and a bit easier to tolerate. None of this is consoling. Helpful though the vaping is, and good though I feel about smoking less, I seem to be stuck on it as a harm-reduction method, not a step towards kicking the habit. I tell myself that once all this – I am waving my hands at the universe – has eased off a little, I’ll really get on with it. The prospect of slowly killing myself is fixed as an abstraction. I feel I’d stop if I were having a kid, but that might just be another rationalisation for putting it off. So here I am, the sort of person who vapes behind their hand in Zoom meetings, and blows a conspicuous little cloud out of the corner of his mouth as if anyone’s not going to notice it because it comes out sideways. I miss being the person I was before I smoked, when I had no idea how much of a luxury it was never to have thought about it, and I know that even if I succeed in giving up nicotine completely, that victory will be shadowed by an obscure sense of loss. I also can’t believe how much less funny this piece is than I meant it to be. But maybe, two years into a global pandemic, that counts for personal growth: the ability to face the absurdity of the harm you are doing to yourself as something more consequential than a morbid joke.The John Williams score plays (with added bells for the festive season), the camera soars above an ersatz Victorian street, wax-sealed letters appear – and just like that, anyone who came of reading or viewing age from 1997 onwards is home. The Harry Potter reunion special Return to Hogwarts, marking 20 years since the first film adaptation of JK Rowling’s gamechanging and multi-multi-million-selling fantasy series about the boy wizard was released, hews as closely to the original’s aesthetic as possible from the off. Chats among the three main stars, Daniel Radcliffe (Harry himself), Emma Watson (Hermione Granger) and Rupert Grint (Ron Weasley), take place in the Gryffindor common room, there’s an opening set piece in the Hogwarts dining hall, Radcliffe and director of the first two films, Chris Columbus, talk in Dumbledore’s office and so on. It provides a rush of nostalgia only heightened as the enduring affection among them all becomes evident. There is much – rising perilously if perhaps inevitably close to emetic levels – of the cast and crew being like a family. There always is in programmes like this, but at least here it is more than usually justified. The actors famously began working on the franchise when they were children, and their audience grew up alongside them pretty much in real time as the films were released between 2001 and 2011. One of what you might assume to be a central member of the family, however, is conspicuous by her absence – the creator of Harry Potter and his world, the author JK Rowling. An essay she published in 2020 giving her views on the impact of gender ideology on women’s rights was widely denounced as transphobic. Radcliffe, Grint and Watson distanced themselves from her. According to her agents, the controversy played no part in her decision not to take part in the reunion and she felt that the 2019 interview footage of her used here (mostly recalling the difficulty of finding someone to play Harry) would be presence enough. Whatever the true degree of her choice in the matter, and despite various fond mentions of “Jo” from Radcliffe and others throughout the special, a void remains. But around it there is charm, warmth, charisma – especially when Helena Bonham Carter (Bellatrix Lestrange) blows in like the world’s most glorious hurricane – and even a little new information amid well-worn anecdotes. Yes, we hear again how Alfonso Cuarón, who directed the third Potter film, made the central trio write essays about their characters and true to form, Watson handed in a perfect dozen pages, Radcliffe mustered half a side of A4 and Grint didn’t bother. But we also hear about Alan Rickman getting the inside line from Rowling early on about Snape’s ultimate motivation and telling not a soul, Watson’s growing loneliness as the pressures on her grew greater, and about the deep fondness between Watson and Tom Felton (Draco Malfoy) and the crush Radcliffe had on Bonham Carter. There are also moments of tangential insight, into the scale of the endeavour (such as when one of the three remembers being told that the casting announcement would be made that afternoon and that the media would descend – “So you can’t go home”), and Radcliffe’s maturity beyond his years from the start. He makes several references to watching the likes of Ralph Fiennes, Gary Oldman, Timothy Spall and many others from the British thespian firmament doing “proper acting”, and his longing to and delight in learning from them is still palpable. It is a slick and calculated production, designed to give Potterheads exactly what they want, how they want it. But it contains enough untold stories and honesty from the participants and unfakeable camaraderie to give it more genuine heart than probably anyone expected. Perhaps in another 20 years they will let Rowling back in, too.After a few minutes in the queue spent eyeing up the best on offer at the local deli, it is decision time. Maybe some of the wonderful Parma ham from Italy? With a few slices of Spanish chorizo? And a piece of brie from that farm in Normandy … oh, and definitely some of the black olives from Greece. The government may be making light of new and burdensome Brexit rules and regulations affecting imports to Great Britain from the EU that came into force on 1 January, but organisations representing small UK firms are not. The firms are worried about the impact on their businesses – and about the choices that will be available to their customers at their favourite specialist stores – on the high street. The Federation of Small Businesses cites local delicatessens, many of which import from small specialist suppliers in the EU, as the type of operators that could be adversely affected. “The classic example is your high street deli that is importing delicacies like, say, chorizo from Spain or parmesan from Italy,” says James Sibley, the federation’s head of international affairs. “For them, the thought of having to register for these systems is daunting and the process is expensive, so we’ve a lot of concern there. For those small businesses directly affected, we have picked up a lot of worry.” The hit to small EU exporters to the UK could be similar to that experienced by UK exporters to the EU over the past year, many of which simply gave up selling goods to the continent because post-Brexit export rules made it too much of a bother and too expensive to carry on. From the beginning of last year UK exporters faced extra paperwork, and added costs, and their customers were stung by resulting higher prices – despite the claims by Boris Johnson, Michael Gove and other Brexiteers that leaving the EU would reduce regulation and lead to lower prices. Now, Sibley says, the effects could be similar for small importers to those that faced UK exporters in 2021. “It is the inverse of what has happened to UK exporters over the past year. We know that a fifth of our exporting members have stopped exporting to the EU, because of that disruption.” Rules that came into force January 1 require businesses (in most cases those receiving the goods in the UK, but in some those sending them here) to notify the customs authorities of precisely what is being sent to Great Britain from the EU, and from where. The rules were in effect waived throughout 2021. The process will require the exporter to acquire and then submit an Eori number (economic operators registration and identification number) to their UK customers so the importers can then input a lot of data and send it off to the UK authorities. If the goods arrive with incomplete paperwork, they can be seized, confiscated or sent back. Sibley says there is evidence that many EU exporters are unprepared for what is about to hit them. “What we are hearing is that there are some EU traders who are not ready for any of this even to the extent of not having this number, so that is a concern.” Then on 1 July this year, more regulations and checks will come in. “From then, exporters will also need export health certificates or veterinary certificates if they are exporting products of animal origin or foodstuffs. That is a point at which some EU exporters might just say, ‘You know what, forget this. It is not worth the hassle’.” Sibley adds: “Also in July you will have physical inspections of goods at border posts in the UK, so again that could lead to delays because you will essentially have a vet with a clipboard going through the lorry saying ‘this is right, this is fine, (or not)’.” Business groups say the problems will affect mainly smaller operators, as bigger concerns can afford to pay customs agents or freight forwarders to handle the paperwork for them. On UK high streets, some shop owners are already worrying about gaps appearing on their shelves in 2022, and about rising prices. El Colmado, Bristol’s only Spanish deli, imports pretty much everything: chorizo sausages, huge serrano hams and glossy green olives. Its owner, David Pavon, expects more disruption and rising prices when importers are required to make real-time custom declarations, input details of food imports into various customs systems, and obtain special codes for lorries to board ferries. “Logistics problems have increased during the past year already because of the havoc coming into England,” he says. “So I imagine in January we’re going to see even more delays, because if a lorry driver needs to sit in the border for six hours or more, we will need to pay his wages. We are paying customs agents in Spain and here to input the information [required for import], which increases the price as well.” Pavon, 41, has already put his prices up – and expects to have to do so again in 2022. “They are still going up and you will see an increase and an increase,” he says. “Someone is making money along the way but you and me are going to have to pay for it.” The wholesalers supplying delis and specialist food shops have similar worries. Reading-based Cotswold Fayre, which supplies hundreds of premium food lines, including European favourites such as stollen and panettone, to independent retailers throughout the UK, has been forced to budget for delays and cost increases on imported goods instead of investing in creating new jobs. “It’s not what we want to do – I would rather spend on starting another shop, but if we have to we will [absorb extra costs],” says Paul Hargreaves, the company’s founder. Hargreaves, who recently met his local MP, Alok Sharma, feels that the government does not understand the impact of Brexit on British businesses. “[Ministers] are not in the real world. They think things are a lot easier than they actually are. That is highly frustrating,” he says. “If they had to experience it for themselves, perhaps there might have been a bit more effort to do a better Brexit deal. The perception is that the ideology [of Brexit] is more important than the practicalities to businesses in the UK.” • The headline and text of this article were amended on 1 January 2022 to correctly refer to Great Britain rather than the UK in specific reference to the new regulations.Just after noon, as the voices of the choir filled the cathedral, the mourners stood, bowed their heads in the direction of the plain wooden casket and then filed out on to Cape Town’s streets. The requiem mass for Desmond Tutu, who died aged 90 six days ago, had lasted much of the morning, long enough for a celebration of a life that has inspired tens of millions around the world, a final farewell from his compatriots, and for the unexpected rainclouds that had shrouded his home city overnight to clear. Now, sunlight streamed through the stained glass windows and the distinctive profile of Table Mountain was etched against a typically blue South African sky. “He never stopped fighting, he never stopped speaking out, and never stopped caring. He was a crusader in the struggle for freedom, justice, equality and peace not only in [South Africa] but around the world as well,” said South Africa’s president, Cyril Ramaphosa, in his eulogy to the charismatic, diminutive former English teacher whose non-violent struggle against the racist, repressive apartheid regime was recognised with a Nobel prize in 1984. “A global icon [due to] exceptional moral stature and service to humanity … We are diminished by his passing. His life straddled an epoch in our country’s history that has now come to an end,” Ramaphosa, a former labour activist who fought alongside Tutu, said. The last surviving major leader of the anti-apartheid struggle, Tutu will be remembered for both his steely determination in the face of violent oppression and his impish humour, which he deployed to inspire supporters, win new allies and confound enemies. The Rev Michael Weeder, the Dean of Cape Town, quoted the singer Billie Holiday, saying that Tutu’s trademark smile had moved people “like the wind that shakes the bough”. “His smile calmed and focused those who saw it, whether in person or from afar,” Weeder told mourners. With only a hundred people allowed into Saint George’s Cathedral in central Cape Town due to Covid restrictions, many had chosen to pay their respects earlier in the week. Hundreds had queued to stand before the closed casket for a few moments in contemplation or sign a book of condolences. Others had placed flowers beneath a portrait of “the Arch”, as Tutu was familiarly known locally. Many remembered Tutu’s role during the long dark years of struggle, when, as a senior cleric, he turned Saint George’s into a hub of political organising as well as a sanctuary of faith. When the apartheid regime banned political gatherings, Tutu held meetings in the cathedral where participants bowed their heads ostensibly in prayer and heard political speeches. Nelson Mandela, a close friend and collaborator of Tutu, called the Anglican church the “people’s cathedral”. Brita Lomba, a 66-year-old photographer and former anti-apartheid activist, said Tutu had been “irrepressible” during the years of struggle. “He stood for values that no one could disagree with … but the most powerful thing was simply how he was as a human being, the way he was,” said Lomba, who had joined a hundred or so others in the square in front of Cape Town’s city hall to watch a live broadcast of the mass on a big screen. Beatrice Brenton, who had begged a lift into Cape Town to watch the funeral because she lacked money for the bus fare, said she remembered Tutu “dancing and laughing”. “He was a very precious, special person all through my life,” the 83-year-old said. Following the collapse of the apartheid regime and South Africa’s first free elections in 1994, Tutu took on the harrowing role of leading the country’s path-breaking Truth and Reconciliation Commission which investigated apartheid-era crimes to bring closure to victims and the nation. This profound commitment to “healing South Africa”, as well as Tutu’s trademark impish grin and joyful laugh, inspired Lerato Jatto to bring her family to watch the funeral. Jatto, who left South Africa for the UK in 1991 but was in Cape Town on holiday, said that Tutu’s work with the victims and perpetrators had shown other parts of the world how to “heal their own wounds … when something so tragic happens”. Nearby, Zinthe Tsele, a 25-year-old worker in a Cape Town spice-packing factory, said she had come with her sister to be “part of the celebration of [Tutu’s] life”. “We learned about him at school. I think people today should listen to Tutu’s message. He didn’t do anything for himself. He lived in a very small home. He was not like today’s politicians. For them it is about power not the people,” Tsele said. Dubbed the “moral compass” or “conscience” of South Africa, Tutu did not flinch from trenchant criticism of the ruling African National Congress (ANC) party, embarrassing senior politicians whom he accused of riding a “gravy train”. In his eulogy, Ramaphosa, who has struggled to reform the ANC since taking power almost four years ago, admitted that South Africa faced “problems and challenges everywhere” and that “poverty, inequality, racism, homophobia, gender-based violence, crime and corruption have left many people disenchanted”. Though Tutu, who suffered from prostate cancer for more than 20 years, largely retreated from public life in recent years, he had continued his lifelong fight for causes he believed in, forcefully supporting LGBT rights, equal access to education and the assisted dying movement. In a videoed message, the Rev Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury, said that Tutu “lit up the world”. “When we were in the dark, he brought light and that light has lit up countries [across the world] struggling with conflict or where the marginalised have suffered. He never failed to bring light, and his light did not fade but grew brighter. [He] is shedding light for those on the edge and those who suffer to this day and in the future,” Welby said in a video message broadcast during the mass. That Covid regulations prevented easy travel may have been a relief to some leaders on the African continent who might otherwise have been expected to attend the funeral. Watching the final moments of the ceremony on the big screen, Francis Sithole, a child youth worker from neighbouring Zimbabwe, said leaders of his country should also heed Tutu’s message. “He spoke the truth. They need to think about what he was preaching,” Sithole, 43, said. In a sermon, Michael Nuttall, the former bishop of Natal who was a close friend and collaborator of Tutu, told mourners: “Desmond was not on some crusade of personal aggrandisement or egotism, though he often and disarmingly admitted that he loved to be loved. “His was not a harsh, ideological quest for justice. Always it was grounded in mercy … in an enduring loving-kindness: the gentle touch, the forgiving heart, the warm smile.” Tutu, who specifically requested an environmentally friendly funeral without lavish expense or ostentation, will be cremated and his ashes interred beneath the floor of St George’s, “a place that he loved”, church officials said.I grew up under the Tories’ Section 28 designation in Stansted Mountfitchet in Essex. That was difficult. It prohibited teachers from promoting homosexuality, which meant they couldn’t condemn homophobic bullying, either. I experienced a lot of bullying. I see my transition as beautiful – it was an act of love for myself. I didn’t know how I was going to look at the end, but it was born the faith that I would be happier. I try not to think too much about what other people think. I try to focus on looking how I feel. That’s what’s brought me most happiness in my life Bravery comes with healing. We all go through awful stuff. We’re all traumatised in one way or another. Life is hard. Bravery comes from confronting what you’ve been traumatised by. I’m very conscious of the fact that tomorrow isn’t promised. We need to do everything we can with every day we have. The first time I felt gender euphoria was when a dear friend bought me a pair of very high, very chic Christian Louboutin heels. I put them on and instantly felt like the woman I wanted to be. I feel like with the internet we’ve lost the art of conversation. We need to get back to actually being able to find a common place, to push past disagreements. There’s nuance to the human experience. Nothing positive comes from seeing each other in 2D. When Alexander McQueen passed, I felt the warmth drain from my body. It was a massive loss. What he did with his shows, how he presented them, was incomparable and unsurpassed. I’m trying to get back into having experiences in nature. I grew up in a very rural area, so I’m enjoying going to nature reserves and national parks and Hampstead Heath and just bonding in real life. The takeaway from the pandemic is that there’s nothing like human energy. Being around those who support you and love you is an incomparable experience. Music always transports me, I learned early that it’s a therapeutic tool, a way to process or bring out feelings, to change the way you feel. When I need joy in my life, I tap into nostalgia and listen to music that reminds me of better times. I want to have children in five years. When you’re trans and unable to produce children myself with my own body, it’s obviously something that takes a lot of planning. But I love kids. I try not to regret anything. It’s a waste of energy. I’m more focused on learning from the lessons I take from the things that I’m not proud of. We all make mistakes. Munroe is supporting TK Maxx’s Give Up Clothes for Good in support of Cancer Research UK for Children &amp; Young PeopleJürgen Klopp will miss Liverpool’s Premier League match against Chelsea on Sunday after a suspected positive test result for Covid-19. Liverpool confirmed that their manager is now isolating after reporting “mild symptoms” in the buildup to Sunday’s fixture. Klopp said in Friday’s pre-match press conference that Liverpool had three fresh Covid cases within the playing squad, all currently unnamed. “We never had this proper outbreak where 15 to 20 players had it [Covid],” he said. “For us it is every day, another one, stuff happens more and more often. It’s like a lottery waiting for the results.” The assistant manager Pepijn Lijnders will lead the team for the 4.30pm kick-off at Stamford Bridge. Liverpool revealed that testing of the entire first-team set-up revealed no further positive cases within the playing squad in addition to the three confirmed by Klopp on Friday but three backroom staff members have returned suspected positive results.A “very tough” few weeks will put the health service under such enormous pressure that hospital bosses could be forced to reintroduce a ban on visitors if they have not done so already, a health chief has said. Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, which represents NHS trusts in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, told BBC Breakfast on Saturday: “Hospital managers have to make very difficult choices and excluding visitors is one of those very difficult choices. “It’s not something that anybody wants to do. It’s a last resort. But, when you’re facing the kind of pressures the health service is going to be under for the next few weeks, this is the kind of thing managers have to do. “I understand how much people want to return to normal and I’m confident that, as this year progresses, we will be able to do that, and we all hope that 2022 is the year in which coronavirus just becomes an illness that we live with, not an illness that dominates our lives. But you can have the optimism but still recognise the next few weeks are going to be very tough and we need to do whatever is necessary to get us through these next few weeks.” Earlier this week, the Times reported that the government was also considering creating a rule that hospitals should not force women to give birth or attend scans without their partners present, even if tougher restrictions were deemed necessary to curb the spread of Omicron. The NHS effort to deal with Omicron is being hampered because substantial numbers of patients cannot be discharged from hospital despite being fit to return home, NHS leaders have said. NHS England figures show that 9,213 patients were forced to stay in hospital on Christmas Day because they could not be supported to go home. On Boxing Day, the number of patients in hospital for more than three weeks who were unable to leave had reached 4,124. Some care homes are not accepting patients because they do not have the staff to deal with them, according to Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers. Staff absences also mean that hospitals in England are unable to deal with some non-urgent treatments, such as physiotherapy and rehabilitation, which are vital for enabling patients to leave hospital. In some hospitals, up to a quarter of beds are filled by people who could otherwise be discharged, Hopson said. The NHS situation report, published on Friday, showed that medical staff had managed to help more than 10,000 people a day leave hospital in the run-up to Christmas. Staff absences due to Covid have more than doubled in the past month, from 11,375 on 29 November to 24,632 by Boxing Day. “We saw some progress in the run-up to Christmas in discharging patients who were medically fit to return home or other community settings,” Hopson said. “That reflected a lot of work to free up capacity to prepare for the threat from Omicron. But this remains a real problem and we know from talking to trust chief executives that in some hospitals delayed discharges can account for 20-25% of the bed base. “In the last 48 hours, trust CEOs have been pointing to the fact that growing staff absences mean it’s getting harder to maintain NHS rehabilitation and step-down services, and there are similar problems in social care. We’re also now hearing of some care homes being closed to new admissions because of staff absences, or Omicron outbreaks, or both.” The news comes as the health secretary, Sajid Javid, said further restrictions on freedom in England “must be an absolute last resort”, amid a record-breaking wave of infections due to the Omicron variant. The current wave will, however, “test the limits of finite NHS capacity even more than a typical winter”, Javid said, as hospital admissions in England climbed to their highest since last January. Writing in the Daily Mail, Javid said England had “welcomed in 2022 with some of the least restrictive measures in Europe”, after the government decided against ramping up protective rules – a move that put Downing Street at odds with leaders of the devolved countries, who had opted for restrictions on nightclubs, other hospitality venues and new year celebrations. “Curbs on our freedom must be an absolute last resort and the British people rightly expect us to do everything in our power to avert them,” Javid wrote. “Since I came into this role six months ago I’ve also been acutely conscious of the enormous health, social and economic costs of lockdowns. So I’ve been determined that we must give ourselves the best chance of living alongside the virus and avoiding strict measures in the future.” Despite his optimism, the health secretary said the time lag between infections and hospital admissions meant it was “inevitable that we will still see a big increase” in the number of people with Covid needing treatment over the next month, and warned that the pandemic was “still far from over”.Some US infectious disease experts and public health officials are questioning whether to continue using the number of coronavirus cases as a metric for determining which mitigation efforts are appropriate, as data suggests Omicron is less severe but much more contagious than previous variants. Those experts argue that the US has reached a stage in the pandemic where reports of dramatic surges in case counts prompt unnecessary worries and that government officials and the public should instead review death and hospitalization data when considering precautions. Case counts “are causing a lot of panic and fear, but they don’t reflect what they used to, which was that hospitalizations would track with cases”, said Dr Monica Gandhi, an infectious disease specialist and professor of medicine at University of California, San Francisco. However, other infectious disease experts say that while they are encouraged by data from South Africa showing that its recent Omicron wave was not accompanied by a significant increase in deaths, the virus continues to strain hospitals in the US, therefore the number of Covid cases remains a vital measurement. The US on Thursday had more than 580,000 new Covid cases, the second time this week that the country has broken its record for daily Covid cases, according to New York Times data. But over the past two weeks, while the number of Covid cases in the United States has increased by 181%, the number of hospitalizations has increased by 19% and the number of deaths has decreased by 5%. “It seems to be less virulent for two reasons,” said Gandhi. “One, we seem to have so much more immunity in December 2021” than during previous waves, and “there are now five laboratory studies that show that it doesn’t seem to infect lungs very well”. In reporting data on Covid, health departments should now take the same approach as they do with influenza, Gandhi said. That means releasing hospitalization and death data but not numbers concerning case counts because, like with the flu, it’s not possible to eliminate the virus, therefore we should only focus on its severity, she said. “Once you have accepted the virus is endemic, just like influenza, then you never track cases because we never screen like this for any other viruses, we track what is causing disease and getting people hospitalized,” Gandhi said. Other countries are now implementing an approach that is not focused on case counts. For example, in Canada, which has also seen record numbers of Covid cases recently, Dr Robert Strang, Nova Scotia’s chief medical officer of health, said at a news conference Thursday that the government agency would no longer focus on daily case counts. “We no longer need to identify and have public health manage every single case of the variant because for most people, that will result in relatively mild illness, so we need to focus our efforts and resources on our most vulnerable groups,” said Strang. “Omicron is all around us and we have to recognize that you could be exposed anywhere … It’s about managing and slowing down the spread but not eliminating it.” The Philippines government also announced this week that it would stop posting case updates on social media, which was similar to an approach employed by Singapore, according to Hawaii Public Radio. But in the US, there are parts of the country where hospitals remains overwhelmed, largely because of unvaccinated patients with Covid. In Maryland, for example, which saw a more than 500% increase in Covid cases and 50% increase in hospitalizations, at least six hospitals have implemented crisis-mode standards of care, according to the Baltimore Sun. At Johns Hopkins Bayview medical center, which saw a 360% increase in patients hospitalized with Covid in December, that means rescheduling elective surgical procedures and opening additional space to treat Covid patients. Justin Lessler, an epidemiology professor at the University of North Carolina, still sees case counts as an “important leading indicator”, he said. “With Omicron are surges are so big, even if it’s on average … much less severe than previous variants, the sheer number of cases is such that hospital systems are going to be overwhelmed and there is risks to individuals because it’s so likely you will be infected.” Mara Aspinall, a biomedical diagnostics professor at Arizona State University, also said case count data remains important because it prevents the public from overreacting or underreacting to the pandemic. “The challenge we have had this whole time is finding that balance between keeping our physical health in check, but our mental health and the economy moving forward, and it’s all with the best information” that we are able to do that, Aspinall said. For Gandhi, that balance lies in health departments tracking case counts internally and only alerting the public on hospitalizations and deaths. “The reason we tracked cases is because we were hoping we could eliminate the virus, but it’s not in the nature of the virus to eliminate it,” said Gandhi. “The country hasn’t totally transitioned to this idea that we can’t eliminate it.”Thanks for your company and emails, I’ll leave you with Nick Ames’s match report. Bye! “Arsenal play some brilliant football but it’s hard to love them when Xhaka isn’t their stupidest player on the day and Gabriel is,” says Neill Brown, and yes he is an Arsenal fan. “Words effing fail me. I’m holding Xhaka responsible for this little meltdown; the petulance of his reaction to the [correct] VAR call was terrible, even by his abysmal standards. Eff. Eff. Eff.” Want more football? Bet you do. “Two sporting things I care most about are Arsenal and Lewis Hamilton,” writes Zack. “Feel like a higher power is trying to tell me something about the meaning of life with these two.” Heh. If I was an Arsenal fan I’d still be delighted, despite that late sting, or at least I’d like to think I’d still be delighted. When did they last play that well against a top-class team? The FA Cup final win over Chelsea in 2017? The first leg against Barcelona in 2010-11? The final whistle prompts boos around the ground. A number of Arsenal’s players are on their back, devastated by that sadistic late twist of fate and the perceived injustice earlier in the second half. Easy to say as a neutral, but I honestly think the result isn’t that important for Arsenal - their first-half performance was their best in years, and the most compelling evidence yet that they are going places under Mikel Arteta. City aren’t going places, they’re already there. The win takes them 11 points clear at the top, and it’s hard to see them being caught. New year, new Manchester City: they’ve learned how to win ugly. They had two shots on target in the whole game but nicked all three points in injury-time. 90+5 min Bernardo is booked for kicking the ball away, and is surrounded by outraged Arsenal players. At times today, Arsenal have been wonderful; at others, not so much. Arsenal’s players are shattered; City’s could be celebrating the title. De Bruyne, on the right, flipped a dangerous cross towards Rodri in the area. It skimmed off Holding’s head and reached Laporte. His shot was blocked but Rodri poked the rebound past Ramsdale from close range and whipped off his top in celebration. Football, bloody etc. 90+3 min De Bruyne shapes to cross and then angles the free-kick sharply towards the unmarked Cancelo on the edge of the D. His first-time shot hits Partey. 90+1 min Cancelo is fouled by Tierney on the right wing... 90 min Six minutes of added time. 90 min City are struggling to get any momentum. They have been noticeably below par, but I’d be inclined to give Arsenal a lot of credit for that. 87 min Mahrez takes Tierney for a little dance before hitting a right-footed shot that deflects off Xhaka into the side netting. That was really good covering from Xhaka. 86 min Cancelo’s deep cross is taken away from Gunodgan by the stretching White, an important interception. Sterling collects the ball and hits a cross that deflects off Tomiyasu and through to Ramsdale. I must say, after maybe 7-8 minutes of noggingonery following Gabriel’s red card, Arsenal have refocussed admirably. 85 min For all the everything, City’s goal remains their only shot on target. Arsenal have had just two (one of them offside), though Martinelli shot just wide on three occasions. They have certainly had the better chances in this game. 84 min Another pragmatic substitution from Mikel Arteta: Mohamed Elneny replaces the goalscorer Bukayo Saka. 83 min This has been a really good game, and all anyone is talking about is fecking VAR. Happy new year! 82 min Laporte plays the ball back to Ederson and then waves an arm at Martinelli. I’m not sure there was much in it, though it was a reflection of how unsettled City have been by Arsenal’s aggression. 81 min “They’re very wound up, but it’s been a long time since I’ve seen so much effort &amp; passion from Arsenal, more than ten years,” says Andrew Hurley. “A bit of everyone-is-against-us was typical of great english teams, from 1989 to 2006.” Yes, fair point. Even if they lose, this has been the most encouraging Arsenal performance I’ve seen in ages. 80 min Cancelo shoots over from 20 yards with his left foot. Arsenal’s defensive organisation has been good all game, but particularly since they went down to 10 men. At the moment - and I realise this this may well have changed by the time I finish this sentence - City don’t look like scoring. 78 min Laporte’s dangerous, short-range backpass almost gives Martinelli another chance. Ederson was alert enough to boot the ball clear, but he only got to it a split-second before Martinelli. 76 min “The shirt pull is the infringement,” says Gary Naylor. “Whether the player dives or not is immaterial.” Yes. I suppose the frustration - for any team, not just Arsenal - comes from pure self-interest all the unpunished shirtpulls, though Xhaka compounded his foul by half tripping Bernardo. 75 min In other news, Jurgen Klopp has tested positive for Covid and will not be on the touchline when Liverpool go to Stamford Bridge tomorrow. 74 min Bernardo, whose every touch is being booed, has a shot blocked by Tierney. 73 min As things stand City are nine points clear of Chelsea and ten of Liverpool, though Liverpool could reduce that to four points with their games in hand. 72 min City are starting to pin Arsenal back. A loose ball breaks to Bernardo, whose driven cross from the left is crucially interecepted by Xhaka at the near post. There was a City player just behind, Gundogan I think, waiting to score. 72 min Smith Rowe has gone to the left wing, with Martinelli up front. 71 min Emile Smith Rowe replaces the captain Alexandre Lacazette, who played extremely well with and without the ball, especially in the first half. 71 min Moments later, Laporte curls well wide from distance. 71 min CIty have their first extended spell of possession in the second half. Eventually Cancelo dances away from Tierney and stands up a cross that is slightly too deep for Gundogan. 69 min Emile Smith Rowe is about to come on for Arsenal, a sensible move given his ball-carrying ability and general brilliance. 68 min Holding is booked for a cynical pull on De Bruyne. There’s more outrage, but it was a clear yellow card. 67 min Arsenal are starting to refocus, and in truth City haven’t been particularly dominant since Gabriel walked. 66 min Sterling shoots high and wide from the edge of the area. 65 min Never mind Old Trafford 2004, Arsenal need to invoke the spirit of Anfield 2001: a spectacular, coming-of-age victory achieved with 10 men. 64 min Saka is booked for asking for Rodri to be booked. 63 min Arsenal are in serious danger of losing the plot. The way their players and supporters are behaving, you’d think this was an Old Trafford 2004-level injustice. That was a scandal for the ages; this isn’t close. I’m not even sure it’s an injustice at all. 62 min Arsenal bring in Rob Holding for Martin Odegaard, an inevitable change once Gabriel was sent off. And City are bringing on Ilkay Gundogan for Gabriel Jesus, who is booed off for the crime of being flattened. 61 min What an astonishing turnaround this has been. Arsenal were so good for 52 minutes, the better team by a distance. And then it all went wrong, big-time. 59 min This is going spectacularly wrong for Arsenal. After that Martinelli chance, Ederson drove a flat goalkick to Jesus in the centre circle. He took it majestically on the chest, turning Gabriel in the same movement, and Gabriel threw out an arm to block him. It’s a clear yellow card, his second in a few minutes, and he’s off. 58 min: WHAT A MISS FROM MARTINELLI! This is pure slapstick. Laporte lobbed a panicky header over the outrushing Ederson, and it looked set to go in until Ake slid in to clear off the line. The ball came to Martinelli, who slashed wide of an open goal from eight yards. And now... It was a really good penalty, swept to the right as Ramsdale went the other way. Gabriel has been booked for doing a Shahid Afridi on the penalty spot before the kick was taken. Mahrez scores to a chorus of boos from the Arsenal supporters. 57 min Riyad Mahrez will take the penalty... 56 min Now it’s kicking off - or at least what constitutes kicking off in the modern game - in the penalty area. Xhaka saw it on the big screen and charged after the referee, saying Bernardo dived. He certainly made the most of it, but that doesn’t mean it wasn’t a foul. Frankly, it was crap defending from Xhaka. PENALTY GIVEN! And Xhaka is booked. Arsenal’s players are fuming, though I’m not sure why. The referee is going to the monitor! VAR check Bernardo was looking for it, it’s true, but I think that constitutes a clear and obvious error from the referee. Xhaka fouled Bernardo twice. 53 min: Big City penalty appeal turned down! This might be given by VAR. Bernardo twisted Xhaka inside out and went over. Xhaka had a big handful of his shirt and probably tripped him as well, so this should be given. 51 min “Not sure that neutral journalist should describe it as good news that Arsenal dominating City in the first half,” says David Pitkeathly. “A very uncomfortable comment.” No, I’m pretty comfortable with it, especially as it was abundantly clear from the previous sentence that I was talking about Arsenal. 50 min Saka’s corner is half cleared towards the edge of the area, where Martinelli fresh-airs a left-footed volley. For a player of his quality that was as reasonable chance. 49 min Martinelli is launched up in the air by the sliding Rodri 22 yards from goal. Rodri slipped; he also won the ball. Arsenal’s players made a lot of it but the referee didn’t give a foul never mind a card. 47 min “As a Manchester United fan who grew up despising Arsenal,” begins Nick Parmenter, “I feel conflicted with the fact I don’t hate this team.” That’s what managers are for. Also, give it time: if they start winning things I suspect you’ll start to feel a bit of the old hatred. 46 min Peep peep! Tom Barneby (17 min) was right and I was wrong: Ederson did touch Odegaard before he got the ball. I’m still not certain it qualifies as ‘clear and obvious’ - 20 years ago we’d have said it was a man-and-ball challenge, and while the game has changed I don’t know whether it has changed that much - but there’s certainly a case that VAR should have encouraged Stuart Attwell to look at the monitor. Mind you, you could say the same after Partey’s challenge on Gabriel Jesus in the 37th minute. Half-time reading Peep peep! Arsenal’s lead through Bukayo Saka’s 31st-minute goal. They have been quite brilliant, outplaying City for much of the half, and could easily have extended their lead. That’s the good news. The bad news is that there’s a top-of-the-range hairdryer in the away dressing-room, and City will not be as sluggish in the second half. 45 min Two minutes of added time. Still no shots on target for City. 43 min: Just wide again from Martinelli! This is pulsating stuff from Arsenal, it really is. Martinelli went on a thrilling run from the halfway line, beating Cancelo twice and Dias once, before poking an early shot across Ederson and just wide. 41 min Odegaard’s inswinging free-kick drifts behind for a goalkick. 40 min Rodri is fortunate not to be booked for a cynical challenge on Saka. Free-kick to Arsenal on the right wing, 30 yards from goal. 39 min: So close from Martinelli! Lacazette robs Laporte on the halfway line and Arsenal are away again. Saka gives the ball back to Lacazette, who shoves it out to Martinelli on the left. He cuts inside, on his right foot, and whips a curling shot from 20 yards that flashes just wide of the far post. Ederson wasn’t saving that. 37 min The first hint of a response from City. Mahrez teases Tierney and clips a deep cross towards Jesus, who is guided/thrown to the ground by Partey. It was a risky, hands-on challenge, but VAR aren’t interested. There wasn’t much difference between that and the penalty that was given to Manchester United at Norwich the other week. 36 min “I think it’s also fair to point out that this is City’s third game in six days (last two away in London),” says J. A. Hopkin. “Arsenal’s last game was postponed. Indeed, Arsenal have had a couple of other Covid postponements, while City are the only team in the Prem to have played every single fixture. Arsenal have definitely caught the champions at the right time!” Fair point. City have a huge squad but it’s still a factor. Even so, the Arsenal of a year ago would be 3-0 down by now. 35 min On BT Sport, Steve McManaman makes the point that Thomas Partey is having a minor stormer in midfield. He’s such a big-game player, that lad, though sometimes he takes that too far by being anonymous against weaker teams. 32 min Now then City. It was a fine goal, involving two of Arsenal’s brighest young talents. White won the ball off De Bruyne, and Arsenal worked the ball crisply across the field to Tierney on the left. He ran infield into space - too much space to be honest - and passed the ball carefully towards Saka, 15 yards from goal at the far post. He ran onto the ball and swept a low, first-time shot to Ederson’s left. That’s a lovely goal. Arsenal lead Manchester City, and Arsenal deserve to lead Manchester City! 30 min It’s important not to get carried away: ultimately it’s 0-0 after half an hour and Arsenal have only had one shot on target, which would have been offside had it gone in. But this is the best Arsenal have played against quality opposition in ages. When they beat City a couple of years ago in the FA Cup semi-final, it was a slightly desperate smash-and-grab; today, so far, they’ve been the equals of City. 28 min Lacazette turns smartly on the edge of the area and hits a shot that is blocked. I suppose the big test will be if they go behind, but at the moment Arsenal look so confident. 27 min One team has had 71 per cent of the possession in the last five minutes. No, it’s not them. 24 min “I know it was lost in the penalty claim (which if given wouldn’t have been overturned; as it hadn’t, it couldn’t be given, let’s call it an umpire’s call), but how good was the control and play by Martinelli?” says Andrew Hurley. “He has gone a little bit under the radar but I don’t see a young forward in the Premier League with a higher potential. When I think of him &amp; Grealish, there’s simply no contest.” Indeed - Grealish is 26. I agree though, Martinelli looks fantastic, and the average age of this Arsenal team evokes their emergence under George Graham in the 1980s. I wanted to describe the build up to the chance but it was lost in the penalty appeal, and by the time the dust settled I’d forgotten most of it. 24 min I wouldn’t say City are rattled, but they’ve certainly been inconvenienced by how well Arsenal have started the game. Long way to go and all that, but this 24 minutes have been more encouraging than any of the five big wins preceding this match. 22 min “No need to panic,” says Tom Barneby. “This is surely less stressful than doing the OBO for an England batting collapse!” On the contrary. After 18 years (gulp), I can do that in my sleep. 21 min This is a really good game, and Arsenal are playing with so much confidence. White clips a classy pass over the top to Tomiyasu, whose confident, volleyed cross is headed behind by Ake. The corner is cleared by Dias. 20 min De Bruyne reminds Arsenal of his and City’s menace with a curler from 20 yards that drifts a few yards wide. 17 min “Was that not given because Odegaard was going away from goal?” says Tom Barneby. “Ederson clearly kicks him before he gets the ball, but the touch was going out. While I like that not everything is a penalty this season, that and Jota against Spurs both looked fairly nailed on and weren’t given - feels like the refs and VAR are trying not to give anything marginal.” I don’t agree that he ‘clearly’ kicks him before he gets the ball - had that been the case, it would have been given. Odegaard going away from goal is, or at least should be, irrelevant. That said, it’s quite hard to analyse umpteen replays while also typing/panicking, so you might be right. 16 min: Ederson saves from Martinelli! This is stirring stuff from Arsenal. Thomas Partey, a rough-track bully in midfield, nutmegs Bernardo and angles a pass to Martinelli in the inside-left channel. He scurries away from Cancelo and pokes a shot that is blocked by Ederson at the near post. Good positioning from Ederson. Replays suggest Martinelli was offside, so it wouldn’t have counted, but it was another promising move from Arsenal. 14 min: Just wide from Dias! City kept the ball alive following a corner and should have taken the lead. Sterling curled in a lovely cross from the right towards Dias, who flicked a header just wide on the stretch. He should have scored. Ramsdale will be especially thrilled he didn’t, as he came for the cross and was nowhere. No penalty! That’s the correct decision. It was a fine move though, with Arsenal opening City up on the counter. Eventually Lacazette played in Odegaard, whose first touch was fractionally too heavy. That allowed Ederson to lunge in and tackle him near the byline. After a few replays from different angles it was clear that he got the ball. VAR check This is really tough to call. I don’t think it’s a foul personally, certainly not a clear and obvious error. It’s a bit odd that he went feet-first, though. 10 min Arsenal appeal for a penalty when Ederson lunges into a tackle on Odegaard. It was a lovely move from Arsenal, and this might be given by VAR. No, Ederson got the ball I think. 7 min Lacazette picks his moment to press Ederson, who hangs on to the ball a split-second too long and has his clearance half-blocked by Lacazette. Nothing comes of it but that was encouraging for Arsenal. 5 min Mahrez takes the corner short and crosses low to Bernardo, whose flick behind the standing leg is blocked. City win another corner, from which Laporte and Jesus get in each other’s way while going for a header at the near post. That was a decent chance. 4 min De Bruyne threads a fine pass towards Sterling on the edge of the area. White lunges and misses but Gabriel comes across to concede a corner. 3 min Nowt to report so far. 1 min City have started with De Bruyne as the left-sided central midfielder and Bernardo on the other side. 1 min Peep peep! City kick off from right to left. The players are out on the field, with in-form Arsenal given a rousing reception. We’re about to get chapter and verse of how good this young team really are. There will be slight delay to the kick-off because of an injury to one of the assistant referees, Constantine Hatzidakis. Doesn’t sound like anything serious; they’re just scouring Holloway Road for a replacement. “I see potential’s Kayky is on the City bench today,” says Edan Tal. “What’s the word on him these days? A cross between Kaka and Malky Mackay?” Surely if he was Kaka, Fluminense would have bottled the transfer. Pre-match entertainment Why not start the year with some elite bongo? BT Sport say the official line on Foden is that “he’s not quite fit enough”. Oleksandr Zinchenko, who often starts at left-back and was on the bench at Brentford, is absent for the same reason. It doesn’t sound like this is a case for the conspiracy theorists. There’s no Phil Foden in the City squad. He is one of three changes from the team that won at Brentford on Wednesday, with Jack Grealish and Fernandinho moved to the bench. Raheem Sterling, Riyad Mahrez and Rodri replace them. Joao Cancelo, who was hurt during a robbery at his home earlier in the week, starts at right-back. Arsenal make one change from the 5-0 victory at Norwich. The impressive Takehiro Tomiyasu is fit to return in place of Rob Holding, so Ben White moves back into the centre of defence. Arsenal (4-2-3-1) Ramsdale; Tomiyasu, White, Gabriel, Tierney; Partey, Xhaka; Saka, Odegaard, Martinelli; Lacazette. Substitutes: Leno, Holding, Cedric, Tavares, Smith Rowe, Maitland-Niles, Lokonga, Elneny, Pepe. Manchester City (4-3-3) Ederson; Cancelo, Dias, Laporte, Ake; De Bruyne, Rodri, Bernardo; Mahrez, Jesus, Sterling. Substitutes: Steffen, Walker, Mbete, McAtee, Gundogan, Grealish, Fernandinho, Palmer, Kayky. Referee Stuart Attwell. Hello, happy new year and welcome to live coverage of Arsenal v Manchester City at the Emirates. If Mikel Arteta’s unconscious mind is doing its job properly, he’ll have been singing The Walkmen in the shower this morning. “You’ve got a nerve to be asking a favour...” For the last few years, fans of Chelsea and Liverpool (and Manchester United and Spurs, though their houses are glassier) have been sneering and sniggering at Arsenal. Now that Arsenal are good again*, they want a favour. Chelsea and Liverpool desperately need Arsenal to take points off City today; if not, their match at Stamford Bridge tomorrow will have the look of a second-place playoff. City start the game eight points clear of Chelsea and nine of Liverpool, though Liverpool have a game in hand. It’s hard to know whether this is a tough test or not. On the one hand, Arsenal have won their last five games, scoring 19 goals in the process, and have a team full of charismatic, brilliant young players. On the other, they have been specialists in false dawns for over a decade and have - with the odd glorious exception - generally been hammered by Pep Guardiola teams. Every Arsenal fan at the Emirates will have a low-level fear of another almighty reality check. But in most cases that will be trumped by excitement and optimism. The next stage in Arsenal’s development is a statement victory against one of the elite. Beating the champions and runaway leaders in the first game of 2022 would do the job very nicely. Kick off 12.30pm.One can only hope the Arteta residence has thick walls. Arsenal’s manager, who had said he would “need a big room” before watching this fixture from home, must have been clawing at them after an unruly, fractious affair his players deserved to win. The fact they left with nothing owed to a five-minute tailspin of mistakes and poor decision-making that did a disservice to an otherwise exceptional performance. A sluggish Manchester City were battered for sustained periods but snuck an added-time win through Rodri, who was showered by plastic bottles as he celebrated with teammates. Arsenal were a goal up through the electric Bukayo Saka when this game turned and, on the strength of their first 53 minutes, that was the least they merited. Nobody does this to City, so the logic goes, but Arsenal had. The league leaders had barely mounted an attack since the early stages, thanking near misses and desperate defending for retaining a serious interest. They had been stretched to within an inch of their lives but were handed their way back on a plate. City had hardly posed a threat after half-time when, in a rare moment of clarity, they spread the play and afforded Bernardo Silva a run at Granit Xhaka inside the box. When Silva crumpled before reaching the byline it appeared, at first glance, to be an act of desperation. He had, after all, not been in the game. But the forward’s protestations were particularly vehement and when VAR had a look it was clear he had a case. Xhaka had grabbed a chunk of his shirt and from there the decision was a formality: Stuart Attwell took a short spell in front of his monitor to make it and, via a spate of handbags, Riyad Mahrez swept in the penalty. Xhaka had been outstanding until then but cannot shake off these moments of self-destruction. Gabriel Martinelli blasted off target straight afterwards when it looked easier to score, after chaotic City defending that was entirely of a piece with their display, and Arsenal’s fortunes immediately deteriorated further. A relieved Ederson, whose miscommunication with Aymeric Laporte had created the chance, took the goal kick and found Gabriel Jesus, who turned past Gabriel Magalhães near halfway. Gabriel had been booked for dissent in the skirmishes before Mahrez stepped up; if anyone had a word in his ear to suggest lying low in the aftermath it did not show and as soon as he checked Jesus the referee had little choice. In receiving a second daft yellow card, Gabriel had given City a lifeline. They laboured in taking it. City, missing Phil Foden and looking a yard short in all areas, hogged possession thereafter but rarely created a chance. Pot shots from the edge of the penalty box were wayward and it felt like one of those days when pocketing an away point does little harm. But with the clock two minutes past regulation time Rob Holding, brought on to shore things up, could only glance a header into Laporte’s path and the City defender’s shot was blocked. Rodri, following up, squeezed his effort past Aaron Ramsdale. His goal secured the kind of win that may mean the title is wrapped up before May; it is hard to imagine City being pushed this hard too often. The Emirates seethed with perceived injustice but that things had changed so starkly was not primarily the officials’ fault. There was an added element to the home fans’ anger: in the 10th minute Attwell had not been summoned to the screen for a review when the VAR official, Jarred Gillett, mulled over a tackle by Ederson on Martin Ødegaard. It appeared Ederson had made contact with the ball before his opponent’s ankle, but Arsenal were left feeling the important calls had only gone one way. “On both, in real time he said no penalty but only gets told to look at one,” Ramsdale said afterwards. Such confusion is an infuriating byproduct of VAR but, ultimately, none of the decisions were obviously wrong. When the dust has settled it would be as well for the angered masses to take pleasure in Arsenal’s application. They had struggled miserably in this fixture for nearly a decade but the complexion was entirely different here and they showed no sign of missing the Covid-stricken Arteta. Saka’s goal, just after the half-hour, was swept in from 15 yards after an intelligent pass from Kieran Tierney and could have been added to. Martinelli, another player impossible to ignore, was denied by Ederson and twice shot just wide after creating chances for himself. Thomas Partey, now lost to the Africa Cup of Nations, ran the midfield and City had no answer to a slick, smooth Arsenal’s aggression. At the end, though, Arteta’s home furnishings might have felt the force of his.Doctors and health officials have warned that the rising number of Covid-19 infections poses a significant threat to the UK’s ability to run trains, buses, hospitals and other key services. More and more people face going into quarantine and that could have grave consequences, they say. As a result, isolation times for those testing positive for Sars-CoV-2 have been cut from 10 to seven days to reduce the pressure on industry. But is this reduction justified? Or is there room for even further quarantine cuts to be made, as has been done in the US? These are critical questions, the answers to which could determine how quickly the nation emerges from the wave of Covid-19 cases it is now experiencing. What are the rules for self-isolating after a positive Covid-19 result? In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, if you’ve tested positive or have symptoms, you can now stop self-isolating after seven days, instead of 10, if you get two negative lateral flow test results on days six and seven. In Scotland, the 10-day limit is still in force. What evidence is there that this reduced period of self-isolation is sufficient to halt people infecting others? “We know that people who get Covid-19 are most infectious early on around symptom onset, and that the risk of transmission declines pretty quickly after that,” says epidemiologist Billy Quilty, of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. “By the time someone finds out that they are infected by developing symptoms or testing positive, it’s already been two or three days since they were exposed, and they may have already been infectious for a day or two. So after five days of isolation, they’re really on day seven or eight of their infection. As a result, we estimate that there is a low risk associated with isolation periods of five days or more.” Does Omicron behave differently from previous variants in terms of its period of infectiousness? Scientists say Omicron may infect people more quickly, but possibly for a shorter period than previous variants. “However, we need to find out if that is the case as soon as possible,” said Quilty. “We also need to make sure that people are not isolating for an unnecessarily long time, especially if this becomes a very acute staffing crisis.” The need for further research is also backed by epidemiologist Prof Dame Anne Johnson, of University College London. “There is a large variability in how infectious people are and how much virus they shed. So we need more studies to understand when it’s reasonable for people to be released from quarantine – though we need to face the fact that we cannot eliminate all risk.” Johnson added that she wanted to see more data on the distribution of viral loads in different people according to their symptoms and at different times of their infection. “We need to better understand how infectious individuals are likely to be at different times and to know when infectivity drops off,” she said. What is the probable long-term outlook for the latest variant? Most scientists are now more optimistic about the likely impact of Omicron, though they worry about the short-term effect it might have on hospitalisations. “In a population that was previously unexposed to a virus, it takes time – through natural infections and vaccines – to get to the situation where you have gradually built up immunity in the population to the extent that people will be getting infected without much impact,” said Johnson. “That is the general direction we are travelling in – as long as we don’t get a new variant that is so different it causes a lot of disease.” • This article was amended on 2 January 2022. The self-isolation period in Wales is seven days, not 10 days as an earlier version said.England’s New Year’s Eve celebrations on Friday were not quite the damp squib many were expecting, with partygoers taking to city centres across the country to celebrate the end of 2021. In Leeds, queues of revellers lined the streets, in stark contrast to the Christmas period, when the city centre had been virtually empty because of concerns over the highly infectious Omicron variant. On Greek Street, a tartan-clad bagpiper hired by a restaurant played Auld Lang Syne as groups of people of all ages went from bar to bar. Sophie Kramer and David Brown had come from Bradford for a New Year’s Eve night out with some friends. Being young and double-jabbed, they felt there was little risk for them. “I’m not worried, not at all,” said 24-year-old Kramer. “We’ve both had Covid before and we just really need a night out, to be honest. I know that sounds stupid because it’s a pandemic, but everyone’s mental health has been so bad this year. That’s important too. It’s not just about Covid.” Brown agreed. He said the couple had wanted to avoid self-isolation over Christmas but were less concerned about needing to isolate now. He said: “We were a bit more careful before but the Omicron variant isn’t supposed to be as bad, so I think it’s worth the risk.” Robert and Sheila Brine had a similar attitude. They had been for dinner and were heading to the casino before going home before midnight. “We’re not worried. We’ve got our masks, we’re triple-jabbed we’ve just got to get on with it,” Robert said. Ryan and Keely O’Shea were also going for dinner, in a change to their original plans. “We were supposed to be having a bit of a do but we’ve cancelled it because a lot of our friends didn’t want to be in a confined space with other people, which is understandable,” said Ryan. “I don’t know anyone who hasn’t been jabbed. I didn’t get it right away because I wanted to see what happened but I’m glad I’ve got it now. It gives you some confidence to go out and live a normal life.” His hesitancy was due to having very little trust in the Conservatives, he said. “I have trouble believing the government. But I always did. Now at least I think other people feel the same.” The pair said the UK government was being shown up by the devolved countries, which were handling the pandemic better. “I don’t understand why there are no rules in England but other places have got them,” Ryan added. Nightclubs in Wales were closed and indoor events were restricted to 50 people, leaving streets empty. Meanwhile in Scotland, despite the cancellation of large-scale Hogmanay events and being urged by the first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, to “stay at home as much as possible”, about 1,000 people of all ages climbed to the top of Calton Hill in Edinburgh to make the traditional countdown to the bells at midnight. Sturgeon said the restrictions were aimed at cutting down transmission of the Omicron variant and because “large events put an additional burden on emergency services”.I like to imagine Jamie Dornan – you might anticipate a full stop there, but do carry on – having the same issues as the rest of us over Christmas, craving a second to switch off and so switching the television on. Perhaps he, too, spent time staring at a hectic page on a streaming service, wondering for so long what to watch that scrolling became the activity and then it was time for bed, the evening having been filled by an endless click of the down button, interrupted only by arguments about whether The Wolf of Wall Street or Zero Dark Thirty is more festive or should we do a Girls5eva or three instead? (The answer is always yes.) In an interview with the Radio Times, Dornan pointed out that viewers are “spoilt for choice” these days and that it is always easy to give up on a new series quickly and move on to the next. “Which I think is a bit dangerous,” he said, arguing that it is often worth giving something a chance or more than one episode. It brought to mind Succession, of course it did, which, in its first season, was far from the ubiquitous must-see it has become. I’d heard it was “slow”, put it off, until I didn’t. The BBC’s new adaptation of Around the World in 80 Days is a certifiable slow starter, but it gets better and I hope viewers offer it their patience. They are under no obligation to, of course. There is an avalanche of choice, though that in itself can be overwhelming, which, granted, is a wild indulgence to grumble about. It is the “my diamond shoes are too tight” of complaints, to borrow a line from Friends, which has inflated its own popularity using the air pump of streaming and remains as popular as it was when it first appeared, if not far more so. Which makes me wonder if the sheer amount of shows we have to choose from drives many viewers back to old familiars or comfort viewing. Certainly, it seems that older shows remain popular. Netflix reports that The Salisbury Poisonings, Downton Abbey and Ackley Bridge have been among its most viewed series in recent weeks, though it’s impossible to know if viewers are rewatching or discovering for the first time. Is it the fact that they are inherently known, already tested on audiences, which makes them an easier choice? It’s hard to tell. But Dornan is right: our already-stretched attention spans are getting shorter and shorter. If we demand instant gratification from television, it will lead to television that is eager to please and that is rarely a good thing. Abba: vinyl is on a voyage, but not for new artists The great vinyl revival shows no sign of stopping. The British Phonographic Industry has estimated that more than 5m vinyl albums were bought in the UK in 2021, accounting for almost one in four album purchases, the highest proportion since 1990. Abba’s Voyage is on track to be the bestselling vinyl of the year, followed by Adele, Fleetwood Mac, Ed Sheeran and Amy Winehouse. It’s a funny old list, a hodgepodge of huge stars, suggesting the decline of that image of the crate-digger sifting through rare cuts in a dusty old shop, affirming that the popularity of vinyl is built on pop. It also points to the collapse of distinct musical eras. Over Christmas, I watched my young niece and nephew dancing to their favourite songs, loaded up on YouTube, one after the other, and it was an odyssey through the decades that reached a climax with Shakira’s 2010 World Cup anthem Waka Waka. It was a concoction of everything from pop’s beginnings to its present and was not particularly shaped by the time in which they live. For smaller and newer artists, though, who are far more reliant on the income from record sales in order to have a hope of surviving, getting vinyl produced last year was difficult, if not impossible, owing to a lack of infrastructure, supply chain issues and the sheer dominance of the big guns at the top, who have gobbled up production capacity. A new plant, Press On Vinyl, is about to open in Middlesbrough and one can only hope the appetite for vinyl leads to more places that are capable of making it. Sally Rooney: a panel of 4.7million is a prize indeed I have an awful habit of lurking on the internet, rather than getting involved in it. I do it on Reddit to the extent that I had to delete the app, because it was filling all the time I’d saved by deleting the Facebook app and then Twitter. But my favourite place to lurk is Goodreads, where readers leave sometimes devastatingly honest, incredibly well-considered reviews of books they have read. Its users have just voted for their favourite books of 2021, giving Sally Rooney’s novel Beautiful World, Where Are You the best fiction prize. Its novelist character Alice would, I’m sure, accept the award, but feel terribly bad about it. Forget all those literary panels of six, with a prize winner here and an academic there. This is the real deal, a voting panel consisting of more than 4.7 million readers who truly know their stuff. Whenever I have finished a novel (never before, it’s full of spoilers), I check in with Goodreads to see how much people liked it, or not, and I always feel a little crushed if something I adored gets pummelled. I love the site so much that I know it now: I will never, ever, be able to download the app. • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnistThe architectural quirks and flaws of a given space are harnessed to explore the tensions within the family inhabiting it: Stephen Karam’s The Humans is the latest in a long line of films to employ a device that was most recently used to impressive effect in Sean Durkin’s The Nest. But while Durkin’s picture was strikingly cinematic in its approach, The Humans struggles to escape its theatrical origins – the film is adapted from Karam’s own Tony award-winning stage play. It’s not the most visually arresting work, but the sound design team excel – the prewar apartment in lower Manhattan creaks and groans its displeasure during a dysfunctional family Thanksgiving. The casting is also first-rate, with Richard Jenkins and a wounded, garrulous Jayne Houdyshell the standouts. They play the father and mother of Beanie Feldstein’s Brigid, whose grimly daylight-free new home is the location chosen for dinner, and a dessert course serving of family scandal. In cinemas and on Curzon Home CinemaSinger-songwriter Moses Sumney, 29, grew up between Ghana and California and studied creative writing and poetry at UCLA. His piercing falsetto and genre-defying music have brought him critical acclaim, starting with his self-recorded 2014 EP Mid-City Island, followed in 2017 by his debut album, Aromanticism, and the 2020 double album Græ. Sumney has collaborated with musicians including Bon Iver and James Blake and toured with Solange and Sufjan Stevens. His latest project is Blackalachia, a self-directed concert film created in association with WePresent, shot over two days in the Blue Ridge Mountains of western North Carolina, where he lives. 1. TV Selling Sunset (Netflix) I pity anyone who hasn’t seen this show. It’s a reality show about a real estate agency in west Hollywood, and it follows the lives and deals of the people who work there, predominantly the female staff who are all ridiculously Barbie-ish – essentially “career Barbie on crack”. It’s incredible. I love reality TV – it tells us a lot about humanity. Reality shows are always inherently dated, so they’re a great capsule of the modern era. 2. Music Don’t Be So Hard On Your Own Beauty by Yeule I don’t know what it is about this song, but I’m addicted to it. Yeule is a Singaporean artist based in London who’s kind of new on the scene, and this song is just so hypnotising – it hints and winks at hyperpop while being an absolutely heart-shattering folk tune. It’s a beautiful amalgamation of a lot of different genres, and it’s stunning. I have a lot of playlists – for driving, for chilling at night, a morning playlist, a folk playlist – and this is in all of them. 3. Book How to Do Nothing by Jenny Odell I’m currently reading this – I put off reading it because it looks like a self-help book – but it’s really fascinating. The author is an artist who works largely in digital art and the book is about how to free yourself from the capitalist trappings of the workforce – not necessarily saying “quit your job”, but suggesting a new path for work. It asks the question: how can we construct our identities apart from defining ourselves by what we do and by our income? It’s a very radical book, and it’s often a hard read. But it has been mind-shifting. 4. Place Western North Carolina I’ve been travelling a lot for work, so I’ve been thinking about how much I would prefer to spend my time in western North Carolina, particularly in the mountains, where I live. I think it’s the most beautiful place in the world. I first arrived in Asheville when I was on tour and knew immediately I wanted to live here. You turn around, 360 degrees in any direction, and you’re surrounded by trees, by the sound of animals, and that’s really a rare feeling for anyone who’s spent most of their life, as I have, living in the city. 5. Film Eve’s Bayou (Kasi Lemmons, 1997) This stars a young Jurnee Smollett, who recently had a resurgence with Lovecraft Country. She’s 10 years old in the film, which is set in a fictional small town in Louisiana. Samuel L Jackson stars as the patriarch of the family, who is maybe cheating on his wife, his daughter sets out to kill him and punish him, perhaps through witchcraft. It was incredibly critically acclaimed and subsequently snubbed by every major award ceremony. It’s a gorgeous, heartbreaking film. I first saw it last year and I think about it every day. 6. Fashion Balenciaga The couture line that Balenciaga launched this summer is another thing that has permanent residency in my brain. I think that what Demna [Gvasalia, creative director] is doing with sculpture and architecture through fashion is some of the most interesting theatre of our time. It’s like a marriage of Romantic and gothic style – it’s a bit ecclesiastical, almost monastic, and I want it all. There’s this really wonderful circular headpiece that feels like: “I’m going to service, but in the year 3021.”It sounds troublingly shallow, but when I saw the tweet that said “Holy shit, ANTM [America’s Next Top Model] is on Amazon Prime” my heart soared. I am not one who can pretend the pandemic isn’t still raging but, in that fleeting moment, I felt a spiritual lightness I hadn’t experienced since 2019. I dropped everything to binge the episodes, then fell deep into a rabbit hole of detective work: where are the contestants now? Are they on Instagram? I found a whole subsection of TikTok dedicated to calling out where the show was problematic, and YouTuber Oliver Twixt has a highly viewed series of interviews with ANTM contestants levelling accusations of maltreatment at the show’s producers. Whatever the reason, ANTM is back in the cultural sphere. For the uninitiated, ANTM premiered in 2003 and continued for 24 series or “cycles”, until its last gasp in 2018. Each season, young wannabe models competed for a modelling contract. They were mentored by supermodel Tyra Banks and her fellow judges, including runway coach Miss J Alexander who participated in 18 cycles. Way back in 2003, we weren’t where we are now in terms of trans or non-binary representation. Cycle 1 contestant Robin Manning christened Alexander “Miss J” to differentiate them from creative director “Mr” Jay Manuel. As we’re now in 2021, I ask Miss J to clarify the pronoun situation. “Miss J answers to all and any pronouns ... Just respect me – call me what you want – but don’t forget to sign that cheque.” There’s something pleasingly quaint about the fact Miss J flip-flopped his pronouns and gender expression – often wearing self-made dresses on the judging panel – without having to label himself as trans, non-binary or a drag queen. Nowadays he would be asked to define himself; here I am, literally doing just that. Miss J appeared in hundreds of episodes, so it’s not surprising that his decade on the show is something of a blur to him. “I look back on that time as me, doing me, being me,” he says. “Feeling fierce and fabulous. Being creative. I created my wardrobe.” But not all the memories are good ones. “I think about the girls, what they went through and how they were treated. I look at the backlash and I do wonder if we knew what we were putting them through.” Indeed. Some moments have aged terribly. Yes, I’m thinking of the two occasions when white models donned blackface for photoshoots. The show is also guilty of cultural insensitivity - visits to overseas destinations were treated as an excuse to caricature indigenous peoples – and pressuring contestants to lose weight. Miss J is philosophical: “I can’t speak on the photoshoots because I wasn’t on [them].” I suggest it’s slightly unfair to judge TV from 15 years ago by today’s more enlightened standards. Miss J agrees. “Did we mean harm? No. I didn’t understand it, why [the blackface] photoshoot happened. Was the idea to make them feel what it’s liked to be mixed? I would have asked them what the takeaway was. But it wouldn’t fly right now.” Some of the former contestants have been less than complimentary about the show, since it re-entered the spotlight. “Some of the girls got upset because they didn’t make it,” says Miss J. “They were competing with other girls and only one girl can win. So now they feel they didn’t get the support they needed. But these girls watched the show. They knew the formula.” And there definitely was a formula. Audiences came to recognise that if a contestant spoke about her home life, it was almost certainly because she was returning to it by the conclusion of that episode. You could also set your watch by the moment when a pretty prom queen-type entered the salon for “makeover week”. Nothing beats the feeling when the stylist takes that Rapunzel-length ponytail in hand and cruelly snips it off while the poor model wails. TV gold. “It was as good for me as it was for you!” Miss J laughs. I’m always surprised that the contestants were surprised. Surely they’d seen the show before? “They knew what they were getting into. They knew we were gonna chop that shit off! Why talk shit about it online?” A few contestants went on to greatness: Winnie Harlow and Leila Goldkuhl notably escaped the “curse” of Top Model, and worked with Calvin Klein and Chanel among others. But most (including a smattering of male models) returned to small-town obscurity. For some, their post-show destiny involved prison (Renee Alway) or addiction (Jael Strauss); one former contestant was murdered (Mirjana Puhar). Even with the criticisms of exploitation directed at talent shows, Miss J thinks there’s still life in the old format. “The fashion world has changed,” he says. “Plus-size models on the catwalk; dark-skinned models are totally taking over. Black Lives Matter has meant everyone wants a Black girl in their campaign. There’s a lot of trans models – and no-one knows. Some are out, some aren’t.” In fairness to ANTM, they were ahead of the curve there. Trans model and actor Isis King competed on the show in 2008, one of the first prominent trans women of colour to break through into the mainstream. But post #MeToo, and with a far greater awareness of the exploitation of young models, is it OK to portray the world of fashion as even dimly aspirational? Would it be safe even? “It can be, because right now everything is microscopically watched,” says Miss J. “We need to change our tone and language. It needs to be a safe space for all of us.” Despite everything, I really, really hope they bring it back. I want more. I’m sorry, I can’t help it; I do. I wonder if, when we dig out the comfort blankets of our past, it’s a subconscious desire to flee back. I watched ANTM in my early 20s when I was truly free for the first time in my life. It was pre-mortgages, pre-pandemic, before my transition and all the transphobia that came with it. Truly, a simpler time. I think that’s what I’m trying to find within America’s Next Top Model, the carefree Juno I was back then.A clock that is the sole surviving object from a second world war Jewish hideout will go on display at Amsterdam’s Dutch Resistance Museum this year. The round mantelpiece clock may have been one of the last things people saw as they were seized by the Nazis and sent to death camps. Along with scores of family photographs, documents and a book of poetry, the clock belonged to the family of Janny Brandes-Brilleslijper, a Holocaust survivor and resistance fighter. The family artefacts help tell the story of Dutch Jewish resistance to the Nazis, so often overshadowed by the horrific history of the large numbers sent to their death. About three-quarters of Dutch Jews were murdered during the second world war, the highest death rate in western Europe. “That is a factor why people thought that the Jewish resistance was next to non-existent,” said Filip Bloem, collection manager at the museum. “But if you look more precisely you see there were many Jews, thousands and thousands of Jews, in hiding.” After the Nazis invaded, Marianne Brandes-Brilleslijper, known to everyone as Janny, refused to get a Jewish ID card and started working for the resistance, stencilling messages on pillars and posts, moving illegal parcels and documents, often hidden under the mattress of her pram carrying one of her children. When the net began to tighten, she and her husband Bob, and their two children, Robbie and Liselotte, moved to a villa in the woods outside Amsterdam. She lived there with her parents, her sister Lien’s family, other Jewish people and resistance fighters. At its peak, 17 permanent residents lived at ’t Hooge Nest (the High Nest), a tale recounted by Roxane van Iperen in her bestselling book of the same name, published in English as The Sisters of Auschwitz. Hidden away from the main road, the villa became an unlikely haven for culture, as the residents put on concerts, wrote music and distributed resistance papers. “Yiddish culture and other arts flourish at the High Nest. There is dance, music, song and recitation. Simon drums, Puck plays the violin and Jaap builds Kathinka a little piano,” wrote van Iperen. It did not last. The group was betrayed in the summer of 1944. Janny had been out shopping when the Nazis arrived. Laden with heavy bags of wheat, she asked four-year-old Robbie to run ahead for help with the shopping. It was only when she got to the door that she saw the big Chinese vase in the window was gone – the warning signal. “She knew it was wrong, but I was already running into the house,” said Robert Brandes, now 82, recounting one of his few memories of life in the High Nest. “She couldn’t call me back and I was already in the house and she knew it was lost. They hit my mother. I can still remember.” Janny, her family and the other Jewish occupants were sent to the Dutch transit camp of Westerbork. (Robbie and Liselotte were spared as Janny’s husband was not Jewish). At Westerbork, they met another Amsterdam family who had been discovered, after two years hiding in the secret annexe: Anne Frank, her sister Margot and their parents. The Brilleslijpers and the Franks were put on the last transport to leave the Netherlands for Auschwitz. As the war entered its final stages, Janny, Lien and the Frank sisters were sent by train, then forced on a death march to Bergen-Belsen. At this overcrowded, disease-ridden camp – “a runaway fair of insane, sick and dying people” wrote van Iperen – Janny worked as a nurse, although there were no medicines. She urged friends, family acquaintances to live, pre-chewing stale bread for the weakest, scavenging tiny scraps of food, closing eyes. She was one of the last to see the Frank sisters alive. Janny and Lien survived the war. Robert remembers the day his mother came to the family’s rented house on the Amstel in Amsterdam. “I cried out to the whole street, look ‘My mother is back, come see everyone my mother is back.’” One of the exhibits donated to the museum is a letter from Robert’s father to Janny, telling of his joy that she survived. “Darling, I thought I would sink through the floor for joy. I just didn’t know what to say or to do. Robby is still the sweet boy you knew. Our darling Liselotte resembles my sweet wife more and more.” Janny’s father’s identity card, with a large J stamped on it, is also on display. Joseph Brilleslijper, his wife Fietje and their son Jaap, died at Auschwitz. Janny devoted her life to the recognition of war victims. She died in 2003. The collection also includes a poetry album belonging to Lien Brilleslijper, a booklet where family and friends would write life lessons in verse. “When you read it now with the knowledge that many of them didn’t survive the war, that is bittersweet,” Bloem said. The documents and photos will be available on digital display on the museum’s website in the spring, while the clock is due to join the permanent collection from October.The London mayor, Sadiq Khan, has congratulated a primary school teacher who wrote a children’s book aimed at gently tackling Covid-19 vaccine hesitancy in the black and minority ethnic community and promoting children’s mental health. Banji Alexander, who teaches at a school in south-east London with a large number of students and staff from minority ethnic backgrounds, started writing Lockdown Looms: Reggie’s Birthday Party, a book detailing a child’s experience of the pandemic, during the second lockdown. “I put pen to paper just after Christmas 2020, and wrote the book in between teaching my year 3 class remotely online after the government’s decision to close schools,” Alexander said. “I needed a book that I could use to allay the fears of my learners surrounding the pandemic. The world as we knew it was changing rapidly around us and children, parents and teachers alike found it challenging.” The story covers topics such as masks, social distancing, home schooling, vaccinations, bereavements, chaotic supermarket scenes and food shortages. “I remember children in my class being disappointed about not being able to celebrate their birthdays in the ‘normal’ way, and missing members of their families, who they weren’t able to see due to the restrictions,” Alexander, who lost his uncle during the pandemic, said. Reggie, the seven-year-old protagonist, is fed up with home schooling and online learning at the end of a lockdown and looking forward to celebrating his eighth birthday with family and friends as new restrictions loom. The aim was to write a book that would offer hope and benefit children’s mental health, said the author, who said he discussed the characters’ feelings with his pupils, teaching them vocabulary to express their own emotions with more accuracy. “The important messages in the book are about kindness, resilience, patience, gratitude and adapting to change. I want the reader to know there is light at the end of the tunnel, regardless of how challenging things may seem. I hope the book will help children learn how to manage their expectations, and become better at articulating how they are feeling.” The book also touches on fears surrounding the Covid vaccine. “I am aware that vaccination uptake is considerably lower in some demographics within the BAME community,” Alexander said. “The topic of vaccinations is quite a divisive one, and for young children, seeing their adults feel quite strongly about a topic can be alarming and confusing, particularly if their friend or friend’s family believe the opposite. “As an educator, it’s my job to dispel myths – be that just by gently mentioning the vaccinations, which play an integral part in the lockdown eventually coming to an end in my story.” Sadiq Khan wrote to Alexander to thank him for his efforts in supporting his pupils during the pandemic. “Teachers like yourself have gone above and beyond to show care and commitment to your students. Your support has been so vital to ensuring students are not only educated, but given the tools to develop resilience, as we continue to adjust to extraordinary times,” the mayor wrote.Newly discovered photographs of 1990s rave culture taken by the fashion photographer Terence Donovan shortly before he died are to go on public display for the first time. The intimate shots of revellers lost in the sounds of the Que Club in Birmingham, a music venue graced by everyone from David Bowie and Blur to Daft Punk and Run-DMC, are thought to be some of the last photographs Donovan took. Hidden in a drawer in Wolverhampton for 25 years, the images mark a “very unusual” shift in subject matter for the photographer, who made his name in the 1960s capturing “swinging London” and supermodels such as Twiggy and Jean Shrimpton. “At the time he took these photos, he was still a photographer for Vogue doing fashion shoots and taking photos of rich and famous people,” said Jez Collins, curator of the forthcoming exhibit, The Que, which will show 10 of the 65 newly discovered photos at Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery in April. “He would photograph people like Princess Diana and musicians like Jimi Hendrix and Ian Dury – but to my knowledge, he had never photographed a club environment and ordinary, everyday people.” Donovan was approaching 60 when, in January 1996, he focused his lens on the dance and rave culture of the Que Club at the request of his son, a student at Birmingham University who DJ’d there. “He would have been completely out of his comfort zone in terms of the music, which had a pounding beat, with a lot of drugs being taken in the dark,” said Collins. “I think the subject matter and the building itself intrigued him.” The Que Club was located in a former church, the cavernous Grade II-listed Methodist Central Hall, and Donovan visited on a techno music night known as House of God. Shooting in black and white, on a smoky dancefloor, “he captured something of great beauty. The photographs are really evocative of what clubbing culture was like then.” As well as revealing the range of subcultures in the club – punks with mohicans, bare-chested skinheads, girls in tight dresses and youths in tracksuit tops, “these photographs show the intimacy of the dancefloor, the unbridled expression of people having a good time, of dancing together in a close space”. They seem particularly poignant at this time. “I think people will look at this, when the exhibition is on, and just have that moment of thinking of things that maybe we have lost because of Covid,” said Collins. “That intimacy, that closeness, that experience of being very close to people you don’t know and sharing in that same moment the same music – and dancing together. That sense of being part of something bigger than yourself.” Donovan’s photos highlight a culturally important moment in the history of Birmingham’s music and clubbing scene, he said. “It’s an amazing find after all these years. This was an important place for people, and it’s been captured by one of the greatest British photographers of the time.” In November 1996, Donovan took his own life. At the inquest, it emerged he had been suffering from severe depression, linked to a steroid treatment prescribed for his eczema. By then, his son had sent the pictures to Chris Wishart, a founder of the House of God club night. They lay in the drawer at Wishart’s house until Collins, founder of the Birmingham Music Archive, which documents and celebrates the city’s musical heritage, turned up last year to interview Wishart for a film about the Que Club. “I interviewed him for an hour and a half and he didn’t mention Terence coming to the club or the photographs. But as we were walking out the door, he said ‘Jez, I think you might be interested in this.’ And I opened this drawer, and there was this box of Terence Donovan photographs. They were just stunning.” He could hardly believe his eyes: “I actually took a photograph of the drawer.”Juliet Davenport may have made a lucky escape from the energy supply market. The founder and former chief executive of green power supplier Good Energy ended her 20-year tenure last February, months before an unprecedented surge in global energy prices left the industry reeling. But then, it’s not unusual for Davenport to be ahead of the curve. Set up in the late 1990s, Good Energy was one of the first “challenger” suppliers to compete with the behemoths of British Gas and others, which had been created by privatisation. It was also a pioneering investor in renewable power, and an early champion of small-scale community energy ventures. “I think you can become a bit of an institution if you’re not careful,” she laughs. In the bar of an upmarket central London hotel, Davenport is taking a break from the schedule of meetings she has to attend as one of the energy industry’s busiest non-executive directors. Few such boardroom figures have a pedigree quite as green as Davenport’s. She founded Good Energy, the UK’s first supplier of 100% renewable power, in 1999, and the company has boasted ownership of the UK’s first commercial onshore windfarm since 2002. She is married to Mark Shorrock, the entrepreneur behind the controversial Swansea Tidal Lagoon, * * * CV Age 53 Family one daughter, one stepdaughter. Education MA Physics, Oxford University, MSc Economics, Birkbeck. Last holiday Cornwall, to Delabole, site of the UK’s first windfarm. Best advice she’s been given “Try to work with people you like on things that interest you.” Biggest career mistake “Hiring people just on their credentials.” Word she overuses “Cool.” How she relaxes “Riding and reading – I’m still working on doing them simultaneously.” * * * and has weathered a long-term public squabble with fellow energy maverick Dale Vince, including an attempted boardroom coup by his company, Ecotricity, earlier this year. Having stepped back from the day-to-day running of Good Energy, Davenport sits on the boards of a string of companies that are helping tackle the climate crisis. Perhaps her most notable role is as chair of rooftop solar innovator Atrato Onsite Energy, whose flotation in November made it the first company with an all-female board to list on the London Stock Exchange. Davenport says she was no longer content with “turning up and doing the same thing” when she realised that, after decades of hard-learned lessons in the industry, she could spread her wings and help new energy firms navigate the market. Good Energy was in need of some new skills too – notably in digital innovation. Proving that sometimes being ahead of the curve means recognising when others are further ahead, Davenport said she wanted to bring in “someone who was better at digital than I could ever be”. She remains a director of the London-listed company, which she says is in a good position to weather an energy crisis in which dozens of small suppliers have gone bust. The company has always hedged its exposure to global commodity prices by buying plenty of energy in advance, she says, and has negotiated supply deals directly with local renewable energy projects, which also helps to establish a fixed price. At the root of the industry’s crisis, she adds, are small energy companies which have failed to maintain the support of investors by differentiating themselves in a busy market, along with a string of problems with how that market is regulated. So is the growing criticism of the industry watchdog, Ofgem, justified? Absolutely, comes the matter-of-fact response. “We’ve been having conversations with the regulator around various areas related to competition in the market for probably the past six or seven years,” she says. “The biggest issue was that [Ofgem’s] key performance indicator for success was the number of suppliers in the market, and the amount of switching between suppliers. That has always been a problem.” The clarion call for households to help address sluggish competition in the energy market by shopping around for the cheapest deal unleashed a flood of poorly financed suppliers and unsustainably low energy deals. This race to the bottom has left more than 4 million households in need of a new energy supplier after record prices caused 26 companies to collapse. “The UK needs energy companies which are prepared to invest in the future,” Davenport says. “If you’re constantly competing on price alone, you can’t invest.” As chair of Atrato, Davenport has her mind on investment: it’s just weeks since the rooftop solar venture raised £150m in an oversubscribed market listing. The company plans to use rooftop solar installations to unlock the largely untapped potential of commercial properties. Its strength lies in bringing together staff who have “a significant understanding of the commercial property market” with experts in renewable energy development. In time, Atrato expects to create standardised contracts that can make the still-niche decision to fit a leased office block with solar capability a “plug and play” option. “The original Good Energy headquarters was owned by a pension fund,” she says. “I remember trying at least once a year to put solar on the roof and completely failing, because the [owners] were so far removed and just didn’t want any complications. “Now a lot of corporates have a commitment to using renewables, and installing projects on their own site is part of fulfilling that. Helping them navigate the way forward if they don’t own their building is a huge part of that. The energy market has to be about making things easy for consumers.” The Atrato ethos echoes in some ways that of Good Energy, which for decades made it easy for households to play a role in the growth of renewables by choosing a tariff from a company that invests directly in renewable energy projects. “The question is how fast we can do it,” she says. “And how standardised we can make this process. If we keep everything as simple and repetitive as possible, we can move faster.” Energy companies that can “enable” consumers to decarbonise their energy use because it’s the easier option are the ones to watch, Davenport believes. “For many years I saw big companies and government try to do big projects because that’s what they can control. But so much can be done on a decentralised level if you can get inside the head of a consumer,” she says. In her next chapter Davenport plans to do just that, all over again.BT In all likelihood, BT will be under new ownership, or at the least involved in a takeover battle, in June next year. The billionaire Patrick Drahi has been assiduously building his stake in the British telecoms giant, having spent more than £3bn to acquire 18% to date, making him BT’s biggest shareholder. After his latest purchase in December, Drahi is now barred under UK rules from mounting a full takeover bid until 15 June, although he can continue to strengthen his grip by snapping up more stock. Drahi, an activist investor known for deep cost-cutting at businesses he controls, will also use his time to allay political concerns about a potential foreign takeover of BT, a company considered critical to the national broadband and mobile infrastructure. The government has already fired a warning shot, saying that it will “not hesitate to act” to protect BT, and in January ministers will gain tougher powers to block takeovers of sensitive national assets under the new National Security and Investment Act 2021. Nevertheless, BT’s days of independence look numbered. Deutsche Telekom, the second-biggest shareholder in BT, with a 12.06% stake, has said it is “entertaining all options” regarding the British company’s future. It is considered a “kingmaker” in any play for BT: if Drahi were to buy its stake, he would hit the 30% threshold at which a takeover offer must be tabled. Mark Sweney ITM Power This year could offer a breakthrough for one of the UK’s leading green hydrogen companies as it moves to capitalise on a boom in demand for the clean-burning gas, with plans to expand internationally. ITM Power, a little-known Aim-listed company, has emerged as one to watch in the UK’s burgeoning green hydrogen industry. At its factory in Sheffield, it manufactures the electrolysers that turn renewable energy and water into a climate-friendly alternative to fossil gas. The company, which in recent months won the chance to provide a 100-megawatt electrolyser for Shell’s Rhineland refinery in Germany, plans to open a second electrolyser plant in Sheffield and has confirmed that its first overseas plant will follow before 2024. The demand for green hydrogen is expected to boom over the coming decades as major economies begin to pursue climate targets in earnest. Green hydrogen can replace fossil gas in power plants, factories and even heavy-duty trucks and ships, and unlike the rival “blue hydrogen” it is not derived from fossil fuels and its production does not cause carbon emissions. ITM Power will fuel its growth with the £250m it successfully raised last month. Its end-of-year trading update shows its backlog of orders for electrolysers has climbed by more than 60% since September to the equivalent of 499 megawatts, while its pipeline of tenders stands at just over 900MW. Jillian Ambrose Revolut The banking and payments app, once known for its popularity among “finance bros”, is finally making headlines for more than just controversial working conditions and its founder’s alleged connections to the Kremlin. Over the past year, Revolut has solidified its presence overseas – with its services now available in more than 35 countries – applied for US and UK banking licences, and become one of the UK’s most valuable fintech startups, worth about £24bn after funding from major global investors including Japan’s Softbank. That is indicative of the company’s insatiable appetite for growth, with its founder – Russian-born former Lehman Brothers trader Nik Storonsky – declaring that he intends to make it the largest bank in Britain. Since launching in the UK six years ago, Revolut has gone from offering a pre-paid card focused on currency exchange to a multi-service app offering business accounts, children’s cashcards, investments, wage advances and cryptocurrency trading. It has also been stacking its boardroom with people from Goldman Sachs and HSBC, and appointed ex-Standard Life Aberdeen boss Martin Gilbert as its chair. The move helped to restore and solidify its reputation, after it faced bad press in 2019 for allegedly overworking staff. Storonsky has admitted the company has made some mistakes but is setting his sights higher. If 2021 is any indication, Revolut will continue to hit milestones in 2022, assuming it does not spread itself too thin. Kalyeena Makortoff Vertical Aerospace The Bristol-based flying taxi pioneer listed on the New York Stock Exchange just before Christmas via a Spac (special purpose acquisition company), apparently confirming its entry into the big league. However, investors are currently debating whether flying taxis – or electric vertical takeoff and landing aircraft (eVTOLs), as they like to be formally known – will prove to be Teslas or tulips. Shares leapt and then slipped quickly back 30% in the first week – labouring for takeoff, much like the embryonic eVTOLs so far seen in public. That said, Vertical Aerospace boasts a provisional £5.5bn order book from the likes of American Airlines and Virgin, and partners including Rolls-Royce, Microsoft and Honeywell. It also aims to climb above the competition by keeping a pilot on board its vehicles, which could speed up regulatory approval. Ultimately, it claims, its VX4 aircraft will be able to fly four passengers at 200mph for costs that are “comparable to a taxi”. Just don’t mention helicopters … (eVTOLs, it is promised, will be incomparably safer, quieter and greener). Gwyn Topham Arrival Following a similar path to Vertical, Arrival listed in New York in March via a Spac merger. The company, which plans to make electric vans, taxis and buses, saw its market value soar as high as $13bn (£9.7bn) after it listed, amid electric-vehicle market mania, but it is now back at $5.1bn as investors await its first revenues. This year will bring the first true test of its abilities. Based in the UK, with its first factory near Bicester, Oxfordshire, Arrival claims its vehicles are already as cheap as fossil fuel equivalents, and cost much less to run. Bus tests started in December, and production begins in the spring. Van production will start in the summer, followed by cars designed in partnership with Uber in 2023. Yet perhaps the most eyecatching aspect of Arrival’s ascent is something that buyers will probably never see: founder Denis Sverdlov, a Russian telecoms billionaire, has set out to upend the logic of high-volume automotive manufacturing. Instead of the long assembly lines pioneered by Henry Ford, Arrival uses robots to build vehicles in a single small “cell”. That could mean lower set-up costs – and a whole new model of putting factories next to their biggest markets. Jasper Jolly Marks &amp; Spencer The high street stalwart seems to have had more turnaround plans during its 137-year history than it has sold hot ready-meal dinners, but its latest, post-pandemic revamp appeared to finally bear fruit last year. M&amp;S now needs to capitalise on the improvement in fortunes of its once-struggling clothing and homeware division. The retailer dared to dream these sales had turned a corner over the past year; in 2022 it will need to prove to investors that this recovery isn’t temporary. While the chain is clinging to its position as the UK’s largest clothing retailer, analysts are asking whether recent fashion acquisitions including heritage name Jaeger, and a stake in sustainable brand Nobody’s Child, can keep pushing apparel sales upwards. A tie-up with delivery firm Ocado got off to a good start, and food sales look encouraging. The question now is whether M&amp;S will increase its stake in the joint venture. The shares are still languishing at around a third below their value when chief executive Steve Rowe took over in 2016. There is speculation he will step down in the next 18 months, and he will surely want to leave on a high. Despite a couple of profit upgrades, M&amp;S still has some way to go before it can reclaim the place in the FTSE 100 it lost in 2019. Joanna Partridge Scancell This spinout from the University of Nottingham, founded in 1997 by Lindy Durrant, professor of cancer immunotherapy at the university, specialises in developing cancer vaccines and has started testing them on humans. But when the pandemic struck, the company decided to modify its vaccine technology to develop Covid shots, in collaboration with Nottingham’s two universities and backed by £2m funding from the UK’s innovation agency. The vaccines aim to induce high T-cell immune responses in the body to identify and kill infected cells, as well as generating virus-neutralising antibodies. Scientists say a strong T-cell response would offer longer-lasting immunity, because the protection from antibodies wanes more quickly, as the current Covid jabs show. As many people are afraid of needles, Scancell decided its vaccines would be administered via spring-powered injectors that use a narrow stream of fluid to pierce the skin. The first trials with 40 healthy volunteers started in South Africa in October, and a further trial is planned in the UK, and data from the studies is expected by June. The company’s two main shareholders are the US health investor Redmile and the Singaporean Vulpes Life Science Fund, while Durrant and other management own 1.8% of the company. Its shares have rocketed in the past two years, from nearly 7p in early January 2020 to over 20p, but remain far below their closing high of nearly 57p, reached in October 2012. Julia KolleweThe thing about history is that it sometimes repeats itself. As far as the tech industry is concerned, we saw that in the year just ended and it looks as though we’re about to see it again in the year that’s just begun. First things first, though: 2021 was the year in which it finally became clear that the free ride that Google and co have enjoyed for two decades was coming to an end – that tech was going to become a regulated industry. Exactly how that was going to pan out was unclear, but the direction of travel was unmistakable. In the US, for example, the incoming Biden administration began appointing to government smart people who understood the societal dangers of unrestrained corporate power. People such as Lina Khan, who now chairs the Federal Trade Commission, the country’s main regulatory body; or Tim Wu, now on the White House’s National Economic Council with responsibility for antitrust and competition; or Jonathan Kanter, a leading antitrust advocate, now assistant attorney general. And so on. Given that all the leading tech companies are US-based, these were the most significant moves, but there were indications in other parts of the world too (including the UK’s Competition and Markets Authority) that democracies were emerging from the long slumber during which tech companies had prospered obscenely. The tech companies saw this coming, of course, and it was eerie to see how their responses echoed the playbooks of the tobacco and energy companies of an earlier period, as chronicled, for example, by Naomi Oreskes and Erik Conway in their 2010 book, Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of Scientists Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Global Warming. The other day, Andrew Bosworth, the incoming chief technology officer of Meta (nee Facebook) was asked whether he thought “vaccine hesitancy would be the same with or without social media”. His reply, verbatim, reads: “I think Facebook ran probably the biggest Covid vaccine campaign in the world. What more can you do if some people who can get that real information from a real source choose not to get it? That’s their choice. They’re allowed to do that. You have an issue with those people. You don’t have an issue with Facebook. You can’t put that on me.” Sounds familiar? It’s what oil companies came up with when they invented the idea of the “carbon footprint” – ie your footprint on the biosphere, not theirs. It’s the displacement of responsibility strategy: since it’s a free country, nobody’s forcing you to do the thing that’s bad for you. Childhood obesity is the responsibility of the child or of his or her parents. Alcoholism happens because you don’t “drink responsibly”. Radicalisation of the mass shooter is not YouTube’s responsibility. It’s always your fault, not that of the manufacturer of the addictive product. Next. Looking forward to 2022, what we can anticipate is a repeat performance of that perennial staple of capitalism: irrational exuberance – the phenomenon by which, in the words of the economist Robert Shiller, “news of price increases spurs investor enthusiasm, which spreads by psychological contagion from person to person and, in the process, amplifies stories that might justify the price increase and brings in a larger and larger class of investors, who, despite doubts about the real value of the investment, are drawn to it partly through envy of others’ successes and partly through a gambler’s excitement”. This tulip-mania de nos jours has been happening with cryptocurrencies for a while, but is about to become more frenzied as the notion that blockchain – the cryptographic technology that underpins bitcoin, Ethereum et al – can become the basis for something called Web3: a new, properly decentralised version of the world wide web (as compared with the current version in which control has become effectively centralised in a small number of giant corporations). In principle, this is an interesting idea – to create what in effect would be an alternative world of finance, commerce, communications and entertainment that could radically transform significant elements of the global economy – and not be controlled by banks and governments. But for those of us cursed with memories of the past, this has a feeling of deja vu. It reminds us of the early days of the internet in the 1980s, when it evoked utopian dreams; here at last, we believed, was an invention that had the potential to dissolve the sclerotic power structures of the old world and become a force for democratisation and human empowerment. It didn’t work out like that, of course. We underestimated the cunning and ruthlessness of corporations, the feebleness of governments and the fact that many of our fellow humans were content to be passive couch potatoes, albeit with streamed box sets. Faced with the dream of Web3, then, the obvious question is: will history repeat itself? Only time will tell. In the meantime, from this recovering utopian: happy new year! What I’ve been reading Free speech? The Liberty of Local Bullies is a nice 2011 essay by Noah Smith on the limits of libertarianism. Lucky dip Moderation or Death is Christopher Hitchens’s masterful LRB review of a biography of Isaiah Berlin by Michael Ignatieff. Daring visionaries In the Beginning Was the Command Line is a memorable essay by Neal Stephenson on PCs, programming and operating systems.The UK’s vaccine rollout has largely been a success: more than 90% of the population aged 12 and over has now had at least one dose, with just over half having had a second dose and the booster. However, there are thousands of people who still haven’t had a jab, despite estimates suggesting that 90% of the most severely ill Covid patients in hospital at the moment are unvaccinated. A number of strategies are being employed to convince those who have so far avoided it get vaccinated, with outreach groups and GPs working to encourage take-up. The Observer spoke to three people who have, in recent weeks, changed their minds. Here, they explain their initial hesitancy and the reasons for their change of heart. Jess Haghkerdar, 32 PhD student, Fife Ecology student Jess said she “wasn’t against the vaccine” and had received her first and second doses. But she had decided not to get the booster. In August 2021, shortly after having her second jab, she had a miscarriage at eight weeks pregnant. “I was worried the vaccine had contributed to my miscarriage and became wary of getting a booster once I found out I was pregnant again” she said. She considered waiting until she had given birth to have her booster, but the became concerned about Omicron and about the number of unvaccinated pregnant women ending up in intensive care. “I realised that my hesitance was based on grief and worry,” she said. “Just looking at the data proved that Covid is a much greater risk than any of my worst fears about the vaccine affecting my pregnancy.” She changed her mind and had the booster. “I don’t want to get Covid while I am pregnant and be in a situation that could potentially be harmful to me and the baby. “I’m a scientist and I know that if there was something seriously wrong with the vaccines, fellow scientists would stop at nothing to discover it and improve our understanding of them. “I understand the visceral response and fear of vaccination, but we need to be realistic about how serious Covid can be and recognise how hard scientists and doctors have worked to keep us safe. No matter how I look at it now, getting vaccinated is worth it.” Kevin Buckland, 46 PhD student and university lecturer, Sutton Coldfield Kevin has had a phobia of needles from an early age. “I just hate them. I forged my mum’s signature when I was 14 to avoid getting the TB vaccination, saying she didn’t want me to have it. They wrote to her six months later, I was found out, and they dragged me into Birmingham kicking and screaming to have it.” His plan was to remain unvaccinated, taking precautions to avoid infecting himself and his elderly parents, who live nearby. The emergence of the Omicron variant made Kevin reassess his approach, as he was concerned by its rate of transmission. “I was reading that just a whiff of an infected person’s breath would be enough to contract it. I’ve dodged it for this length of time and thought, how much longer can I go on? “I booked an appointment about a month ago and chickened out. I then rearranged that one and finally went along. I just concentrated on the fact that it was a good thing. I hardly slept the night before. “On the day, I didn’t even realise she had done it. It helped that I walked into the place not wearing glasses so I couldn’t see anything anyway. There was one person taking my details, the other had a hypodermic needle. “I was talking to the one with a laptop about my phobia and, without me noticing, it was done. I didn’t feel a thing. I have my second booked for February and plan to get a booster.” Adam, 26, from Cheshire Adam (not his real name) lost faith in the government in 2020, largely because of Dominic Cummings and the Barnard Castle affair. “I just thought if they can lie about something of this magnitude, what else can they lie about?” He then became sceptical because of the speed of the vaccination programme rollout. “I felt like it was quite rushed to begin with. There wasn’t much research published or data coming out, which led me to believe that it was being pushed out for other reasons – not just to save lives, but to save the economy, which to some extent I understand, but I feel like saving lives is much more important. Damage to the economy can be repaired, but you can’t bring back someone who has passed away.” Over time Adam, who works for his family’s wealth management business, came to believe in the benefits of vaccination by following hospitalisation figures in trusted news sources. “I was hesitant about getting my first vaccine, which I didn’t have until about three months ago. I had my second dose three weeks ago. “The hospitalisation numbers for people who were vaccinated compared with people who were unvaccinated were scary. At the same time, I felt like there was a bit more control on the misinformation that was being put out there. “The information that was published was worrying, so I thought it was best in the long run to get the vaccine, rather than not, despite what my feelings were at the time.”Twitching is synonymous with birdwatching, which can often involve long journeys in search of rare species. But now a new breed of climate-conscious birder is trying to persuade fellow enthusiasts to keep it local instead. A group of young birders has created a challenge for spotters to find birds in their own patch close to home rather than routinely travelling long distances to spot particular birds, a practice known as “twitching”. The Green Patch Challenge, created by Joe Parham, a 22-year-old birder from the Midlands, invites under-25s to attempt to travel only on foot or by bike to see birds. “We all need to make changes to our lives to address the climate crisis, and the goal of the challenge is to capture this while encouraging young birders to explore and enjoy nature close to them,” Parham said. “It’s not about stopping everything. It’s about making positive changes, doing much less travelling and when you do it, try to do it low-carbon.” Birdwatching has been growing in popularity in the UK and there was a lockdown boom last year when numbers taking part in the RSPB’s annual garden survey, where people report which birds they can see in their gardens, jumped by 85%. About three million people do some birdwatching every year. The Green Patch Challenge has been followed up by Birdwatch magazine, which set its readers a #LocalBigYear challenge for 2022, inviting birders to find species in patches within 10km of their home. The challenges harness the passion that most birders – whether twitchers or patchers – have for drawing up lists of birds they’ve seen. Many have overlapping lists of birds seen in their back garden, in their county, in the UK or the rest of the world. The lists can be quite competitive – on New Year’s Day, many birders began their year list by trying to see as many birds as possible on their patch. At peak migration times, some twitchers travel almost every week to see rare birds, a practice that is increasingly under fire from some parts of the birding community. In November, about 100 birders travelled to Papa Westray, one of the smallest of the Orkney islands, to see a varied thrush – a bird usually seen only in north America and last spotted in the UK in 1982. Some chartered planes and boats to reach the island for the sighting. Javier Caletrío, a researcher based in north-west England, set up the Low Carbon Birding blog in 2018 to try to persuade birdwatchers to travel less. He said it was important for birders to set an example. “If people see us acting as if there is a crisis requiring immediate action, it is more likely that others will also demand urgent, radical action from politicians.” Birding was often dominated by stories about “the excitement of travelling to distant places and seeing rare and exotic birds” he said. “These young people are telling other young people that they can be good birders and have fun without travelling to distant places by means of burning fossil fuels. And obviously low-carbon birding is not about the end of travel. It is about doing it differently – planning your holidays differently and making the most of public transport.” Matthew Broadbent, 20, who helps run the Green Patch Challenge, said: “I know the feeling when you see a stunning, rare bird, and it’s fantastic. It’s a buzz, and makes you want more. But we need to learn to travel shorter distances to see birds, we need to do what we can to protect our planet.” Keir Chauhan, 19, began birding seriously in 2020 and said that joining the Green Patch Challenge in north London had changed his life during the lockdowns. “It provided an outlet,” he said. “If I’d had a bad day, I’d go looking for a new bird around Ally Pally.” A pair of peregrine falcons haunts the BBC signal tower on Alexandra Palace. “It’s amazing to watch them hunt in the mornings, chasing the crows,” he said. “There’s a reservoir near there and most of the time there’s no birds whatsoever. But one time I saw a kestrel land and it turned out they were nesting there. Even in a place as birdless as that – it’s not a foreign country, it’s not a nature reserve – you can see interesting birds.” Stephen Moss, a lifelong birder and author, whose book, Skylarks with Rosie, charts the lockdown birdwatching he did in the patch near his Somerset home, said that making local observations had an important ecological purpose as it enabled research into the prevalence of bird species. “Low-carbon birding is clearly a good idea,” Moss said, “but some people are arguing that we should not be doing any long-distance trips – Chris Packham said he’s never going to do it again. “But there are places like Costa Rica, the Gambia, Trinidad and Tobago, or Kenya where vast amounts of its economy comes from wildlife tourism. We need to find the right balance between the local and global.”Arsenal were left nursing a sense of injustice after VAR decisions contributed to their dramatic 2-1 defeat against Manchester City, with their assistant manager, Albert Stuivenberg, suggesting they had been denied a “clear penalty” when Martin Ødegaard was challenged by Ederson in the first half. Stuivenberg was overseeing Arsenal in the absence of Mikel Arteta, who looked on from home after testing positive for Covid-19. He and his players felt the referee, Stuart Attwell, should have been asked to review Ederson’s tackle on the monitor, just as he did when awarding City the second-half spot kick from which Riyad Mahrez equalised. “I think it is a clear penalty, but at least a moment for the referee to check, like what happened with their penalty,” Stuivenberg said. “It is inconsistent.” Aaron Ramsdale, the Arsenal goalkeeper, was similarly confused after seeing City’s penalty appeal at close quarters. Attwell originally awarded nothing when Bernardo Silva went down under Granit Xhaka’s challenge but when invited to review the decision by the VAR official, Jarred Gillett, he changed his mind. “I don’t know why the referee is told to see one and not the other,” Ramsdale said. “It is there for a reason, go and use it. It is the inconsistency. The whole point is to help the game out. In real time it didn’t look like one, [but] slow it down on a screen and it is given.” Despite their frustration at not being awarded a penalty, Arsenal surged ahead later in the first half through Bukayo Saka and were by far the better side before Mahrez levelled. The equaliser was followed quickly by a second yellow card for Gabriel Magalhães, whose first was for what Stuivenberg termed a “normal comment … no dirty language was used”, and Arsenal paid the price through Rodri’s late winner. “I’m sad that we don’t end up with three points, that’s the most frustrating part,” Stuivenberg said. Ramsdale agreed: “I don’t think for large parts of the game teams have done that to Manchester City.” An 11th straight win for City gives them an 11-point advantage at the top, although Chelsea and Liverpool have opportunities to reduce it with games in hand. There have been two bigger gaps on New Year’s Day in the Premier League era. Pep Guardiola accepted City had been fortunate. “Arsenal were better,” he said, before pointing out that City had two days to recover from their win at Brentford. “It was so tough for us to come back. We had no energy. We were incredibly tired and they were better, but football has happened and sometimes it comes in our side.”There was much wailing and gnashing of teeth a few weeks ago when the Daily Telegraph announced that the renovation of the fire-ravaged Notre Dame cathedral would turn it into a “politically correct Disneyland”. As so often when that august publication buckles on its cuirass and bascinet in the War on Woke, it helps to look closely at its sources and evidence. In this case, it relied on the opinions of a conservative architect called Maurice Culot and sight of rather general proposals to install “modern art murals” in some of the side chapels and to project quotes from the Bible in languages that include Mandarin. A more measured and informed article in the Washington Post, by the art historian Elizabeth Lev, later pointed out that these chapels were formerly “an ill-kept hodgepodge generally passed over by tourists” and there should be nothing very terrible about a cathedral communicating the scriptures in the world’s leading languages. France’s National Heritage and Architecture Commission has since backed the proposals, with a couple of reservations. The work might yet be clumsy and inane or beautiful and thoughtful – it’s just that convincing evidence of its monstrosity hasn’t been produced by its detractors. The devil, so to speak, will be in the detail. Form over function Cedric Price was an architect and thinker whose insights, more than 18 years after his death, continue to resonate. One of these was to challenge the assumption of architects and their clients that erecting a building is the best solution to a given problem. A big shiny structure called The Centre for Ending Poverty (to use a hypothetical example) might not actually do what it claims. Price’s wisdom is pertinent to the saga of the Nightingale hospitals, the facilities created with much fanfare and expense early in the pandemic, which treated fewer than 400 patients. Now Sajid Javid is doubling down on this less than triumphant idea by ordering eight “Nightingale surge hubs” – units in hospital car parks to deal with a possible wave of Omicron admissions. One obvious but unanswered question is where the staff might come from to run these hubs. Even more obviously, would it not have been better to implement policies that reduce this potential surge, so that the Nightingales would not be needed at all? BBC morals off course I imagine the BBC’s moral compass to be a handsome and substantial instrument, brass-trimmed and Latin-inscribed, kept in a Reithian marble vault deep in Broadcasting House. It seems, though, that someone has tunnelled into its vicinity and placed a powerful electromagnet there, one programmed to switch on and off to an unpredictable synth funk beat. How else to explain its decision to interview Alan Dershowitz as an apparently objective commentator on the crimes of Jeffrey Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell, in particular on the credibility of the couple’s victim Virginia Giuffre? Dershowitz, as the BBC failed to mention, was one of Epstein’s lawyers and associates and is himself embroiled in lawsuits with Giuffre over her accusations that he was another of her abusers. In 2020, he wrote an article in the Spectator, “The Ghislaine Maxwell I know”, which attacked the “one-sided narrative” of “lying witnesses” such as Giuffre. The case against Maxwell, he sagely concluded, “is far from over”. The BBC acknowledged its error, but why make it in the first place? In case my electromagnet theory is not strictly accurate, here’s another: the corporation is now so thoroughly browbeaten and disoriented by accusations of liberal bias that it truly doesn’t know north from south and east from west. • Rowan Moore is the Observer’s architecture correspondentFrom a distance, the beach at Winterton-on-sea in Norfolk looks like the opening scene of Saving Private Ryan, with hundreds of grey bodies lying motionless across the sand. On closer inspection, it becomes clear they are not fallen soldiers but a huge colony of seals taken to the land for pupping season. It’s an amazing annual sight that draws tourists and nature-lovers from across the country, but another process is taking place that is pushing people back – the growing threat of coastal erosion. Just along from where the armies of grey seals lay with their white pups, there used to stand the Dunes Cafe, a much-loved beach facility with a large and loyal clientele. A year ago it was demolished to prevent its imminent collapse as a result of land lost to sea and storms. The ground where it stood is, like the cafe itself, no longer there. It’s a story of disappearance taking place all along the eastern coast of England, but particularly in East Anglia, that bulbous protrusion jutting into the North Sea. That climate change and rising sea levels take their toll on the landscape is an old story, but one with an urgent new twist. “The sea level’s been rising since the last ice age, 20,000 years ago or so,” says Jim Hall, professor of climate and environmental risk at Oxford University’s Environmental Change Institute. “And it’s going faster. We’re probably not seeing its effect very much yet on the coast, though we will in the future.” A 2020 report by the Committee on Climate Change, on which Hall sits as an expert on coastal erosion and flooding, found 1.2m homes at significant risk of flooding and a further 100,000 subject to coastal erosion by 2080 – which, although it sounds safely distant, will be within the lifetime of most of those born so far this century. Two years ago, the US-based climate change research group Climate Central went further. It produced a map showing areas of the UK at risk of being underwater by 2050. They included sections of north Norfolk, all of the Lincolnshire coast and much of Cambridgeshire, along with parts of East Yorkshire, Merseyside and the Bristol area. According to the group, this would happen even if “moderate” attempts were made to combat climate change. Such predictions are based on highly complex, and disputed, modelling, yet there are significant warning signs that such an outcome is growing rapidly more plausible. Last month, scientists monitoring the Thwaites Glacier in Antarctica, an ice shelf the size of Great Britain, warned it is in danger of collapse. “It’s being melted from below by warm ocean waters, causing it to lose its grip on the underwater mountain,” said Peter Davis from British Antarctic Survey and the International Thwaites Glacier Collaboration. He said research suggested that the ice shelf will begin to break apart within two decades. Should there be a complete collapse, it would lead to a highly consequential rise in sea levels of 60cm. That may be a worst-case scenario, but it will almost certainly have a notable impact on the British coastline. In a sense Norfolk is a real-time lesson in how weather and sea can drastically alter a landscape. After the Dunes Cafe was dismantled, a chef called Alex Clare set up a mobile silver Airstream cafe to cater to locals and visitors at the car park next to where the cafe once stood. He’s had to move the Airstream four times in eight months, as sections of the dunes on which the car park sits have collapsed into the sea under pressure from storms and high tides. “In the last two weeks,” Clare told me, “a strip about as long as this caravan has disappeared. You hear about erosion, but you don’t know what it means, what it involves, until you witness it. And it’s a shock to see the physical transformation.” The car park owner has tried to slow the erosion by laying down large concrete blocks on the beach, but it’s the definition of a losing battle. Winterton’s coast possesses a bleak beauty, enhanced by the fact that the village sits back from the sea, behind a broad wall of dunes. By contrast, at Hemsby, a mile or so south, the town, with its amusement arcades and fairgrounds, stretches all the way to the shoreline. Four years ago, there was a line of seven chalets close to the edge of the sandy cliffs that drop down to the beach. They all had to be knocked down as the land beneath them began to fall into the sea. The local council is looking at sea defences, but the only workable answer involves large-scale investment and a major process of sandscaping. That is what took place at Bacton, 15 miles north along the coast from Winterton. A four-mile-long dune was built to protect Bacton Terminal, which supplies around a third of the UK’s gas and had been moving steadily closer to the cliff edge, literally and metaphorically. Designed by the Dutch engineering company Royal HaskoningDHV, it involved the placement of 1.8 million cubic metres of sand along the beaches near the terminal. The design relies on the sand being shifted into place by wind, waves and tides. The Dutch are world leaders in land reclamation and protection, having over the years reclaimed more than a sixth of Holland’s landmass from the sea. “In the long run,” says Professor Hall, “any coast protection is temporary. We’ve been doing engineering to protect the coast for a very long time. Almost half of the UK coast has some kind of protection – sea walls, revetments, promenades, that kind of thing. The Victorians were inveterate promenade builders.” Such protections don’t stop the sea rising. They merely fix, for a while, the point of the shore profile. At Happisburgh, near Bacton, wooden revetments did that job, until they collapsed 20 years ago, leading to a sudden and damaging exposure to the sea. “Once you lose [the protection], there’s a lot of pent-up erosion capacity,” says Hall. Although there is growing media coverage of coastal erosion, it’s as Alex Clare said: knowledge of the thing isn’t the same as experiencing it. “There’s a bit more recognition that the sea level is rising fast,” says Hall. “But I don’t think coastal communities have really understood what the future holds.” He believes there should be an “honest conversation” between government, local government and the affected communities. While the money required to protect cities like London and Hull will have to be found, that’s not likely with isolated villages. When I visited Norfolk last month, the locals seemed fatalistic or in denial, pointing out that the situation was worse somewhere else, either up or down the coast. As I drove back, it began to rain, and that night the weather deteriorated. The next day there was a large landslide at Mundesley, near Bacton, with a huge chunk of the cliff face collapsing on to the beach. Above it, houses stood on the precipice, their future looking about as secure as Norwich’s position in the Premier League. As Pete Revell, station manager at Bacton HM Coastguard, said, Mundesley was viewed as stable by comparison with nearby Happisburgh, and the landslide came as “a bit of a surprise”. It certainly shocked local resident Antony Lloyd, who said he was “very nervous and agitated about any further incidents.” He was finding it hard to sleep and thought he would have to move. Of course, the occasional landfall or loss of beachside chalets is hardly cause for national panic. But like canaries in a coal mine, the inhabitants of the villages strung along Norfolk’s shifting coastline are a warning of a worrying future. There are processes under way whose outcomes are unavoidable, and those that can potentially be arrested. But it will require unblinking foresight and long-term action, neither of which are our national strong suits. If you take the path north from Winterton’s beach car park you come to the roped-off seal sanctuary. Beyond, seals and their pups lie still and vulnerable in the dunes, hundreds of yards from the shore, as if waiting for the sea to rescue them. And come it will, not now or next year, but much sooner than we care to think.Four Peaks Sound Walk (Radio 3) | BBC Sounds Desert Island Discs: Richard Osman (Radio 4) | BBC Sounds A Tribute to Janice Long (BBC Radio Wales) | BBC Sounds Christmas Takeover (Radio 1) | BBC Sounds Radio 3’s Four Peaks Sound Walk, which went out on Christmas Day and the following three days, initially seemed like a strange yuletide-to-new-year offering. Each programme was based around a walk to the top of the highest peak in each of the four nations of the UK. Presenter Horatio Clare, producer Jeremy Evans and sound engineer Andy Fell all tramped to the top of Ben Nevis, Slieve Donard, Scafell Pike and Snowdon (Yr Wyddfa), through cawing birds, shifting landscapes, capricious mountain weather and varying amounts of fellow climbers (hardly any on Slieve Donard, hordes on Ben Nevis). The shows mixed the airy, rainy sounds of the walks with Clare’s observations, reminiscences and recounting of myths. Music was added too, some of which was a little on the nose (classical strings and “bom-bom” drums pull me out of, rather than bring me into an atmosphere), though most was a lovely addition. And Clare is such a wonderful presenter, his occasional exertion-caused breathiness somehow enhancing his gorgeous way with words. I loved his tale-telling: the stories of the to and fro between Irish clan leader Donard and Christian arriviste Saint Patrick; Clare’s own childhood memories of going crabbing with “the Welsh Cézanne”, Kyffin Williams, “a real druid figure with a white moustache and gentle manner”. Clare has a gentle manner, his clipped, polite greetings to other walkers – “Hello there… Hi… Hello” – making me giggle on occasion. Anyhow, the strangeness I mention is not in the programmes themselves, which were eerie and moving, but not weird. It’s in their timing. The Sound Walks were such determinedly open-aired, misty skied affairs, offered at a time when most of us were huggermugger in one warm room, stretching our legs only to shuffle to the kettle or fridge – though perhaps that was the point. I listened when I went out to walk the dog, tramping around a cramped, urban landscape immersed in the sounds of a vast, wilder one. Surprisingly, the shows proved a perfect accompaniment to a small life; contemplative and human, with a strong connection to the past and to the Earth itself. You need headphones and solitude for their full effect. Another exceptionally human listen was Richard Osman on Desert Island Discs. Much of what he said in his interview with Lauren Laverne has already been filleted for newspaper headlines, as Osman is now a national treasure, but it’s worth hearing him talk, especially about how his life has been enhanced by TV. He has nystagmus, an eye condition that means his vision is often blurred, and his description of how telly opened up the world, visually, for him was very affecting. His self-knowledge meant he was an excellent interviewee, despite his naturally private nature, and he talked interestingly about his food addiction, his mum, his brilliant and interesting career. You sensed a deep emotional swirl within him that remained carefully contained; a desire to give and receive love bubbling just beneath that calm, witty surface. A lovely person to spend 45 minutes with. Janice Long, who died on Christmas Day at the terribly young age of 66, was never anything other than a lovely person to spend time with. Her presenting career took her to Radio 1 and Top of the Pops (she’s one of the few hosts still bearable to watch on the reruns), as well as Radio 2 and 6 Music. And she was still going strong: she hosted on Saturdays on Greatest Hits Radio and had a weekday evening show on Radio Wales. Long’s producer at Radio Wales, Adam Walton, pulled together a moving celebration of her life in music, which aired on Monday, just two days after she died. He played music by some of the many bands Long had championed during her career, and spoke to several musicians, including Holly Johnson and Ian McCulloch. Walton hosted too, which must have been difficult, as he was very upset by his friend’s death. He almost lost it on several occasions, including during a link between Trampolene’s Beautiful Pain and the Smiths’ There Is a Light, as did I. But the programme he made for Long and her fans was a beautiful tribute to an exceptionally endearing person. “There was no side to her,” said Johnson. “She was ambitious, but it wasn’t at the expense of anyone.” Very true. In the 80s, Long was not treated particularly well at Radio 1, where she became persona non grata when she dared to have a child. Such discriminatory days are in the past, thank goodness, and it was great to hear plenty of diverse young talent on the station throughout the week. For the past couple of years, between Boxing Day and New Year’s Day, Radio 1 has given new presenters a chance to host a show in its week-long Christmas Takeover. Last week, we heard from 30 new DJs. Every one was remarkably upbeat and capable, even though they were given only short opportunities to speak: a little reading out of what listeners are up to, a spot of throwing to the news. But it was terrifically exciting for the presenters, and you could hear those with a spark enliven these small speaking roles. Plus, as they were all playing nailed-on bangers, every show was an easy, not too chatty listen. Just the thing to inject some bounce into your Twixtmas shuffle to the fridge.Michael Gove, in his new role as the cabinet’s major-domo and minister in charge of “levelling up”, is about to expend large amounts of intellectual and political capital attempting to close the gap between the south-east and everywhere else. Levelling up, as we are told repeatedly by No 10, will be the defining achievement of the Johnson administration and 2022 is the year that efforts to transform the much-neglected regions begin to gather pace. With this in mind, Gove is about to publish a white paper that outlines how the government plans to tackle this gargantuan task. So far the prospects for a major commitment across Whitehall are looking slim. The chancellor, for one, wants to make sure that whatever Gove wants comes with no new cash attached. Recycling is popular in government, especially when it concerns money. Gove’s response appears to be a renewed focus on the bureaucracy supporting the regions. He has floated a scheme to fill the geographical gaps between the metro mayors who run most of England’s big city regions with a new concept of US-style regional governors. There is no suggestion of mimicking the neo-colonial mini-White Houses that host governors in most US state capitals – just a network of elected chiefs able to reduce regional inequalities and drive growth around the country. Gove’s mistake here is his apparent determination to join the list of reformers who focus more on structures than desired outcomes. One advantage he can claim as he prepares to confront the many entrenched and powerful interests in the shires (which dominate the Conservative party apparatus and will object to governors) is the lack of agreement among political opponents on an alternative to whatever structure he puts forward. Labour and the thinktanks that feed ideas to shadow ministers agree on one thing – that extra funds and power should be devolved away from Whitehall. But they have not found an alternative system of local democracy to coalesce around since John Prescott’s proposal for regional assemblies was crushed in a referendum held in north-east England almost 20 years ago. And there is good reason. As Prescott found out, extra layers of government appear to the public as civil-service employment schemes. Even sharp-shooting governors can quickly look like jobsworths to those who see themselves as taxpayers first and citizens second. Labour is rightly more concerned with issues that Gove wants to sidestep, such as how to foster more productive regional economic engines based on a collaboration of public and private capital. The access to private capital in England’s north-east, north-west and south-west, where a lack of finance cripples businesses’ ambitions, is so much more important than having a go-getting governor. And what about health outcomes and education, which have improved by leaps and bounds in London and the south-east over the last 20 years, while standards have stagnated or gone backwards in other parts of the country? From George Osborne’s elected mayors to Gove’s planned overhaul, debates about the efficient and functional management of English territory have always taken precedence over questions such as how to determine and represent local political identities in a way that increases levels of participation, accountability and legitimacy. These issues underpin economic success because they give individuals and communities a sense of respect and control. Gove wants the eventual model for the whole country to be London, which, he says, under Labour and Conservative mayors has set out strategic goals, giving coherence to the revitalisation and regeneration of large parts of the capital. The latest of those mayors, Sadiq Khan, says these statements ring hollow. He told the Observer: “The government is saying to all other parts of the country they will have a London-style transport system. But London doesn’t have a London-style transport system and that is because these days the government is micro-managing what we can and can’t do. “Whether you are Andy Burnham or Andy Street, Jamie Driscoll in the north-east or Dan Jarvis in Sheffield, it is clear more powers should be devolved. But the control freakery of the government, with ministers hoarding power rather than giving it away, is overwhelming.” Economic studies show that only a greater degree of autonomy can generate higher and more sustainable growth rates, and that such progress is only seen over long periods of time. So why should anyone put their faith in governors when the template for them, the London mayor, is cut off at the knees, denied not only the cash needed to do anything meaningful, but with Whitehall breathing down his neck? If Gove cannot enhance local democracy and accept all that it entails, then governors and much else he proposes will be window dressing for an administration that is levelling down. • This article was amended on 2 January 2022. The referendum on a regional assembly for north-east England was held in 2004, not “more than 25 years ago” as an earlier version said due to an error introduced during editing.New year, new dawn? As it turned out, not quite. For a long time, it seemed that history might be made at Vicarage Road on Saturday – a first clean sheet for Claudio Ranieri as Watford manager, his first Premier League clean sheet for three years and three days. Watford have had five managers since they last kept a Premier League clean sheet and Davinson Sánchez’s injury-time winner means that number could soon increase to six. Six points from 11 games since Ranieri took over is not an encouraging stat for Watford. For the Italian, pretty much all that can be said is that his win percentage is higher than it was during his disastrous stint in charge of Fulham – although anything but a win at Newcastle in a fortnight would change that. Ranieri lasted three months and two weeks at Fulham; he would have to survive beyond 18 January for his Watford reign to last longer. While there have been the remarkable victories over Everton and Manchester United, it’s very hard to argue that there has been an improvement since Ranieri replaced Xisco Muñoz at the beginning of October. This was Watford’s sixth defeat in a row; an unprecedented run of poor form under the Pozzos. “I am very proud,” said Ranieri. “Also our fans should be proud because the team played a fight until the end. What was unbelievable was to concede a goal with a header with all our tall players. We are alive! We will survive!” Given present form, that seemed an optimistic take. From a clean sheet, though, could perhaps have grown belief – and there had not been much of that at kick-off. Rather there was a sense for much of the first half of an acceptance of fate, something encapsulated by the sight of Harry the Hornet forlornly banging a drum in the corner to general indifference. Perhaps the hundreds of empty seats were down primarily to Covid, the complications of festive travel and new year hangovers, but it can’t help that this Watford offer so little incentive to make an effort. Until João Pedro came on to offer a threat with his direct running, there was a grim meekness to Watford. Their resistance consisted largely in simply being: existing in a relatively organised 4-4-2. But again and again possession was wasted. Clearance after clearance went to a Spurs player or out of play. Pass after pass was misplaced. And the result was that Spurs kept coming in wave after wave. Perhaps this was defiance but it was the defiance of an unremarkable sandstone cliff against the sea: eventually erosion was always going to take its course. Not that Tottenham offered much. Like so many high-pressing teams, they are at their best against sides who come out at them, which Watford, with their two banks of four dropped deep, simply didn’t do. This was similar to the Southampton game, as Spurs lacked the creative spark to break through against increasingly dogged opponents. Forced to try to play their way through an opponent or to rely on the wayward crossing of Emerson Royal, Tottenham looked a little one-paced and lacking in imagination. “It was difficult because we didn’t score but created chances and when you find an opponent who is well organised it is not simple,” said Antonio Conte. “When we find a very narrow team we have to improve.” And that perhaps suggests the limitations of this squad. For all Tottenham have improved under Conte, for all they look better organised and more motivated, they remain the same group of players, and they are a group that, since the departure of Christian Eriksen, has lacked much in the way of magic or unpredictability. Tanguy Ndombele has at times suggested he could provide it, but Conte made fairly clear this week that he is no fan: Ndombele’s unpredictability is the wrong kind of unpredictability. Conte’s importance is obvious. As the game was delayed with five minutes remaining while a fan received treatment in the Graham Taylor Stand, he gathered his players and issued yet further instructions. When the game began again, Spurs came with renewed vigour, earning them the free-kick wide on the left that Son Heung-min arced in for Sánchez to glance home. A win is a win and it lifted Spurs, despite their shortcomings, to within two points of Arsenal with two games in hand. Watford, meanwhile, are sinking fast and under the Pozzos, that usually means only one thing. Ranieri, it feels, is already on borrowed time.Premier League: A Crystal Palace side missing several key players through injury and illness host West Ham at Selhurst Park. Rob Smyth has the latest ... Premier League: For a long time, this had threatened to be a first clean sheet for Watford under Claudio Ranieri, but Davinson Sánchez’s injury-time header ensured it was not, writes Jonathan Wilson from Vicarage Road. Davinson Sanchez speaks: “The goal,” the unlikely scorer of Spurs’ winner tells Sky Sports. “That was what we were looking for, not just myself, the fans, the team, the result we are happy for. I am happy to be here the way we are going. “It was very physical coming to play here, they always make it hard to play against, but we had intention from the beginning to keep pushing for a result. “If we opened the game earlier it would become a different game. Crystal Palace, second half we created many chances but a bit unlucky in the final third. Southampton, before the goal we missed the last pass. Finally we got it, we are working very well to keep pushing.” Premier League: A late Rodri smash-and-grab took the points for Manchester City despite a spirited display from Arsenal. Nick Ames was at the Emirates for the Guardian ... Premier League Arsenal 1-2 Manchester City Watford 0-1 Tottenham Hotspur Crystal Palace v West Ham (5.30pm) Championship Blackpool 1-0 Hull City League One Burton Albion 4-1 Crewe Charlton 0-1 Wycombe MK Dons 0-0 Gillingham Oxford United 1-1 Cheltenham Town Rotherham United 2-1 Bolton League Two Barrow 1-2 Bradford City Crawley Town 3-1 Colchester United Forest Green 2-0 Stevenage Hartlepool United 0-0 Oldham Scunthorpe United 0-1 Carlisle United Sutton United 2-1 Exeter City Swindon Town 5-2 Northampton Town Walsall 3-3 Newport County Premier League: Despite a largely heroic defensive effort, Watford lose their fourth home game on the bounce, going down to a Davinson Sanchez header deep in added time. League One: Dan Jebbison makes it Burton Albion 4-1 Crewe in the second minute of added time. League Two: Walsall score a late equaliser against Newport County through a Conor Wilkinson volley in the fifth minute of added time. He’s scored three this afternoon ... one past his own goalkeeper. Premier League: They can’t! Davinson Sanchez is unmarked and scores with a header from three yards out after connecting with a Son free-kick. Watford 0-0 Tottenham Hotspur: We’re into eight minutes of added time at Watford, where the deadlock remains unbroken. This will be a great point for Watford ... if they can hang on. Watford 0-0 Tottenham Hotspur: Play resumes at Vicarage Road following an interruption so that a spectator could receive medical attention. Hopefully they’re OK. League Two: Sutton go 2-1 ahead against Exeter City courtesy of a Rob Milsom penalty in the 89th minute. Watford 0-0 Tottenham Hotspur: With less than five minutes of normal time remaining, medics from both teams dash across the pitch at Vicarage Road to look after somebody who has taken ill in the stands. We wish all involved well. Play has been halted but the players are still on the pitch. League One: Mark Sykes slides the ball home to equalise for Oxford United against Cheltenham Town. Watford 0-0 Tottenham: Hugo Lloris brings down Joao Pedro in the Tottenham penalty area but gets away with it. Having seen it twice, I think the Tottenham goalkeeper was very, very lucky not to concede a spot-kick. Other opinions are available. League Two: Freddie Sears pulls a goal back for Colchester against Crawley, who lead 3-1. League One: Michael Smith has put Rotherham 2-1 ahead against Bolton at the New York Stadium. Crystal Palace: Guaita, Ward, Andersen, Guehi, Mitchell, Schlupp, Milivojevic, Hughes, Ayew, Benteke, Edouard. Subs: Butland, Tomkins, Olise, Eze, Mateta, Matthews, Kelly, Riedewald. West Ham: Fabianski, Coufal, Dawson, Diop, Johnson, Rice, Soucek, Bowen, Lanzini, Benrahma, Antonio. Subs: Yarmolenko, Vlasic, Areola, Noble, Fredericks, Masuaku, Kral, Okoflex, Alese. Referee: Michael Oliver (Northumberland) Watford 0-0 Tottenham: Watford goalkeeper Daniel Bachmann saves brilliantly from Son, who’d volleyed a Lucas Moura ball over the top goalwards. Excellent goalkeeping. League Two: Walsall equalise against Newport through a Matt Dolan own goal, only to go behind to Dominic Telford’s second of the afternoon a minute later. It’s 3-2 to Walsall at the Banks’s Stadium. League Two: Swindon score their fifth goal against Northampton, with Harry McKirdy bagging his fourth of the afternoon. It’s 5-2 at the County Ground. Watford 0-0 Tottenham: Son miskicks wide of the far post after barely connecting with a Reguilon cross from the right. He didn’t get enough contact on a very inviting delivery and puts his head in his hands. It remains scoreless at Vicarage Road. League Two: It’s now Swindon Town 4-2 Northampton at the County Ground, where Tyreece SImpson has extended the home side’s lead on the hour mark. Watford 0-0 Tottenham Hotspur: Watford win a free-kick in a great position just outside the Spurs box but Joao Pedro sends his effort miles over the bar. League Two: League leaders Forest Green have gone ahead against Stevenage courtesy of a Josh March goal. Elsewhere, Swindon lead Northampton 3-2 in a real ding-dong at the County Ground. League Two: On as a sub for Walsall against Newport, Conor Wilkinson has scored a goal at each end. The one he just stuck past his own goalkeeper means Newport lead 2-1 at the Bescot/Banks’s Stadium. League Two: Ashley Nadesan has put Crawley 3-0 up against Colchester with his second goal of the game. League Two: There are quick-fire goals from both sides at the County Ground, where it’s Swindon Town 2-2 Northampton Town. Jon Guthrie put the Cobblers 2-1 up, only for Harry McKirdy to equalise for the hosts a minute later. Watford 0-0 Tottenham: Spurs goalkeeper Hugo Lloris is called into action for the first time this afternoon, throwing himself to his left to save splendidly from Joshua King. League Two: Barrow have pulled a goal back against Bradford through Josh Gordon and now trail by the odd goal of three. League One: Callum Wright pokes home from close range to give Cheltenham a one-goal lead at Oxford United. Watford 0-0 Tottenham: Sensational scenes at Vicarage Road, where Watford win a corner. Tottenham clear. League Two: Bradford have doubled their lead at Barrow, with Andy Cook scoring their second goal. Watford 0-0 Tottenham Hotspur: Play has resumed at Vicarage Road, where Watford have brought on Joao Pedro as a half-time substitute for their striker Emmanuel Dennis. A curious move from tinkerman Claudio Ranieri, unless Dennis is injured. Premier League Arsenal 1-2 Manchester City (result) Watford 0-0 Tottenham Hotspur Crystal Palace v West Ham (5.30pm) Championship Blackpool 1-0 Hull City League One Burton Albion 3-1 Crewe Charlton 0-1 Wycombe MK Dons 0-0 Gillingham Oxford United 0-0 Cheltenham Town Rotherham United 1-1 Bolton League Two Barrow 0-1 Bradford City Crawley Town 2-0 Colchester United Forest Green 0-0 Stevenage Hartlepool United 0-0 Oldham Scunthorpe United 0-1 Carlisle United Sutton United 1-1 Exeter City Swindon Town 1-1 Northampton Town Walsall 0-1 Newport County Premier League: It’s scoreless at Vicarage Road, where Spurs have been utterly dominant. Harry Kane feels he should have had a penalty and may have a case but the deadlock remains unbroken at half-time. League Two: Rod McDonald has fired Carlisle ahead against Scunthorpe with the only goal of the game so far at Glanford Park. League One: It’s rat-a-tat stuff at Rotherham, where the home side went ahead against Bolton only to be pegged back two minutes later. Michael Smith scored for Rotherham in the 40th minute, only for Eoin Doyle to equalise soon afterwards. League Two: Sam Hoskins has equalised for Northampton at Swindon. League One: Absent from his Wycombe side’s game against Charlton at The Valley because he has Covid, Gareth Ainsworth will be delighted to see Sam Vokes has put the visitors ahead after 35 minutes. League Two: Joel Lynch gets 2022 off to a bang, putting Crawley 2-0 up against Colchester. League One: Kane Hemmings scores his second goal in two games, sending a volley past Crewe goalkeeper Dave Richards to put Burton 3-1 ahead. Championship: Gary Madine has put Blackpool a goal ahead against Hull City in the only Championship game being played this afternoon. Premiuer League: A poor ball from Daniel Bachmann is prodded towards Harry Kane. He cuts in towards the centre of the pitch and fires inches wide of the far post. League One: Burton lead Crewe 2-1 with John Brayford putting Jimmy Floyd-Hasselbaink’s side ahead. League Two: In good news for resident Guardian cartoonist David Squires, his beloved Swindon have gone a goal up against Northampton. Harry McKirdy has got the goal on 28 minutes. Premier League: Daniel Bachmann is forced into action again, saving a Sergio Reguilon shot from distance. It’s a terrific save from the Austrian, who flung himself to his left and got two hands to the ball. Watford are under immense pressure. Premier League: Tottenham defender Davinson Sanchez gets his head to a Heung Min-son corner but is on the stretch and unable to get any power behind his effort. Daniel Bachmann saves comfortably. League One: Tom Lowery equalises for Crewe against Burton Albion at the Pirelli Stadium. Premier League: Harry Kane stings the palms of Watford goalkeeper Daniel Bachmann with a rising drive. Tottenham are totally dominant against a Watford side that is sitting very deep. Premier League: A poor header from Watford centre-half Craig Cathcart drops for Pierre-Emile Hoejbjerg, who fires over the bar from inside the opposition penalty area. League Two: It’s Crawley 1-0 Colchester, with Ashley Nadesan keeping the scoreboard operator on his or her toes. Premier League: Tottenham are playing ball after ball out to Emerson Royal out on the right-wing but he isn’t getting the crosses in to the box. Premier League: Not a great deal to report from Vicarage Road, where it remains scoreless between Watford and Spurs. The visitors are dominating possession but have created little or nothing in the way of goalscoring chances. League One: Burton lead Crewe through a Harry Chapman strike on six minutes. League Two: Exeter City have equalised against Sutton through Tim Dieng, while Barrow trail Bradford by a Lee Angol goal. League Two: Dominic Telford has put Newport County a goal up against Walsall at the Banks’s Stadium. Meanwhile at Gander Green Lane, high-flying Sutton United have gone one ahead against Exeter City. Omar Bugiel with the goal there. Peep! Tottenham have kicked off at Vicarage Road, their players a vision in magenta shirts, shorts and socks. The personnel of Watford wear their usual home kit of yellow shirts, black shorts and yellow socks. Emmanuel Dennis unleashes an early shot from inside the Tottenham penalty area but it’s low and straight at Hugo Lloris. Premier League: Nick Ames was at the Emirates to see Manchester City nick all three points from a spirited Arsenal side courtesy of a late, late winner from Rodri. Premier League: A tremendously entertaining game at the Emirates draws to a close with the 10 crushed men of Arsenal losing by the odd goal of three – a late, late strike from Rodri. Their players and fans are furious with referee Stuart Attwell, who didn’t do a whole lot – if anything – wrong. Premier League: Oh Arsenal. Rodri pokes home from the edge of the six-yard box, pouncing on a rebound from Ben White before whipping off his shirt, celebrating in front of Arsenal fans and being pelted by empty bottles and plastic cups. This just in: Liverpool manager Jurgen Klopp will not be at Stamford Bridge for Liverpool’s match against Chelsea tomorrow afternoon because of Covid-related reasons. We wish him well. Watford: Bachmann, Troost-Ekong, Sierralta, Cathcart, Masina, Sissoko, Sema, Kucka, Louza, King, Dennis. Subs: Ngakia, Cleverley, Joao Pedro, Gosling, Fletcher, Tufan, Hernandez, Angelini, Morris. Tottenham Hotspur: Lloris, Sanchez, Dier, Davies, Emerson, Skipp, Hojbjerg, Reguilon, Lucas Moura, Kane, Son. Subs: Doherty, Winks, Gil Salvatierra, Rodon, Lo Celso, Alli, Gollini, Tanganga, Ndombele. Referee: Robert Jones (Merseyside) Premier League: It’s all going spectacularly pear-shaped for the Gunners, who had played so well for 50 minutes. Moments after Mahrez’s goal, Martinelli missed a sitter, with Nathan Ake hacking off the line for City. Not long after that, Gabriel, who had been booked for scuffing the penalty spot prior to Manchester City’s equaliser, received his second yellow card for a block on Gabriel Jesus. It’s all square at the Emirates but Arsenal are down to 10 men. Premier League: Following a VAR intervention and pitchside monitor consultation, Manchester City were awarded a penalty for a Granit Xhaka foul on Bernardo Silva. Riyad Mahrez has scored from the spot to restore parity for Manchester City. Rob Smyth has the latest ... Today’s Premier League fixtures Arsenal 1-0 Manchester City (latest score) Leicester v Norwich City (postp) Watford v Tottenham Hotspur (3pm) Crystal Palace v West Ham (5.30pm) Championship Sheffield United v Middlesbrough (postp) Blackpool v Hull City Coventry City v Luton Town (postp) League One Burton Albion v Crewe Charlton v Wycombe Ipswich Town v Lincoln City (postp) MK Dons v Gillingham Oxford United v Cheltenham Town Plymouth Argyle v AFC Wimbledon (postp) Rotherham United v Bolton Wigan Athletic v Accrington Stanley (postp) League Two Barrow v Bradford City Crawley Town v Colchester United Forest Green v Stevenage Harrogate v Port Vale (postp) Hartlepool United v Oldham Leyton Orient v Bristol Rovers (postp) Rochdale v Mansfield Town (postp) Salford City v Tranmere Rovers (postp) Scunthorpe United v Carlisle United Sutton United v Exeter City Swindon Town v Northampton Town Walsall v Newport County Tom Cleverley is available for selection after nearly three weeks out with a hamstring injury, but Spanish right-back Kiko Femenia will sit this one out with a hammy issue of his own. With Jeremy Ngakia also a doubt, Juraj Kucka may have to drop back to deputise in the back four. Elsewhere in Watford’s defence, Danny Rose is also out with a knee injury. Ismaila Sarr and Ben Foster are among Watford’s other lame and halt. Tottenham are without Cristian Romero, Steven Bergwijn and Ryan Sessegnon, who are all absent due to soft tissue injuries. Giovani Lo Celso is expected to be available if required following his return from injury on a day when it has been reported that Juventus have decided they don’t want the Argentinian midfielder in part exchange for their Swedish winger Dejan Kulusevski. Watford: Claudio Ranieri has insisted Watford have not disrespected the Africa Cup of Nations after Emmanuel Dennis was confirmed as missing the tournament. Nigeria accused Watford of “baring fangs” after confirming the striker had not made their 28-man squad. Read on ... Tottenham Hotspur: Antonio Conte has warned it will take more than the January transfer window to turn Tottenham into regular top-four contenders again, it says here ... Happy New Year, one and all! Arsenal and Manchester City got the Premier League ball rolling in 2022, and it’s currently **** at the Emirates, where .... Covid dictates that we have just one top flight game kicking off at 3pm (other time zones are available) today, which means we’ll be focussing much of our attention on goings-on at Vicarage Road, where relegation-threatened Watford host Tottenham Hotspur. We’ll also be keeping tabs on the fixtures in the divisions below ahead of Crystal Palace’s match against West Ham later this evening, which you will also be able to follow with Guardian Sport.The former Labour prime minister Tony Blair’s ennoblement this weekend, courtesy of the Queen, has been defended by the Speaker of the House of Commons, Sir Lindsay Hoyle. Sir Tony, rather than Sir Anthony, as he is now known, has been made a Knight Companion of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, 14 years after leaving Downing Street. But the honour has been criticised by Blair’s political opponents and those who argue the legacy of his invasion of Iraq in 2003 makes him unsuitable. Speaking on Saturday morning Hoyle said he felt the honour, the oldest and most senior British order of chivalry, was “a fitting tribute” for a former prime minister, although he felt it was not a political decision. “Whatever people might think, it is one of the toughest jobs in the world,” the Speaker said, “and I think it is respectful and it is the right thing to do, whether it is Sir David Cameron. They should all be offered that knighthood when they finish as prime minister.” Hoyle was talking to Today programme presenter Martha Kearney on BBC Radio 4 when he was asked if he believed all recent former prime ministers should now be knighted. “If you have been prime minister of this country, I do believe the country should recognise the service given. Absolutely. You finish in the office and when you’ve finished it is the respect that we give to those prime ministers,” he replied. Most attacks on the monarch’s appointment of Blair to the order, membership of which was also given on Saturday to Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall and to the former Labour cabinet member Lady Amos, the first black person to be honoured this way, have come from the political left, but were picked up by right-leaning media, including the Daily Mail. The newspaper said there had been backlash, quoting satirical tweets from the veteran investigative journalist John Pilger and from former MP George Galloway. Appointments to this ceremonial order are made without prime ministerial advice and are usually announced on St George’s Day, on 23 April. Founded in 1348 by Edward III, it is the oldest and most senior British Order of Chivalry and a recognition of significant public service. Sir John Major, Blair’s predecessor, was the last prime minister to receive the honour. “It is not about politics. It is about the position they have held in this country and it’s the respect that we show to those and it is a fitting tribute,” said Hoyle. • This article was amended on 6 January 2022 to clarify that Sir John Major was the last prime minister to receive the honour.Desperate residents in China’s western Xi’an city are running out of food after they were barred from grocery shopping in a fierce lockdown. In the southern province of Guangxi, people who broke Covid laws were recently publicly shamed by being paraded through the streets in Hazmat suits with placards round their necks. The rest of the world is learning, slowly and with some difficulty, to live with Covid-19, but in China, authorities are doubling down on their “zero-Covid” policy: trying to stamp out the disease whenever it appears, and at any cost. A single case in a border town led to 200,000 people being locked down late last month. A key aspect of the policy is border closures. Few people are allowed in or out of China, and those who do enter the country face up three weeks of government-enforced quarantine. Some other countries locked the world out for over a year in a bid to lock out the pandemic. But in 2022, Beijing is treading an increasingly solitary path. A combination of mass vaccination, social pressure and highly transmissible new variants has persuaded other once “zero-Covid” countries – including Australia, New Zealand and Singapore – to begin slowly opening up again to the world. Inside China, some senior scientists and officials have also taken the political risk of calling for similar reopening, in recognition of a world where it seems Covid will become endemic. Gao Fu, head of the Chinese Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, suggested recently that the country could be ready when vaccination rates pass 85%, perhaps early in 2022. Others have joined scientists abroad, warning that even Beijing’s autocratic powers and popular support for lockdowns and other control measures may not be enough to keep highly transmissible new variants out. “China will have great difficulty with Omicron and a zero Covid policy,” Tulio Oliveira, director of South Africa’s Centre for Epidemic Response and Innovation, said on Twitter. He is part of the team that first alerted the World Health Organisation to the new variant. “They may need to join the rest of the world with mitigation strategies. China should not punish its public health officials or citizens or foreigns because (of) a more transmissible variant.” Whatever the cost, China is likely to push extremely hard to keep the virus under control for most of this year, ahead of two high-profile, high-stakes events. Next month, Beijing will host the winter Olympics, a gathering already dogged by diplomatic boycotts over human rights abuses. In the autumn the Communist leadership will meet for their 20th Party Congress: it is expected to officially extend Xi Jinping’s hold on power by another five years. Authorities in Beijing will have little appetite for putting either the Games or the Party Congress in jeopardy with a Covid outbreak, that would amount to an uncontrolled test of the effectiveness of domestic vaccinations and medical preparations. The health risks of opening China up to Covid are likely to be higher than in countries that abandoned their zero Covid policies, said Sean Yuji Sylvia, assistant professor at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, whose research focuses on health economics and China’s health system. “There are several reasons why it makes sense for China to maintain strict controls for the time being,” Sylvia said. “China has a high population density and lower herd immunity in the population due to limited exposure to the virus and less-effective vaccines. “The health system is also relatively weak in much of the country and could easily be overwhelmed. And even if vaccines provide good protection against severe cases, patients with less-severe illness are more likely to be hospitalised in China.” The country’s hospitals are also manned by doctors who have little clinical experience of treating Covid, while professionals elsewhere now have two years’ painfully earned understanding of its development and how best to control it. The possible human cost of opening up also has a political dimension. Government and state media have seized on how the virus spread in other countries as evidence of poor leadership and bad decision-making. Abandoning zero Covid could potentially trigger a crisis in hospitals and healthcare that would open the Chinese government to similar criticism. The first few weeks of the pandemic, when hospitals in Wuhan were overwhelmed and the death toll included many medics, fuelled fury and fear nationwide. “China’s zero-Covid policy is driven primarily by social stability concerns. The regime sees Covid, Sars and other epidemics or pandemics as a health crisis that has the potential to evolve into a social crisis,” said Lynette Ong, associate professor of political science at the University of Toronto. “With that in mind, it is not hard to understand why they are willing to defend it at all cost. But the costs are high. As the rest of world learns how to live with it, China will find itself alone, with few coping mechanisms.” A key sign to watch for, she added is whether the approach to Covid shifts after the leadership decisions are made at the Communist Party Congress. Strict controls have been astonishingly effective so far. Over the past four weeks, when China was battling a relatively large cluster of infections by domestic standards, authorities detected 3,400 cases and no one died. Over the same period, more than 5.7 million people registered Covid infections in the United States, and 36,000 people died of the disease. And as other economies crumbled under the pressure of deaths and lockdowns, China continued to grow But if its path continues to diverge from the rest of the world’s, the costs and challenges of the zero-Covid approach are almost certain to rise. In 2020 and 2021, once China stamped out its initial outbreak, domestic spending picked up. Its factories resumed churning out goods for the world, adding Covid tests and other medical gear to their production line, for a pandemic that seemed to be passing the country by. Now however, the economic calculus has become more complicated. Strict new lockdown and quarantine rules are affecting everything from global supply chains – as sailors wanting to return home must spend weeks in isolation – to factory output. Trade partners are angry at the impact of suddenly imposed new border controls, with more than 6,000 Vietnamese trucks suddenly stranded at one border in late December. If other markets continue to ease Covid-related controls on movement while China remains shuttered, they may be forced to look elsewhere for trade partners.. If Beijing remains sealed off from the world, this may also diminish China’s efforts to project its influence worldwide. This has been a high profile feature of Xi Jinping’s increasingly assertive rule, including his flagship “Belt and Road” initiative, offering investment and aid around the world. But for now, authorities have clearly prioritised the political advantages of a Covid-free China, and are willing to pay a very high price to keep that unusual status in a world where the disease is becoming endemic. “China’s ‘dynamic clearance’ strategy has thus far proven effective at limiting the domestic spread of the disease, albeit with significant cost, effort, and trade-offs,” said Thomas Hale, associate professor in public policy at Oxford University’s Blavatnik School of Governance. “The government’s statements since the emergence of Omicron –which have touted the present strategy as a success – suggest that the point of transition (away from zero Covid) is not close, despite some discussion of this in the Chinese media. “Moreover, when it does come, the transition may not be easy because Chinese society has gotten quite used to a low level of transmission.”January – Africa Cup of Nations Prevailing attitudes towards Afcon among Premier League clubs are often unhealthy but, for those with a genuine love for the sport itself, it is one of the most captivating spectacles around. This year’s edition, postponed from 2021, will be played in Cameroon; the competition has become used to late scares over its hosting and has had to overcome concerns over Omicron and the reluctance of European sides to release their players. But once the Indomitable Lions kick off against Burkina Faso on 9 January attention will rest on the pitch. It should be an open tournament, contested by some of the world’s best players, with the 2019 finalists, Algeria and Senegal, the teams to beat. About 40 of the players taking part are England-based, while the commitment shown by Sky and the BBC in screening every game is testament to the tournament’s invigorated global profile. March – World Cup play-offs The World Cup play-offs reliably offer some of the most exhilarating, nail-biting tension around and this year is unlikely to be different. In Europe a new format sees three mini-tournaments start at the semi-final stage on 24 March and conclude, five days later, with a set of knife-edge shootouts for a place at Qatar 2022. Should things go as expected, Portugal will face Italy in one of them; Wales could play Scotland in another and it would be heartening to see home nations’ interest next winter extend beyond England. Elsewhere, five African teams will emerge from a set of intense two-legged ties with a World Cup berth: the draw will be made this month and Mali, in particular, may fancy a first qualification. Further play-offs pitting an Asian side against a South American team, and Concacaf representatives against one from Oceania, will take place in Qatar during the summer. May – Championship shakedown Fulham and Bournemouth have threatened to run away with the Championship at times and, as a later point will cover, that is no good thing. But they have serious competition from Blackburn, outsiders at the start of the season but third by a whisker after taking 22 points from the last available 24. The picture below that is reliably chaotic, with teams as far down as 12th-placed Sheffield United harbouring realistic ambition of a play-off push. All of life can still be found in England’s second tier for now, even if it appears at perpetual risk of becoming more stratified than ever. If the tension does dry up at the top then not to worry: in the nether regions Wayne Rooney’s Derby, deducted 21 points and operating with a patchwork squad, have embarked on a run that puts them in with a shout of what would surely be the most unlikely survival of all time. May – Can Arsenal Women turn back the clock? Time was when Arsenal Women had a stranglehold on the domestic game. They had won seven straight titles when the Women’s Super League was inaugurated in 2011 and immediately added two more. But they have won only one of the subsequent eight and were not expected to topple the lavishly resourced Chelsea or Manchester City this time around. With the halfway stage looming, though, they lead Emma Hayes’ side by four points while City are nowhere. Under Jonas Eidevall, a young Swede who increasingly looks to have been an inspired replacement for Joe Montemurro last summer, Arsenal have improved significantly and played some delightful attacking football. It goes without saying that Vivianne Miedema, second in the division’s scoring charts, has been fundamental to their title charge; she is out of contract in the summer but, should Arsenal be able to roll back the years to reign supreme once more, it might become easier to make her stay. July – England hosts Euro 2022 Only three Uefa Women’s Championships have been staged since England last hosted the tournament but Euro 2005 feels a lifetime away. Back then the hosts finished bottom of Group A and the final between Norway and the eventual champions, Germany, drew just over 21,000 fans to Ewood Park. Nowadays England, semi-finalists in 2017, can be considered among the favourites and should be spurred on by a tide of euphoria. The stock of the women’s game has never been higher and should only grow this summer, with no serious competition in the footballing calendar. Euro 2022 was originally Euro 2021 but found itself moved back in the calendar after Covid-19 meant the men’s Euro 2020 was postponed; it will be worth the wait, with 10 venues around the country giving access to a wide distribution of fans, and if Sarina Wiegman’s team go all the way, the Wembley final will be the summer’s hottest ticket. July – Who will sign Vlahovic and Haaland? The two brightest young strikers in Europe will probably lead the summer’s transfer chatter. In an ideal world Dusan Vlahovic would stay at Fiorentina, watch a successful team be built around him and cement a legacy akin to that of Gabriel Batistuta. But nobody with the 21-year-old striker’s potential is allowed to stick around outside the biggest clubs for long nowadays and, given he has rejected a new contract, he will almost certainly be with a Champions League big hitter next season. Vlahovic, who has scored 16 in 19 for a mid-table side this season, could plausibly fill a centre-forward vacancy – if there really is one – at Manchester City. Similar questions will be asked about Erling Braut Haaland, whose early-career feats have been even more remarkable. If Vlahovic’s inevitable departure speaks wearily of football’s modern-day market forces then the idea Haaland must leave Borussia Dortmund to better himself is even more grim and it seems likely he will take his phenomenal goalscoring capacities to England or Spain for 2022-23. August – 30 years of the Premier League The second weekend of the 2022-23 season will mark three decades since a Premier League ball was first kicked in earnest. It has become a runaway train, cannibalising the vast majority of its competition, and the brutal truth is that even its lower-ranked sides can outspend all bar a tiny handful of their contemporaries elsewhere in Europe. The current campaign features 12 of those who were pioneers in 1992 and that does suggest a reasonable degree of mobility across the divisions has been sustained. But the more recent proliferation of yo-yo sides such as Norwich, Fulham and West Brom serves as a warning that diversity is becoming limited, as does the remorseless accrual of points at the top by Manchester City, Chelsea and Liverpool. The quality might be high but, after a year when its leading lights disgraced themselves by attempting to found the European Super League, there is little sign that the top flight has serious interest in helping the rest keep up. A welcome 30th birthday present might be a little humility and a dose of awareness that a healthy bigger picture would make the “product” even more attractive and less predictable. November – World Cup in Qatar A dozen years after winning the rights, Qatar opens its doors to the world amid the most jumbled-up feelings. Everyone loves World Cups: they are precious and all the more so for taking place every four years, which is one of the reasons Fifa’s attempt to rush in a biennial format must be stopped. But this one takes place under an inescapable cloud and the best thing football can do is try to strike a balance. If this tournament has anything like the on-pitch drama of Russia 2018 and Euro 2020, it will be the most entrancing of diversions as the nights get colder and shorter; the profile that brings must count for something, though, given the long list of human rights concerns that have dogged the hosts. National teams can take a stand, as Denmark have in pledging to step up their public criticism of Qatar over the coming months. The real test for this World Cup, far beyond its entertainment value, will be whether it has lived up to its own billing as a force for lasting good.“How have we managed to sign this guy?” There is something a little vague and apocryphal about the oft-quoted reaction of one unnamed Celtic player to seeing Virgil van Dijk in training on his first day at the club. Van Dijk was 22 at the time and a late bloomer, rejected as a teenager by Willem II (“too many limitations”), and more recently by Ajax, PSV Eindhoven and Feyenoord, with two decent seasons at Groningen to recommend him. Celtic paid £1.74m up front for Van Dijk. And exactly how this came to pass remains an excellent question, one that speaks to Van Dijk’s own slow-burn rise from the fringes of Dutch football; through the meandering promise of his early years (as the journalist Simon Kuper put it: “a first-rate player with a second-rate career”); to that period in 2018-2020 when he stood apart in his own clear, clean space as the best pure defender in world football. Sunday’s trip to Stamford Bridge is an anniversary game for Liverpool and Van Dijk. It is almost exactly four years since he made his debut against Everton at Anfield, four years since the club paid what was then a world-record transfer fee for a defender. At the time Van Dijk had never played in the Champions League knockout stages and had made only 16 appearances for his country. This was a signing based on that same sense of double-take, the rare combination of poise, physical ease, leadership vibes and a feeling that this was a footballer yet to reach out into the outer limits of his own grand talent. As Van Dijk prepares for what will be – or would have been, or might still be – a mouthwatering personal battle with Romelu Lukaku, a centre-forward yet to score in six games against him, another very distinct quality stands out. Van Dijk is that genuinely rare thing: the magic-bullet player, the jigsaw-piece signing, a moment of one-man team-completion. Football really doesn’t work like this very often. The variables, 11 to the power of 11, are too vast. The parts are constantly shifting. There is, every time you walk out, an opposition to contend with. One perfect part to complete the perfect team: it just doesn’t happen. At which point, enter Lukaku, who was also signed, or so it seemed, as the final stroke in some evolving masterplan. Here was a European champion team with one gapingly obvious, forehead-slapping, football-for-dummies hole in its frontline. Just add one cutting-edge centre-forward. Then press go and stand back. How’s that working out, anyway? It is extraordinary to think that in early September Lukaku could be seen fist-pumping and badge-slapping back at the Matthew Harding end as the Chelsea fans sang his name, fresh from terrorising the Aston Villa defence. Fast-forward three months and Lukaku has just given a startlingly tin-eared and, as far as Chelsea’s fans are concerned, bizarrely cold interview to Sky Sports Italy: talking in awed tones of his dream of signing for various other clubs, of his undying love for his previous employers, and threatening to leave because the system isn’t to his liking. There is no doubt that footballers think these things all the time, that they talk like this in private. Football isn’t a cobble-close community fairytale. Players do not ruffle the hair of small boys and girls as they catch the bus to the ground and feel deep in their souls the ties that bind them to these distant global super-clubs. But talking like this in earshot of the people who pay to watch, who just want to dream a little, to believe against all logic that this feeling is mutual, is brutal stuff. He could miss Sunday’s game because of it. However this situation ends up resolving itself, Van Dijk to Liverpool looks a little more stark, even more of an outlier. It is worth remembering that Van Dijk turned up at Anfield looking a little underdone, three weeks since his last game for Southampton. He scored against Everton in that debut game but his next two were defeats by Swansea and West Brom, with Van Dijk a little fogged and rusty, whirling around at times like a man being menaced by a cloud of midges. Steadily something settled. By the end of January there was already a sense of some precision-cut shape being eased into its groove. As winter dissolved into spring, Liverpool set off on that freewheeling run of slightly wild attacking football that took them all the way to the Champions League final, but which also featured 11 clean sheets. The next two and a half years would bring a Champions League triumph, a Club World Cup gong, a league title and, in Van Dijk’s case, a rare sense of sustained, frictionless excellence; a period bookended by Jordan Pickford’s horrendous assault on his knee in October last year and the nine-month hiatus that followed. Two things stand out now about the golden age of Virgil. First, that Liverpool team was prepped and ready, the system grooved, primed and easily understood. Jürgen Klopp’s centre-backs are asked to defend one on one, to cover the full-backs, to curate that risky high line. Van Dijk was ready for this, a pure central defender in the classic mould, with a rare ability to take defensive soundings, to obsess over details of covering and blocking and marking. Van Dijk has always had a curiosity about systems, a thirst for learning that his earliest coaches noticed. There is a theory he benefited in the long term from the lack of high-end academy training in those slow-burn years, from the need to work the game out for himself. It is a quality he will require once again as he enters another phase in his career. It is still a little startling to witness the moments of everyday slackness that have crept into Van Dijk’s game as Liverpool have struggled to regain their own champion pitch, as the midfield in front of him has shifted, as Van Dijk has searched to regain his explosive agility. This is perhaps a little unfair. The balance in any team is impossibly delicate. The combination of forces that led to the magic bullet years has been replaced by another haystack of variables. And the default option in football is always uncertainty. Scroll down the list of all-time Premier League signings, through Grealish-Lukaku-Pogba-Maguire-Sancho-Pépé-Arrizabalaga-Havertz, and only one player in the £70m-plus bracket – the Dutchman at No 6 – has managed to escape that sense of make do and mend. If the trip to Chelsea, the duel manqué with Lukaku, tells us anything it is that the golden age of Virgil really was a startlingly rare exception.A strange and unfamiliar noise swirled around the Emirates Stadium at full-time. Strewn across the turf in red and white was the human rubble of a crushing injury-time defeat. Takehiro Tomiyasu and Ben White were out cold. Thomas Partey, hand outstretched, helped them up. And as Arsenal’s exhausted players slowly winched themselves to their feet, the four sides of the ground rose to applaud them: a gesture of approval, pride, perhaps even defiance. Yes, Arsenal had lost to Manchester City again. Yes, it had been largely self-inflicted again. But somehow this did not feel like the other times. To anyone who lived through the really bad years, who has seen this stadium at its most toxic and disenchanted, who has seen successive generations blanched and brutalised, this in itself was bracingly new. We can argue about how good this Arsenal side actually are, about whether their recent boost in form is any more sustainable than the ones that preceded it. But right now there is a little halo of hope around this club, and it feels like the most fragile and the most important thing at once. Let’s deal with the game first: Arsenal were brilliant for 45 minutes at the start and resolute for 30 minutes at the end with 10 men. Even so, we cannot ignore the fact that, at the pivotal points of the game, City held their nerve and Arsenal lost theirs. This, as much as anything they do tactically or technically, is the true mark of City’s current dominance over English football: no team since Alex Ferguson’s Manchester United has been as adept at leveraging their aura and reputation. Referees get flustered. Opponents do stupid things. The margins for error are so fine that every moment becomes a pressure-point, a high-stress situation, a potential disaster in the making. Does Gabriel clean out Gabriel Jesus and earn a second yellow if he isn’t painfully aware of City’s speed on the counter? Does Granit Xhaka tug desperately at Bernardo Silva’s shirt if he isn’t wary of Silva’s ability to squirm through the tiniest gap at light speed? This is the privilege of champions: even when you’re not at your best, oppositions still have to pretend you are. And yet, for a decent chunk of the game, Arsenal offered the rest of the league a blueprint. They put on a show. The full-backs camped out in the City half. Partey and Martin Ødegaard had the keys to the midfield. Most importantly they had a goal to show for their efforts and it came from the player who more than anyone seems to embody the spirit and basic tactile pleasure of this Arsenal side. There is perhaps no better noise in English football right now than the sound a crowd makes when Bukayo Saka gets the ball in space. Something strange is happening with Saka at the moment. It’s not simply that he’s a brilliant player in a rich vein of form, although he is and he is. It’s more the way people respond to him: Arsenal fans, England fans, rival fans, children, grandparents. People love this guy. People who don’t even like football like Saka. Hard-bitten fans in the Clock End who have spent decades screaming abuse at anyone bold enough to step within earshot melt like marshmallows in his presence. Consider: this is a guy who misses the crucial penalty in a European Championship final, England’s first major men’s final for 55 years, and somehow he doesn’t get turned into a pizza advert or a punchline or a meme. Instead, people love him more. People clutch him to their hearts a little tighter. People feel for him. One could see it in the way he disappeared into the crowd after scoring his goal: a sea of bobbing heads and screaming faces and phone screens. Grown men and women ruffled his hair and shouted things into his ear and threw their arms towards him, hoping to touch the hem of his garment. On one level, it was merely the futile first goal in a 2-1 defeat. But as a moment of pure human connection it was the most powerful moment of the day, and by extension the year. Saka has already survived. He knows what tough times feel like. Last year he was Arsenal’s player of the season in a thoroughly joyless, depressing campaign. Doubtless there will be tougher times to come too, particularly in this flawed and improving young team still trying to find its place in the world. But somehow in the bear pit of modern football, a place that feels angrier and more balkanised with every passing week, this 20-year-old man still manages to turn out every week and show us a little joy. And that, at least, is something worth holding on to.Good news has been in short supply for England’s cricketers during this Ashes series but some arrived for Mark Wood in the shape of the new year honours list: his father was awarded an OBE for services to pensioners for his work at the Department for Work and Pensions in the north-east. Derek Wood was also among the first to sample his son’s speeds in the back garden at home in Ashington. “We had to stop when I was about 13,” the younger Wood told me six years ago, shortly after winning his first Test call-up. “We had a long thin garden and I’d charge in from the conifers at the back. I kept hitting him on the head.” Fast forward to the present day, with England 3-0 down and only a whitewash to dodge, and it is hard not to sigh when pondering Wood and a missed opportunity. Jofra Archer has been a loss, no question, but for the first time in a long time – perhaps going back to Frank Tyson in 1954-55 – England still pitched up in Australia with the fastest bowler on either side; certainly the fastest in a generation of Englishmen and, in terms of sustained pace in Test cricket, the fastest in the world. The latter may surprise a few people but the analysts CricViz only have it one way: since the start of 2020 no Test quick can top Wood’s average speed of 88.2mph (142kph), while his pace on this tour, averaging 90mph (144.91kph), is the highest by a visiting bowler to Australia since Hawk-Eye data began in 2006. Four years on from a 4-0 Ashes defeat that highlighted England’s need for speed, here it is. But for how long? Wood’s physical hardiness has been questionable in the past but since lengthening his run-up and smoothing things out at the end of 2018 he is now consistently producing eye-popping numbers on the speed gun. Yet with him about to turn 32, his best work coming overseas and with white-ball specialism clearly an option in his final years, the sight of Wood in the whites of England haring in should be savoured. Pace isn’t everything. A skiddy trajectory from 5ft 11in makes the ideal length a tricky balancing act on these surfaces and five wickets at 32 does not jump off the page (even if he beat the bat with such regularity in Brisbane as to wonder whether he had walked under ladder). Nevertheless, seeing David Warner’s back leg twitch at the point of release, Steve Smith nick off for 12 at the Gabba to a smart plan executed at 91.6mph or Marnus Labuschagne similarly edging behind for one at the MCG, there have been flashes of what might have been for England had the batters not wilted. “We know we haven’t scored the runs to help the bowling attack,” said Jos Buttler. “Woody has bowled fantastically well and any time he has the ball in hand it’s exciting. When someone can bowl at that pace – and from ball one he’s up at that mark – it’s an incredibly exciting asset to have in your team. “At times he’s bowled without much luck as well. At Melbourne he could certainly have picked up more wickets for how well he bowled. “But yeah, we know that we haven’t scored the runs to give the bowling attack that sort of base that we’ve needed. Having kept to him, he is bowling as quick as ever and he looks fantastic.” Chris Silverwood is a good man and the head coach deserves sympathy as he sits in isolation in Melbourne. Cricket-wise there have been too many errors on this tour, however, and the decision to rest Wood in Adelaide after bowling 25.1 overs in the first Test must sit among them. Silverwood and Joe Root spoke of a need for Wood to play a fuller role later in the series, but this was just one example of their failure to grasp that defeat in the second Test meant there would be no “later in the series”. The phrase “it’s a marathon, not a sprint” kept coming out, when England simply had to burst out of the blocks. Having bowled in only two innings through the inadequacies of others, and with six days of rest between matches boosted to eight thanks to the battergeddon in Melbourne, there seems little reason why Wood will not play in the fourth Test at Sydney, starting on Wednesday. The SCG has replaced the MCG as the pitch that causes the most angst locally these days and, if as flat as expected, his clear point of difference may well be required to transcend conditions. Elsewhere, however, England have slightly painted themselves into a corner, dropping Rory Burns and Ollie Pope in Melbourne and seeing little difference in the result. The former has been working with Graham Thorpe in the nets to calm down his idiosyncratic movements but may not get an instant return unless concerns over Haseeb Hameed’s retreat prove too great. Should England decide they want to look to the future, it may also be that Jonny Bairstow at No 6 drops out after just one Test. If so, Dan Lawrence could find himself the latest reserve asked to play without meaningful preparation. Australia will be forced into at least one change with Travis Head, their leading run scorer of these Ashes, having tested positive for Covid-19. All other results came back negative and logically Usman Khawaja should feature at the ground where his 171 four years ago ground England into the dust. There are further decisions to be made, with Scott Boland perhaps dropping down now Jhye Richardson is fit again, despite the 32-year-old’s remarkable figures of six for seven at the MCG. Ultimately, Pat Cummins and his head coach, Justin Langer, do not have to stress too much, even if their batters will still need to be on high alert when Wood starts charging in from the conifers once more.Jos Buttler says a chastening Ashes campaign – for himself and England – has not diminished his desire to remain a three-format player in international cricket. The 31-year-old wicketkeeper-batter has long since established himself as one of the leading limited-overs players in the world but so far his tour of Australia has continued a 56-cap Test career that, while not without highlights, is yet to live up to the same billing. Though a determined 207-ball rearguard on the final day of the second Test in Adelaide was commendable after coming in on a pair, dropped catches in that match and a rash dismissal during England’s first-innings collapse at the MCG have contributed to the 3-0 scoreline that leaves the tourists playing for pride in Sydney and Hobart. Asked if he still wanted to pursue Test cricket given his young family, his obvious market value in the less labour-intensive shorter formats and the recent decision by South Africa’s Quinton de Kock to become a white-ball specialist, Buttler said: “It’s certainly my ambition. I don’t think I’d have put as much into it as I have done if it wasn’t. “I have fantastic family support – they’re very supportive of me and my career, and make a lot of sacrifices for that. It’s certainly maintained my drive and ambition to try and play [Test cricket].” On De Kock, Buttler said: “That’s Quinton’s own personal situation. As a huge fan of his, I’m disappointed that he’s at that stage. I love watching him bat, keep wicket and play Test cricket. I commend him for making a decision that’s right for him. But I feel I’ve got that support and in a place where I want to try to make it work.” As such, the next two Tests represent an important time for Buttler and a number of teammates who want to secure places on the tour of the Caribbean in March. Who will select that squad is not a given, with the position of the head coach, Chris Silverwood, under review while he isolates in Melbourne due to a Covid case in his family. Adam Hollioake will not be able to join the setup because of a close contact testing positive but England are yet to report any cases within the camp beyond the three coaches and four family members who tested positive this week – Australia similarly cleared their latest tests after Travis Head’s diagnosis – and Buttler believes there is a determination among his teammates to put on a performance for those left behind. He said: “One thing is we’re massively in it all together. We live it all together and we want to play well for each other. It’s frustrating for Chris he’s not here with us – another complication of the tour – but we’re certainly very united. “There is an overriding sense of disappointment and frustration with the situation we’ve found ourselves in. We certainly don’t want to be a team to lose 5-0.” On the off-field distraction of Covid cases, he said: “A year ago, when something like this happened, it was a much bigger shock and more of a worry. At the moment it’s still a worry and waiting for a Covid test is a bit like playing rouletteat the minute.[But] we need to be in a place where Covid doesn’t stop everything. There will be positive cases throughout the tour. We hoped that wouldn’t be the case, but we’re trying to manage it as best as possible.”“This doesn’t feel different to a death,” Elise Christie says as she tries to build a new world without speed skating, the sport that has consumed half her life. Christie, a three-time world champion who also won 10 European titles, announced her retirement last month after a year which nearly took her life. Christie had been hoping to compete in her fourth Winter Olympics next month but, feeling let down by the sport and struggling with injury and her mental health, she says: “It’s like you’ve lost the most important thing in your life and the thing that you gave everything up for.” Christie sits on a sofa at home in Nottingham and rubs her face gently. Earlier this evening she had broken the news to me, in a revelation she has not discussed publicly before, that loss and trauma drove her into a depression where she attempted to take her own life last April. We have also discussed how she is now trying to summon the resilience that usually defines her. “I spent 16 years hammering away, trying to win constantly and it’s taken its toll,” the 31-year-old Scot says softly. Over the past year, because none of her world or European titles made any money, Christie had been working at Pizza Hut while chasing her Olympic dream. But last week, adjusting to her skating retirement, Christie started a different job. She now works part-time behind the till at a Shell garage as she considers two offers to transition to a different Winter Olympic sport. It means that, while still hurting after everything she has been through, she is defiant and hopeful. “I don’t want to die. I don’t want to leave everyone behind and create pain for them. I want to carry on. Sport has improved vastly with mental health the last four years, and so has the world, but it wasn’t enough for what I had to deal with [last] year. I don’t blame anyone. I’m not angry at anyone. I was at one point, like anyone would be, but I’m not now.” A few months ago Christie released her autobiography, the powerful and aptly named Resilience, in which she described 2018 as the hardest year of her life. She entered the Winter Olympics that year as a multiple world champion, but Christie had been persuaded to skate when she was injured in an effort to win more places for her team. Catastrophe struck at the Games in South Korea when she was disqualified controversially, twice, and taken out on the ice and penalised in her final attempt at winning a medal. Christie’s tears went viral but, months later, the devastation ran far deeper. Her long-standing coach, Nick Gooch, was made redundant, her Olympic gold medal-winning boyfriend, the Hungarian skater Shaolin Sandor Liu, left her by text and Christie’s self-harming escalated. A few days after Christmas in 2018 she was so distressed that, in the midst of self-harming, she injured herself so seriously that she feared her life was in danger. In shock, Christie suddenly did not want to die. A friend rushed her to hospital where she was told how lucky she had been. Three years have passed since then. Before Christie discusses the future she revisits the fresh turbulence of 2021 in a typically raw and open way. She remembers that last April, after terrible pain in her personal life, “I spiralled quite badly and I had an attempt [to take her life]. It was very difficult … I would never class myself as suicidal because I don’t think I’ve ever felt I want to die. But I was in too much pain. A friend sent me a message that night. He said: ‘Are you OK?’ I was like: ‘Not really.’ I don’t know how he knew, because I didn’t say [she had just attempted to take her life], but he had a feeling. He patched me up and helped me.” What would have happened if he hadn’t rescued her that night? Christie shakes her head. Was it worse than her hospitalisation in 2018? “A lot worse. But I thought it wouldn’t be good for all the people who follow me for mental health if I just gave up like that.” Christie looks up. “Since then, I’ve not self-harmed. It’s been steady progress but I wasn’t supported very well through it in terms of skating. I was lucky to have my family around me. They live in Scotland but they came to see me. I had my job at Pizza Hut and they were really good with me, giving me time off, and being understanding. So it was a very difficult period and there were points where I didn’t know if I’d be able to function again. But I was like: ‘Nah, we need to change this.’ That’s why spreading awareness about mental health has become such a purpose for me. What happened with skating this year is crap but I’ve still got something else I’m focused on. I’m working towards helping lots of people.” Now, after almost an hour of talking about 2021, which also included a car accident and the recent death of her grandfather, Christie smiles grimly when I say it sounds like an even harder year than 2018. “It’s hands down topped it,” she says wryly. “It’s been a lot worse. But it taught me so much because if I had been unlucky and gone that day [when she tried to take her life eight months ago], I’d have left so many people in pain. I’d have also given up the legacy I believe in, which is to help people with their mental health, and show them you can get through this stuff. “So I’m not sitting here having not qualified [for the Olympics] and losing my career, and going: ‘I’m better off dead.’ I’m trying to show people something different, Yes, I’m struggling. I’m gutted. But I don’t want to be in that dark place again. I’m working on other things now, progressing my life in other ways, focusing on sorting myself out.” The saga of her non-qualification for the Olympics is complicated but, until she slipped into the depression that nearly ended her life, Christie had been skating effectively. “I’d been keeping up with the boys and racing them really well. But after I had some time off [in April] I’d asked for a clinical psychologist and wasn’t given one. I was then told that until the clinical psychologist was involved, I can’t train. It ended up being four weeks. Eventually I spoke to my sports psychologist who I’ve known for years. He is ace and I said: ‘We need to do something because I’m missing too much.’ So he and the doctor helped get me back on the ice. I still didn’t have a clinical psychologist but I said: ‘I’ll push all this to the side and get stuck into training.’ It was going really well up to August.” Christie then began cramping in her legs and feet and “it was like I was seizing up while skating. The problem was we had three weeks until the qualifiers. So there was no time really to sort anything. Mentally I’ve pushed something to the side. I’ve now got this physical illness pushed to the side and I’ve been made to skate through the qualifiers. The national trials were in September and I got really sick. I should have pulled out of trials but I was told if I did I won’t get selected for the Olympic qualifiers. I had to race very unwell and got my arse kicked at the trials. “Between the trials and [Olympic] qualifiers someone above me decided I had to have a psychological evaluation. I don’t know if it came from a good or a bad place. I just know I’ve asked for a clinical psychologist all year. I’m now being doubted. Is my physical illness actually in my head? I’ve got 10 days to get this done or I don’t go. So I didn’t train during that time because I was so stressed.” Christie passed the evaluation but she was still battling injury. “I didn’t skate the last week [of the qualifiers] as there was no point. I felt gutted, because I was thinking: ‘Why is my own country stopping me going to the Olympics when I’m racing on a badly sprained ankle after being ill all year?’” *** In her book Christie writes of how, before the 2018 Olympics, she was doubted when she complained of an injury. She was finally given a scan and Christie was elated when it was proved she had torn a tendon. “I was injured but I wasn’t insane,” she says. She saw herself as being a “medal machine” that needed to race to secure funding for her sport. “If you look at Arianna Fontana [the Italian speed skater who won eight Olympic medals], she’s had a much longer and much more successful Olympic career than me. But she did not achieve some of the other stuff I’ve done and she was never put under the same level of pressure. She could take time out, reduce her training load and still have income. But every year I had to be the one that kept the programme funded – or that’s how it felt to me. “It was the same at every world championships. I didn’t enjoy my medals. It was like: ‘I’ve got to medal to keep my funding.’ When I got that injury in 2018 the best thing would have been not to send me to the next two qualifiers, because I was already qualified. But instead it was another five weeks’ training on a leg that had a significant tear. It meant I was in agony at the Olympics.” Christie has suffered extensively and, having been bullied as a schoolgirl, she was raped at the age of 19. She did not feel strong enough to report the crime, even after the man who assaulted her apologised much later. Christie spoke about the rape for the first time in her book and she says: “I wasn’t speaking about it to get a conviction. I spoke up to create awareness.” The conviction rate of rapists is shockingly low and Christie shakes her head again when asked if she believes this will soon change. “No. Even if I went through it again today I couldn’t honestly say I’d do anything about it – not when people accused me of lying after I spoke about it.” It’s difficult for Christie in the wake of her retirement but, with fresh hope and light in her voice, she says: “I still feel passionate about sports and training. I’ve been offered three options. One of them isn’t an Olympic sport, and two are. I’d still love to have the Olympic medal, though, because that’s my passion. But if I can help one person with mental health issues that would mean more than any medal. So I’d rather take my time now to heal and look after myself and help others with their mental health.” Resilience by Elise Christie is published by Reach Sport In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support for rape and sexual abuse on 0808 802 9999 in England and Wales, 0808 801 0302 in Scotland, or 0800 0246 991 in Northern Ireland. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.html You can contact the UK mental health charity Mind by calling 0300 123 3393 or visiting mind.org.ukRaven Leilani is the author of Luster, a kinetic, award-winning debut novel whose fans include Barack Obama. Now published in paperback, it tells the story of Edie, a young black woman trying to find her way as a painter in New York City. After getting fired from an entry-level publishing job and ground down by the gig economy, Edie moves in with her middle-aged white lover, his white wife, and their (adopted) black daughter in the suburbs. Cue a plethora of razor-sharp, caustically funny insights into the politics of race, gender and desire. Leilani, 31, spoke from her home in Brooklyn. What inspired Luster? I wrote it when I was in NYU’s MFA [creative writing] programme, which I’d come to with an entirely different novel. When my teachers asked me whether I had any real intention behind my project and I couldn’t articulate an answer, I started Luster. I wanted to write something that felt honest and urgent. Because I was trying to scrabble together pages, I wrote in a panic and edited myself emotionally less, so the work came from a more vulnerable place. And some of the most vulnerable subjects for me, I guess, are art and intimacy and failure. How much did you plot in advance? I was flying by the seat of my pants. I knew I was going to write about painting and I absolutely knew that I was going to write about Edie’s experience in the middle of this open relationship, but the book kept changing as I was writing. It still feels crazy to admit this, but Edie was supposed to die. I’m so glad she didn’t! She is such a unique force. Were there any other literary characters who helped you glimpse who she might be? She came from an intensely personal place, but there existed in the ether these threads that introduce women who were allowed to fail and be fallible, to be sexual and make mistakes and even be complicit in their own subjugation. Toni Morrison’s Sula is a crucial text in rendering the interior lives of complicated, contradictory black women. Brit Bennett’s The Mothers is a more contemporary example of a woman’s ambivalence and fallibility. Candice Carty-Williams’s Queenie made me feel able to write candidly about sex and yearning. There’s a moment when Edie fantasises about being hit and then lets her older white boyfriend do just that. How have readers responded to this? It comes up a lot. It’s one of those things where I think, in 20 years, will I look back and have qualms? But currently I’m happy I was able to represent her pleasure on the page without judgment. It’s a deeply tricky thing to write about a black woman who is inviting this kind of violence. I wanted her to be a character who has the freedom to find pleasure where she finds it, but it is, too, still quite intertwined with the fact that because she is a black woman, she experiences these loud and soft violences in her public life, and choosing it in her private life is a way to exert that control that she doesn’t have elsewhere. Sex scenes can be tough to write. What guided you? I wrote them in a way that was sensitive to the private logistics and the trial and error of longing, and of developing – especially as a young woman – an informed idea of what your pleasure looks like, and how to ask for it. Authentic desire can feel so fraught as a woman, right? Yes, extremely. You have to undo a lifetime’s worth of conditioning. The moment I turned 30, my algorithm began showing me Botox. No shaming – what makes you feel beautiful makes you feel beautiful – but that programming is so deeply insidious that the work of saying simply “this is what feels good” is still extremely radical. Luster captures so acutely the grind of keeping body and soul together while trying to make it in a city like New York. That was one of a handful of missions I had going into the book – not to represent the starving artist, the exhaustion, as a romance. It was important to me to talk about the roaches and the mice as opposed to the mythic end of the journey where you have the apartment in the sky. You worked for five years in between finishing college and starting your MFA. What kept you going creatively? I was mostly concerned with how to pay my student debt and how to pay my rent. I would come home after work and write. I remember the first time I started submitting poems – I got nothing but rejections. But I love writing so much, I was happy to be living in those worlds that I’d made. Has it always been that way for you? Yes. I was a solitary kid and when I started writing around eight or nine, that was how I’d create my own fun. It still is. Tell me about your own connection to painting. My brother was a painter, and I inherited my love of that medium from him, but I felt I couldn’t be good enough as fast as I wanted, and so for a while I didn’t paint at all. During the pandemic, I started again, and I remembered why it was my first love. Are your paintings abstract or figurative? Always figurative. I am obsessed with the body – with the parts that are pleasure and the parts that are pain and dysfunction. If you can draw a hand, it’s a superpower. Do you have a writing routine? My brain doesn’t turn completely on until the sun goes down, so I write at night, in bed – where I am right now – and to music. What was on your playlist for Luster? A ton of disco. I had my Diana Ross, my Sister Sledge, but I also listened to Metallica. I crave that abrasive wall of sound – it really centres me both in life and on the page. You’ve worked in publishing. Would you say the industry’s finally getting to grips with its representation problem? I’d say that we’re making strides but there’s still a lot of work to be done. I am optimistic, partly because we have so many writers from marginalised groups working who are incredibly brilliant, incredibly fresh and incredibly hungry. If I asked you to name a black female writer who deserves more recognition, who would you choose? Asali Solomon, whose book The Days of Afrekete came out recently. I don’t know that she’s underrated but I feel like she is an absolute genius. I love what she does formally and what she manages to emotionally pack into very few pages. What books are currently on your bedside table? Sometimes I Trip on How Happy We Could Be by Nichole Perkins, The School for Good Mothers by Jessamine Chan, How Music Works by David Byrne, and Sheila Heti’s new novel, Pure Colour. If ever I’m stuck, I’ll pick up a book that will give me fuel. Heti’s How Should a Person Be? is a text I refer to a lot. What did you read as a child? The kind of books that you read when your parents just see you reading and they don’t realise what you’re reading. So Anne Rice, Laurell K Hamilton, the really sexy gothic vampire fiction – I loved those. What writers working today do you most admire? I would say both Zadie Smith and Katie Kitamura. I’ve been lucky that they are heroes and I’ve also got to learn from them as teachers. Luster is published in paperback on 6 January by Pan Macmillan (£9.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyEngland reported a record high daily total of 162,572 new cases on Saturday, up from 160,276 the previous day, official data showed. The government said a further 154 people had died in England within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have now been 174,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. The data normally also includes Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, but did not on Saturday because of differences in reporting schedules over the new year weekend. The figures come as the health secretary, Sajid Javid, said further restrictions in England must be a “last resort” and that the UK must prepare to “live alongside” coronavirus in 2022. But he said the record-breaking wave of the Omicron Covid variant would “test the limits of finite NHS capacity even more than a typical winter”. It came as an NHS leader warned the next few days would be crucial in the fight to reduce the impact of the Omicron variant. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents health trusts, said staff were working “flat out” and that the NHS was under “arguably more pressure” than this time last year. In a thread on Twitter, he wrote: “NHS preparing for worst &amp; hoping for best. Staff flat out, esp. given level of staff absences. We will need to ask them to perform flexible heroics again if hospital Covid numbers continue to rise. “We can’t keep doing this. Long-term NHS capacity issues must be addressed.” He said the booster vaccination campaign was “significantly more resource-intensive”, and staff absences meant the NHS was “beyond full stretch”.A 15-year-old boy stabbed to death in Croydon, south London, on Thursday has been identified as Zaian Aimable-Lina, the Metropolitan police said. Police have said Zaian was from the local area. A 15-year-old boy who was arrested on suspicion of murder has been released on bail to a date in late January. Zaian’s death marked the 29th teenage homicide in London in 2021, surpassing the 27 seen in 2017, which had been the highest in recent years. The previous peak was 29 teenage homicides in the capital in 2008. However, within minutes of Zaian’s death a 16-year-old boy died after being stabbed to death at Philpots Farm Open Space in Yiewsley, Hillingdon, west London, making him the 30th teenage homicide in the capital in 2021. Met Police Commander Alex Murray said: “I am deeply saddened by every single homicide this year, and greatly concerned by those that have been teenage killings. Each one is a tragedy leaving behind heartbroken families and distressed communities. “My thoughts are with the victims and all those impacted. They are not statistics, not just numbers, they all have families, and they all should have had their lives ahead of them. “They and their families have been robbed of something precious and we should all be doing everything we can to stop this,” he said. He added that the police were devoting “huge resources” to preventing homicides and said the Met was not “complacent” about knife crime. Chief Inspector Richard Leonard said: “My thoughts continue to be with Zaian’s family and friends as they cope with this tragic loss. My team are continuing to work around the clock so that we can give Zaian’s family the answers they deserve. “Zaian’s death has sent shockwaves through the local community and London as a whole. He was just 15 years old and had his whole life ahead of him, and we need the community to work with us to bring those responsible to justice.” In a Twitter thread, the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, said he was “devastated” by the deaths of the two boys and he was in close contact with the Met “who are doing everything possible to bring those responsible to justice”. He said the safety of Londoners “will always be my number one priority” and he was “investing record amounts in policing to put more officers on the streets and creating positive opportunities for almost 100,000 young Londoners, helping to divert them away from violence”. He added: “I refuse to accept that the loss of young lives is inevitable, and will continue to be relentless in taking the bold action needed to put an end to violence in our city.”Dan Reeves, who won a Super Bowl as a player with the Dallas Cowboys but was best known for a long coaching career that included four blowout losses in the title game with the Denver Broncos and the Atlanta Falcons, died Saturday. He was 77. A statement released by his family through former Falcons media relations director Aaron Salkin said Reeves died of complications from dementia. The statement said he died “peacefully and surrounded by his loving family at his home in Atlanta”. “His legacy will continue through his many friends, players and fans as well as the rest of the NFL community,” the family said. Reeves was a versatile player who played a key role in the Cowboys becoming an NFL powerhouse in the 1960s under Tom Landry, but his own coaching career – stretching over three teams and 23 seasons – is where he truly left his mark on the league. Including a stint with the New York Giants, Reeves totaled 190 coaching victories – the ninth-most in NFL history. But he was never able to win the biggest game of all, going 0-4 in the Super Bowl, each of them by double-digit margins. Reeves, Marv Levy and Bud Grant are the only coaches to lose four times in the Super Bowl. “Dan Reeves leaves a lasting legacy in our game as a player and coach,” said Falcons owner Arthur Blank, who fired Reeves from his final job in 2003. “His track record of success in Dallas, Denver, New York and Atlanta over several decades speaks for itself, marking a long and successful life and career in football.” Just 37 when he took over as coach of the Broncos in 1981, Reeves acquired quarterback John Elway in a trade and built a team that made three Super Bowl appearances, earned six trips to the playoffs and won five AFC West titles over his 12-year tenure. But Denver never won an NFL title under Reeves, losing 39-20 to the Giants in the 1987 Super Bowl, 42-10 to Washington in 1988 and 55-10 to the San Francisco 49ers in 1990 – still the most lopsided loss in the game’s history. Despite those defeats and a bitter parting after the 1992 season, Reeves is remembered fondly in Denver, where the Broncos inducted him into their Ring of Honor in 2014. “Coach Reeves set the foundation for the Broncos’ decade of dominance in the 1980s and championship tradition for years to come,” the team said in a statement. “Reeves coached the Broncos with integrity, character and toughness along with sincere appreciation for his players and coaches.” After a falling out with Elway and allegations that the star quarterback had colluded with then-offensive coordinator (and eventual head coach) Mike Shanahan to force a change, Reeves was fired by the Broncos. He took over the Giants in 1993 and led the team to the playoffs in his first season, but that would be his only postseason appearance in New York. He was fired after four seasons but quickly caught on in 1997 with the Falcons, a homecoming of sorts for the Georgia native. In just his second season with a franchise that had experienced little success, Reeves guided a team known as the ‘Dirty Birds’ to a 14-2 record in the regular season and their first trip to the Super Bowl. After Reeves underwent emergency heart surgery, the Falcons beat the heavily favored Minnesota Vikings in an overtime thriller at the Metrodome to claim the NFC championship, prompting the coach to attempt the arm-flapping dance that star running back Jamal Anderson and other players had made the team’s trademark. “My guy!” Anderson wrote on Twitter. “I am going to miss DR, a first class human, and a most excellent coach. My thoughts and prayers are with (his wife) Pam, his family. A family man first. Respect &amp; love, RIP Coach Reeves!” Reeves again came up short of a championship, losing to Shanahan, Elway and the Broncos 34-19. Reeves engineered a trade that brought Michael Vick to the Falcons and made his final playoff appearance in 2002, when Atlanta became the first road team to win a playoff game in Green Bay. But Vick was injured during the 2003 preseason, and Reeves was fired after the team won just three of its first 13 games. He ended his coaching career – and 39 uninterrupted years in the NFL – with a record of 190-165-2. Reeves remained in Atlanta after his retirement, most notably serving as an adviser to Georgia State when it launched a football program that now plays in the Sun Belt Conference. Daniel Edward Reeves was born in Rome, Georgia, but grew up in the Americus, in the southwestern part of the state, where he played football, basketball and baseball in high school. Reeves attended college at South Carolina, where he was a three-year starter at quarterback from 1962-64 and also played baseball for the Gamecocks. Better known as a runner than a passer, Reeves was not drafted after college. He signed a free-agent deal with the Cowboys, who initially wanted him to play safety but wound up moving him to running back. Reeves emerged as one of the team’s key players just as the Cowboys were establishing themselves as the successful franchise that would become known as ‘America’s Team’. He started all 14 games at halfback in 1966, leading the Cowboys in rushing with 757 yards and eight touchdowns. Dallas made its first playoff appearance but lost to the Green Bay Packers in a 34-27 shootout for the NFL championship, missing a chance to play in the first Super Bowl. The following season, Reeves rushed for 603 yards and five TDs, again starting every game, as the Cowboys made another run to the playoffs. Again, they were thwarted by Green Bay one win shy of the Super Bowl, losing to the Packers on a touchdown in the closing seconds of the famed ‘Ice Bowl’ game at frigid Lambeau Field. A knee injury in 1968 limited his effectiveness, and Reeves played only a limited role the rest of his career. But Landry recognized his abilities off the field, asking Reeves to serve as a player-coach while runner such as Duane Thomas and Calvin Hill took on more prominent backfield roles. The Cowboys made their first Super Bowl during the 1970 season, losing to the Baltimore Colts on a last-second field goal, but finally won the championship the following year with a 24-3 victory over the Miami Dolphins. Reeves retired as a player after the 1972 season, becoming a full-time assistant on Landry’s staff. As a head coach, Reeves was known for his gruff, no-nonsense approach and an offensive philosophy that favored a physical running game. But he also coached two of the game’s most dynamic offensive players, Vick and Elway, defying those who labeled him as old-fashioned. With his distinctive Southern drawl, Reeves could be honest to a fault, such as when he spoke openly of the rift that led to his departure in Denver – and opened up a lot of old wounds – during the lead-up to the Falcons facing the Broncos in the 1999 Super Bowl. “There’s still a lot of hurt that won’t ever go away,” Reeves said. “You never will forget those things.” But Reeves rarely held grudges, even with members of the media that he had clashed with. In his later years, he would gladly take phone calls to discuss the issues of the day, once joking when a reporter identified himself, “OK, what did I do wrong now?” Reeves is survived by wife Pam, his high school sweetheart; children Dana, Lee and Laura; as well as grandchildren and great-grandchildren. Funeral arrangements have yet to be announced.In 1944, George Orwell got a letter from TS Eliot, a director at Faber, rejecting his political satire, Animal Farm. There were several reasons. First, it was not the right time. Also, said the creator of The Waste Land, “the effect is simply one of negation”. The poet took issue, too, with the wholesale disrespecting of pigs, since they were logically the “best qualified to run the farm”, being the cleverest. “What was needed (someone might argue) was not more communism but more public spirited pigs.” So, if some leading film critics watching Adam McKay’s Don’t Look Up (currently most-watched on Netflix) have hankered for a less satirical kind of satire, they are in distinguished company. TS Eliot might well have agreed with these reviewers that McKay’s savaging of a society too corrupt and deluded to save itself from an urgent threat to life on Earth, in the film’s case, a comet, could have been more cheerfully done. For instance, echoing Eliot on pigs, some of the more cartoonish leads could have been made more relatable. How about humanising lead villain Peter Isherwell (Mark Rylance being mesmerising), a creepy tech billionaire who, absurdly, intends to live forever? Meanwhile, McKay’s US president, the preposterous Janie Orlean (Meryl Streep) has appointed her dreadful son chief of staff. Why can’t these grievous weirdos with their silly dialogue be more like, say, Donald Trump, Mark Zuckerberg or Elon Musk? Even the obscure scientists (Leonardo DiCaprio and Jennifer Lawrence) attempting to convince an irresponsible leader and a clicks-obsessed media that the Earth truly is in danger, should, it’s been suggested, have been awarded intriguing personal journeys that would offset the more apocalyptic content. Implicit in the professional objections to this film – it is “angry”, “smug”, “sad”, “shrill”, “condescending”, “scattergun”, “disastrous”, “insensitive”, “unfunny”, “depressing”, “heavy handed” but also “toothless” – is the proposal that, if McKay wanted to jolt disengaged people into noticing, even talking about, collective complacency on global warming, some sort of gentler, more immersive approach could have been more effective. How would that work? Maybe imagine Swift’s A Modest Proposal if he’d cut all the heavy-handed sarcasm, stopped droning on about mirrors and considered how baby-eating made vegans feel. Or something akin to political cartoons minus any dung, pigs or insensitive face/body caricature. That the film has, however, an approval rating of 77% against the critics’ 55% (on Rotten Tomatoes) could indicate that the public has a relatively higher tolerance for angry, broad, insulting etc material, at least when this feels like a justifiable response to current politics. Though it helps if it’s funny, biting, gleefully performed by an incredible cast and finally pulls off a massive tonal shift, from propulsive near-farce to stillness and regret. “We really did have everything, didn’t we?” says DiCaprio’s scientist. “I mean, if you think about it.” In fact, Don’t Look Up ends, for all its irksome negativity, by telling us something unusually positive about satire. Maybe, for all the repeated announcements of its death or terminal feebleness, this genre can still be revived, as now, into vigorous, exhilarating life? After the disparaging reviews, scientists in particular responded that the film’s depiction of their discipline being ignored and trivialised rings utterly true. Peter Kalmus, a climate scientist, called it “the most accurate film about society’s terrifying non-response to climate breakdown I’ve seen”. “Keep it light, fun,” the fictional scientists are exhorted, before discussing imminent extinction on a Fox-like chatshow. And “couldn’t it have been more light, fun?” is a fair summary, by coincidence, of the advice for McKay from detractors. Events dictated that his film offers an additional, aka “scattergun”, commentary on leaders who in the pandemic favoured President Orlean’s approach to an incoming health catastrophe: “sit tight and assess”. No satirist could have anticipated Trump’s bleach advocacy or his fellow fantasist Boris Johnson’s view of the virus as an adversary to be, when he chose to acknowledge its existence, “wrestled to the floor”. McKay’s film doesn’t feature a hilariously vain government figure shagging in the face of extinction: sensitive audiences would probably have thought a Hancockian character either in poor taste, heavy handed or simply unbelievable. “It was already a crazy script but I would say reality out-crazied us by like 10 to 15%,” McKay said. “Well done, reality.” It’s largely because of this routine out-crazying by the usual suspects that satire became the subject of repeated obituaries. But given the professional bollocking administered to McKay’s death-defying production it could also be that old-school, Swiftian satire – that is, not nice and not nuanced – has itself dwindled in appeal. Supposing, as Professor Robert Phiddian has argued, contemporary academics find the conventions of satire frustratingly arbitrary and simplifying, it could be that certain viewers similarly bridle at a film whose authorial intention lies beyond productive dispute. Though shamelessness in public life hasn’t, as it turns out, rendered satire impossible, it hardly invites subtle treatment. How, with the recommended light touch, is a satirist supposed to ridicule a leader who, performing press-ups or other tricks for free editorial, counts his absurdity as a superpower? Nor, given Boris Johnson’s likely successors, is his departure likely to reset satirical standards to those prevailing when Dr Strangelove, with which McKay’s film has been disobligingly compared, was having fun with double entendres. Liz Truss, Johnson’s would-be replacement, was posing in scarlet costumes and an eye-catching new pompadour well before Meryl Streep was accused by critics of overdoing it as the scarlet-suited, over-ringleted President Orlean. Actually, when compared with Truss’s patriotic cheese oration (“That. Is. A. Disgrace”), President Orlean’s rhetoric as she, too, poses as saviour of the free world, is notably sane. Truss won’t be impossible to satirise, but any attempt that isn’t at least unkind, angry, shrill, insensitive, preposterous and depressing is likely to look like PR. • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnistAlmost two years on from the emergence of Covid, people have watched borders shut, businesses close, lockdowns lengthen and case numbers climb. A widespread disruption – skewing lives socially, professionally and financially – has prompted people to reconsider the choices they make, who they are, and how they fit in the world. Guardian Australia asked readers to share how the pandemic made them rethink their life. More than 100 reader responses show that emerging from a universally-felt disruption is a new normal. And that new normal looks different for everyone. Scott, 52, Sydney The pandemic has made me consider working differently. I started my working life in an era where long hours, long weeks, accumulating unused sick days was almost a way of measuring yourself. A badge of honour. Take a tablet and soldier on. I ask myself more now: who benefits from that stoic drive for being productive? I can see moving back to the country and working to live, not living to work. Ara, 50, Perth It has brought into stark relief that I don’t need a lot of stuff to be happy, but I do need connection to people, even if it’s virtual. This has led me to shop less, start working through clearing things I don’t need from my house for it to be more minimalist and tidy. I’ve fallen ever so in love with my local library. Means I read more and spend less on books. I’ve also realised that health is number one. Rosie, 26, Melbourne/Auckland I quit my depressing job two months into 2020 lockdown. A job that was morally and ethically against my values. An environment that affected my mental health and self-esteem … I found a job that I loved within a month and have never looked back. The pandemic pushed me to make my life … meaningful again, and I believe I’m on the right track. I made two films, have a wonderful, loving partner, am living overseas for the first time and have set the bar high professionally. I never want to work for something I don’t believe in, and I have discovered the drive to achieve this. Ali, 57, Canberra Yes, being largely restricted to my house [during] lockdown left me feeling stiff and sore and old. So I decided to get back into running, something I did some years ago but gave up when I moved houses and lost my routine. Starting very slowly using the Couch to 5k app, I gradually started running again and am now running 4-5km most days. It’s great! I listen to podcasts as I run and it’s a time when I feel free and relaxed. I’m much more mobile and I feel like my body is 10 years younger again! No more sore knees walking up and down the stairs! Sandra, 81, Queensland It has reminded me that it is important to seize the moment, to enjoy what is available for me to enjoy. Enjoy the moment, take my pleasures where and when I can find them. I am doing more cooking and more baking than I have in years and loving it. I have also realised, belatedly, that a relatively solitary existence is just fine, particularly with the companionship of a good dog. Joy, 30, Sydney It has reminded me that the most important things in life are our health, our experiences and our friends and family. Work doesn’t matter so much and it’s not worth the stress. It’s a miracle we’re even here to begin with, so why would we want to spend most of our lives working just to make someone else richer? The standard path of: get a degree/trade, find career, get married, buy a house, have children, retire and then finally be free and travel or do what you always wanted to do … seems like a waste of a human life to me. It’s a never-ending hamster wheel that’s tricking us into chasing things that we think will make us happy, but happiness already exists inside of us. We don’t need to reach any of those levels to attain it. It seems futile. I now want to focus on enjoying my life and being a better person. I guess I want more freedom in my life and to be less tied down by a career. I would also like to live a more sustainable life so that I am doing my best to leave the planet in a survivable condition for the next generations. I hope we see a massive revolution in the way we work and live that no longer exploits us or the planet. Katie, 48, Sydney It has made me want to pursue work that I actually like to do … I would like to be more in control of my own choices. I walk every morning now with my husband and the dog before work. This has meant we have talked lots, we fight less, it has been great for our marriage! I would love to keep this. Less transport is so much better. Less sitting in a dark, cold office. So much nicer to see the green outside my own house. David, 54, Hobart I found myself wanting to find out more about my own self. I was needing to work out contentment and for me I found that could only come from inside. I starting reading books and I found texts like Intimacy and Solitude by Stephanie Dowrick and Total Meditation by Deepak Chopra. I also Read 1Q84 by Murakami … I find my inner self the most important thing now. I try to engage with the outside world on my terms. Edilia, 63, Sydney I realised that caring for everyone else but not taking care of myself was a really dumb thing to do. I have come to the realisation [that] this is my life and I want to live it differently. It will not be the long-term vision I had prior to the pandemic, but it will allow me to be valued as an individual. I have embraced new opportunities at full throttle where I continue to use my talents for the greater good and people appreciate what I do. Jake, 28, Cambridge It has emphasised the importance of family. I want a more balanced life, where family and career can go hand in hand. Previously I had thought that there always needed to be a compromise, however I now realise that with the advent of virtual learning and virtual working, it is more possible than ever before. Physical health has become more of a priority. Having more opportunities to work from home has been a great change of pace and I have seen it manifest in my physical health too (less hair loss, weight management etc). Ronald, 83, Western Australia I loved travel … I had plans to visit Morocco, Turkey, Spain and other parts of Africa and Europe. But I now accept the reality. So, getting to see more of Australia is now more important than seeing other countries. And I really want to spend more time in the bush. I have become more healthy and fit during the pandemic. I have increased my time at the gym … I go for longer jog/walks several times a week. I go to a sauna and spa a few times a week. And I use the treadmill a few times a week … I just want to enjoy things. Mentally, the pandemic has increased my reading, music listening, watching old movies and new TV series. Juliet, 53, Wollongong Simplifying my life and prioritising what is important to me has been good for my mental health. Less wine is good for my health. Saying no to socialising when I don’t want to is good for my mental health. Reading has been a great pleasure. Now I will spend an entire weekend indoors reading, not feeling the need to go anywhere. Intellectual stimulation feeds my soul and I am getting this from books. I have realised that other forms of indoor entertainment such as podcasts and good TV can be far more stimulating than going out. I would love to quit my job. I realised that I spent a lot of money on things that I did not miss at all, such as eating out … I really don’t need new clothes, or as many trips away. I really embraced being a homebody … I have really embraced my introversion. I now only want to spend money on outings that I am passionate about. Lockdown really made me appreciate where I live, near the beach. Considering that one of the allowed activities was exercising, I realised that a walk in nature is something not to be taken for granted. I have realised that the simple things in life are the best. The pandemic was not a negative experience for me. It’s made me prioritise what is important in my life.After more than two decades as a subeditor, I know language is alchemy and there’s no exact prescription for good writing. But I also know grammar is central. Meaning can turn on a single word or punctuation mark and a little fine-tuning can prevent ambiguity and inconsistency. Just read this sentence and tell me grammar doesn’t matter: After being whipped fiercely, the cook boiled the egg. Almost everyone has a grammatical pet peeve, and commas attract a lot of attention. When they’re needed, they’re essential – compare “I’m sorry I love you” and “I’m sorry, I love you”. But haphazard or unwarranted commas can be distracting and even misleading. Jonathan Franzen wrote a whole essay on the “irritating, lazy mannerism” of comma-then, as in: “He dims the lamp and opens the window, then pulls the body inside.” I sympathise but I’m personally more irritated by comma-but and comma-too. The Guardian style guide is clear on the Oxford comma (comma-and in a list); it’s definitely not needed in “he ate ham, eggs and chips”, although an essential distinction between these two sentences: I dedicate this book to my parents, Martin Amis, and JK Rowling. I dedicate this book to my parents, Martin Amis and JK Rowling. But I give punctuation champion Lynne Truss the last word: “Don’t use commas like a stupid person. I mean it.” On non-comma matters, F Scott Fitzgerald thought the exclamation mark was “like laughing at your own joke” and should be done away with, and Milan Kundera claimed he once left a publisher for trying to change his semicolons to full-stops. (I’m a big fan of the semicolon; it encourages the reader to linger a little longer on the thought before it.) And Proust cringed at cliches: “It’s quite true that the sun is on fire at sunset, but it’s been said too often.” Some of my personal bugbears come up more regularly than others. “Compared to” is different from “compared with”. Use the first if you want to liken one thing to another, the second to contrast. And that reminds me: in my book “different from” is correct, “different to” and “different than” are not. “Who” and “whom” are both needed but not interchangeable. The same goes for less/fewer, like/such as and imply/infer. And there’s a simple rule for “that” v “which”: if the sentence needs the (restrictive) clause the word is connecting it to, use “that”, otherwise use “which”. (Some of the grammarati point to an irregular restrictive “which” that can replace “that” but I’m yet to be convinced.) If all of this sounds like so much nerdy nitpicking, I concede some arcane rules are just begging to be bent, although I would still argue you have to have a good reason. The Guardian says it’s fine to split infinitives because “stubbornly to resist so can sound pompous and awkward”. Ditto on ending a sentence with a preposition. And while strictly plural, “data” can take a singular verb, as in “data shows”, because how often do you come across “datum” anyway? Common sense should come into it, and so too aesthetics. Think of how the prose flows. If a sentence is long and inelegant, change it. Sometimes I use an en dash or even parentheses to break up a string of commas. And don’t dangle a verb at the end of the sentence, far from its subject. “How high will emissions from the project proposed for the northern region and the existing plants in the south and west be?” is just ungainly. Words should sound right too. If you’re torn over whether the possessive of James takes a second S after the apostrophe – James’s – say it out loud. To quote Joan Didion, grammar is “a piano played by ear”. Some words have lost their meaning from overuse. I once edited out three appearances of “iconic” on a single day; “unforgettable”, “infamous” and “emblematic” stepped in admirably. Others become unusable if they’re loaded with an agenda. Politicisation is dangerous. As Orwell said: “If thought corrupts language, language can also corrupt thought.” Language matters. It matters how laws and treaties are written, and whether coal is “phased out” or “phased down”. It matters that news is truthful and that literature inspires. Language reflects – and can even define – who we are. So a little respect, please, for its rules. • Susan McDonald is a news producer for Guardian Australia and a freelance writerIt’s totally understandable why someone you were once inseparable with might fade out of your life. People move cities, change jobs, have children. Or maybe they embraced the paleo diet while you embraced the cronut craze. Inevitably some friendships are made for a stage of life rather than a lifetime. The forgotten birthdays and missed milestones make it seem all the more impossible to make contact out of the blue. Sure, Facebook tells you they danced at their cousin’s wedding or started a podcast about flightless birds, but liking the odd post is not quite the same. I’m not suggesting suddenly spamming all your old friends, but some stand out from the past. If you find yourself stalking them on social media (exes excluded) or reminiscing about the good times you had together, that’s probably the best gauge that there’s something there worth revisiting. So if you’re under 40 and the idea of actually talking on the phone sounds terrifying, how about sending them an email or a DM? The new year is a good time to say “Hey, long time no see, how about that pandemic?” No need to explain the extended silence; it’s safe to assume they feel the same way, so it’s unlikely they’ll hold it against you. There’s no particular script to follow. I prefer to skip the boring stuff like career moves or house upgrades and jump into more important achievements, like mastering the DIY lockdown haircut and coming fourth in the work step competition. Think of whatever bound you together in the first place and you’ll figure out what to say. If in doubt, talk about Squid Game. It could be a one-off interaction, or it could spark a back and forth like old times. Either way, it will remind your old friend that despite the time passed, you still value them.Thinking about a road trip to celebrate the end of a very challenging year? Jump on your bike, charge up the EV, crunch those petrol-driven gears to visit one of Australia’s regional art galleries. And remember to check ahead for Covid-safe entry rules. Geelong Gallery: Archie 100: a century of the Archibald prize On now, until 20 February 2022 The best available paintings in 100 years of the Archibald prize have been gathered together in one exhibition, called Archie 100, and it’s a treat. Mostly the annual Archibald portrait show features a handful of standout works and lots of fair-to-middling ones (and that’s being kind), but for Archie 100 the selection process has chipped away at a lump of rock to reveal a Michelangelo’s David inside. OK, I’m exaggerating, but there’s no doubt that from the original 6,000 portraits, curator Natalie Wilson has given us a superb selection, capturing not just likenesses but most importantly the essence of the sitters. Many of them are not prize winners (because the judges often get it wrong) but iconic images abound, including William Dargie’s Albert Namatjira, Natasha Bieniek’s Wendy Whiteley, John Brack’s Barry Humphries as Dame Edna and a self-portrait with Chuck Berry, of all people, by Vincent Namatjira, Albert’s great-grandson. If you watched Finding the Archibald, hosted by Rachel Griffiths on ABC TV last year, you’ll know all about it, but nothing beats seeing the real thing. Also on offer are special associated events including late-night viewing on selected Friday nights and a curator talk. Archie 100 is an Art Gallery of NSW touring exhibition, and Geelong Gallery is its only Victorian venue. Ballarat International Foto Biennale Last call for road trippers and locals alike, on now until mid-January, (exact date varies according to venue). This central Victorian city is a sort of outdoor living museum: experience some of the world’s most impressive high-colonial architecture, gradual decline and latter-day resurrection, in real time. It’s all there in the fascinating streetscapes – many of which you can check out while moving between dozens of venues presenting exhibitions as part of the Ballarat International Foto Biennale now extended through to January. Chief among them is the Art Gallery of Ballarat, an imperious reminder of the pretensions of gilded-age worthies’ attempts to transplant the European academy to the antipodes. Solidly in control, conservative and rich, who would have thought the very edifice they built in their own image would one day host three exhibitions of photography, each one presenting a view from below and outside that once was unthinkable. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter The working class and provincial Beatles, so pivotal to the changing of the guard that made the British empire instantly old-fashioned in the 1960s, are centre stage in Linda McCartney: Retrospective. Two hundred photographs taken between 1965 and 1997 document pop culture’s heyday and beyond. Iconic faces and intimate family shots feature in a selection curated by the former Beatle Paul McCartney and his and Linda’s daughters Mary and Stella. Hurry, as it ends January 9. Also on show, the view from the pink parts of the globe that powers both Robert Fielding’s Miil-Miilpa (Sacred) and Anindita Banerjee’s Ondormohol. Fielding, an Aboriginal artist with Afghan heritage, has built an impressive body of work exploring, or rather celebrating, the energising presence of Tjukurpa (the Dreaming) in the lives of his Yankunytjatjara elders and the landscape around his community of Mimili, deep in the APY lands of far northern South Australia. The elders are portrayed in close-up, elegiac black and white photos that capture deep-grained faces vigorous with the inner light of traditional lore. Landscapes are captured in an experimental process that incorporates the sun and earth as elements of the image, over-written with statements of ownership and belonging. Banerjee, from Kolkata in Bengal, India, has been struck by the familiarly evocative high-Victorian architecture of public spaces in her adopted city of Ballarat. Personal connection to both Bengal and Ballarat, two outposts of empire, one crumbling, the other restored to magnificence, prompts questions of how we view “here” and “there” and our relationship to time and the world around us. All three exhibitions provide a nuanced, lively counterpoint to the imperial narrative embodied in the city’s – frankly, often oppressive – architecture of empire, within which their photographs work their transgressive magic. Alice Springs Desert Mob 30: celebrating 30 years of Desert Mob exhibitions. Re-opening January 11 until 1 June 2022. Since 1991 the annual Desert Mob exhibition at the Northern Territory government’s Araluen Arts Centre in Alice Springs has been a showcase for community-based art centres in central Australia. These tiny communities in some of the remotest locations in Australia have been the engine drivers behind a blossoming of Aboriginal desert art into one of the world’s most dynamic contemporary art movements. Invention, risk taking, sheer beauty and an assertive self-confidence rarely found elsewhere – as the world is (at last) acknowledging. And each year the Araluen Arts Centre acquires the best of them for its own collection of desert art. All the big names are included of course, but one of the biggest thrills of Desert Mob is the discovery of unknown artists displaying, “fully formed artistic expression based on deep cultural knowledge and sovereignty”, as Araluen Arts Centre puts it. Right now until 1 June 2022 you can see the best of the best, a retrospective selection of 50 works from the Araluen’s Desert Mob collection. IMHO there isn’t a more thrilling and exciting collection of recent desert art anywhere in the world – and it encompasses all art forms from carving, printmaking and sculpture to painting, textiles and fibre. Often refreshingly raw and honest, it can be adventurously avant-garde, and great fun too. If you’re looking to take some art home with you while in the Alice don’t miss the selections at Raft artspace and Talapi – two long-established galleries that deal directly with community-based Aboriginal owned and run art centres, so you can be sure of ethical provenance when purchasing. Or come back again in September 2022 and breathe deep the heady perfume of spring gum blossoms in the pristine desert air as you head to the next Desert Mob annual exhibition. That’s your chance to buy from dozens of art centre stalls and the main exhibition too. Matt Dickson is a Hunter Valley-based arts writer. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityNetflix Mother/Android Film, US, 2022 – out 7 January Ah yes: the old “rise of Skynet” chestnut, whereby all androids in a dystopian future declare themselves sick of doing our dirty work and rebel against the lousy humans who enslaved them. Director Mattson Tomlin dusts off an old genre that has had some memorable recalibrations recently, such as Ex Machina, I Am Mother, Blade Runner 2049 and the Westworld reboot. Chloë Grace Moretz plays Georgia, who discovers she is pregnant on Christmas Eve. Soon androids (which in this future are modelled to look like humans) start raising hell, prompting her to embark on a perilous journey to a safe place in Boston where she can give birth. Action and carnage ensue. When the droids go crae-crae, one assumes humans no longer have an ability to send a Windows error report. The horror! Archive 81 TV, US, 2022 – out 14 January Here comes another new take on a creaky old genre: the found footage production. Loosely based on the popular podcast of the same name, with Australian horror bigwig James Wan on board as producer, Archive 81 follows an archivist (Mamoudou Athie) who, while repairing damaged VHS tapes, pieces together the story of a documentary film-maker (Dina Shihabi) who investigated a dangerous cult. It’s probably best not to expect a masterpiece, as the found footage genre is only occasionally interesting: for every Cannibal Holocaust, The Blair Witch Project or Chronicle, there are a zillion forgettable low-rent productions. But hey, stranger things have happened, as has Netflix’s smash-hit show Stranger Things – one of its directors, Rebecca Thomas, helming four episodes of Archive 81. Honourable mentions: Spider-Man: Far from Home (film, 4 January), The House (TV, 14 January), Ozark season four (TV, 21 January), Munich: The Edge of War (film, 21 January), Snowpiercer season three (TV, 25 January). Stan The Tourist TV, UK/Australia, 2022 – out 2 January Pulse-pounding action, cliffhanger-filled plotlines and a core mystery involving a character stranded in the outback who cannot remember his own name let alone what he is doing here – now this is a great way to kick off your television watching in 2022. Irish actor Jamie Dornan (AKA Christian Grey from the Fifty Shades franchise) gets plonked in the middle of heat-frazzled Woop Woop, playing “The Man” – an antihero who suffers severe amnesia after being rammed off the road by a psychopathic truck driver. Why are the locals so … mean? And what did he do to deserve such rudeness? All will eventually be revealed after many a twist and turn. Directors Chris Sweeney and Daniel Nettheim establish a foot-to-the-pedal pace that doesn’t let up across the show’s six-episode arc. Gold Film, Australia, 2022 – out 26 January Jamie Dornan isn’t the only famous, hunky foreigner to be plonked in the arid outback – there’s also heartthrob Zac Efron. Directed by actor Anthony Hayes, who made the very good 2008 Adelaide-set drama Ten Empty, Gold is a survival thriller about a man (Efron) who discovers a big chunk of the good stuff and, of course, executes a plan to keep it. Any outdoors-set film about greedy hard-bitten men pursuing wealth at the potential expense of life, limb and sanity is inevitably compared with The Treasure of the Sierra Madre – which is a little unfair given John Huston’s 1948 film is a rolled-gold (so to speak) masterpiece. We’ll see how Gold stands up, but one thing we know for sure: it will never get old to see good-looking foreign actors left to fry in the Australian sun. Honourable mentions: Upgrade (film, 2 January), The Raid 1 and 2 (film, 4 January), Enemy (film, 7 January), That Damn Michael Che (TV, 12 January), Wolf Like Me (TV, 13 January), The Iron Giant (film, 15 January), Unforgiven (film, 15 January), Melancholia (film, 20 January), Mandy (film, 21 January), He Died with a Felafel in his Hand (film, 25 January), Jasper Jones (film, 27 January), Lantana (film, 27 January). Amazon Prime Video The Tender Bar Film, US, 2021 – out 7 January The latest George Clooney-directed film is a 70s-set coming-of-age drama presented in a postcard-looking retro aesthetic. Adapting JR Moehringer’s 2005 memoir, Daniel Ranieri plays JR as a child, with Ben Affleck as his Uncle Charlie and Christopher Lloyd as his cranky grandfather. Lloyd has been doing the angry old man shtick for what feels like an eternity; he even seemed old and nutty in the Back to the Future movies despite the actor then being only in his late 40s and early 50s. Shane TV, Australia, 2022 – out 25 January Any documentary about Shane Warne has a lot of important ground to cover, including the cricketer’s appearance in Advanced Hair advertisements, his fondness for durries and his extraterrestrial-themed reinterpretation of the theory of evolution. Oh, there’s also Warne’s huge influence on cricket and his presence in Australian media as one of our most influential sport celebrities. Amazon Prime Video’s documentary claims it presents an “extraordinary untold story” that offers new ways “to understand the man behind the legend”. Honourable mentions: F9: The Fast Saga (film, 1 January), Red Dog: True Blue (film, 5 January), Happy Feet (film, 6 January), Hotel Transylvania 4: Transformania (film, 14 January), The Lobster (film, 15 January), The Hitman’s Bodyguard (film, 19 January), As We See It (TV, 21 January), Inglourious Basterds (film, 26 January). Binge Peacemaker TV, US, 2022 – out 13 January The opening credits sequence of James Gunn’s new superhero series shows the titular hero and others dancing on a soundstage lit up with pink and blue lights. It’s hard to imagine a more fitting scene to summarise Gunn’s approach to caped crusader stories – his party-loving vibes making them feel like fun soirees (see also: Guardians of the Galaxy, The Suicide Squad and the underrated Super). Peacemaker continues where The Suicide Squad finished, even beginning with a “previously on The Suicide Squad” recap. This will limit the show’s broader appeal while satisfying fans of that film in particular. The series fleshes out the hero’s backstory and subsequent adventures, which involve him arguing with random people, evading assassination attempts and hanging out with his pet eagle. The Cleaning Lady TV, US, 2022 – out 5 January An early scene in The Cleaning Lady reveals that protagonist Thony De La Rosa (Élodie Yung), who is working as a cleaner in Las Vegas, is actually a brilliant, quick-thinking doctor. Coming to America from the Philippines, seeking a bone marrow donor for her very sick young son, Thony struggles to make ends meet, fighting for the future for herself and her family. This is difficult enough before she finds herself caught up in organised crime. This show features a very strong performance from Yung, whose presence has a solidifying effect, binding the drama together. Honourable mentions: Mad Max: The Road Warrior (film, 1 January), Mad Max: Beyond Thunderdome (film, 1 January), Harry Potter 20th Anniversary: Return to Hogwarts (TV, 1 January), The Constant Gardener (film, 3 January), Searching for Bobby Fischer (film, 5 January), Lost in Translation (film, 7 January), Pulp Fiction (film, 7 January), Saturday Night Fever (film, 8 January), Euphoria season two (TV, 10 January), Last Cab to Darwin (film, 15 January), Flashdance (film, 15 January), The Dark Tower (film, 29 January), American Beauty (film, 30 January). SBS on Demand Araatika: Rise Up! Film, Australia, 2021 – out 26 January Larissa Behrendt has carved out a niche as an interesting cine-essayist making documentaries that explore subjects highly significant to Indigenous Australian culture – most recently After the Apology, about the continued removal of Indigenous children from their homes, and now Araatika: Rise Up!, which follows a group of NRL players as they create the First Nations equivalent of a haka. The doco gets a tournament movie-esque trajectory when Wesley Enoch, artistic director of Sydney festival, invites Dean Widders and others to perform their soon-to-be-invented dance on a world stage, leaving no doubt as to what the final moments of Araatika will be. It is a film that’s softly uplifting and told with a warming sense of optimism. Delicatessen Film, France, 1991 – out 1 January French directors Jean-Pierre Jeunet and Marc Caro (AKA Jeunet and Caro) made some amazing films – among them 1995’s The City of Lost Children and also the spectacularly weird and gnarly Delicatessen, a black comedy revolving around a butcher who murders humans then sells them as cheap meat. Grim subject, maybe, but it’s a visual delight from start to finish; if you don’t believe me, check out its innovative opening credits. Honourable mentions: The Apartment (film, 1 January), Angel Heart (film, 1 January), Mud (film, 3 January), Sextortion (TV, 6 January), Crisis (TV, 13 January), Nasdrovia (TV, 13 January) The Place Beyond the Pines (film, 22 January), Sorry for Your Loss seasons 1 and 2 (TV, 27 January). ABC iView ABC iView’s summer binge ABC iView has launched its “Summer Binge” program, with key strands including family, drama and comedy. Movie-wise there’s a wealth of Australian films in particular – highlights include The Mule, Lore and Strictly Ballroom. Plus there’s loads of international titles such as Buried (starring Ryan Reynolds as a man who’s buried alive), Train to Busan (a ferociously good South Korean horror film) and The Florida Project (a moving drama set in and around a crummy hotel not far from Disney World). Disney+ The Big Short Film, US, 2015 – out 7 January Adam McKay’s latest satire, Don’t Look Up, has divided audiences and critics, some seeing it as an unmitigated disaster while others appreciate it as a thinly veiled commentary on the climate crisis. His GFC-themed comedy The Big Short was, for what it’s worth, more lauded and less divisive, celebrated as a fine example of making an accessible film out of dry and potentially uninteresting subject matter. A huge cast – including Ryan Gosling, Brad Pitt, Melissa Leo, Marisa Tomei, Margot Robbie and Christian Bale – help the medicine go down. Steve Carell delivers one of several memorable analogies when he describes mortgage bonds as “dog shit wrapped in cat shit”. Fantastic Mr Fox Film, US, 2009 – out 7 January Like Adam McKay, Wes Anderson is a big-name director with a new film that has recently hit screens: the charming but slight The French Dispatch. The highly distinctive auteur’s style is even more fastidious in animation than live action, evidenced in his irresistible stop-motion adaptation of Roald Dahl’s famous children’s novel. Fantastic Mr Fox follows the suave titular character (voiced by George Clooney) as he steals produce from his human farmers then deals with the fallout. Honourable mentions: The Simpsons season 32 (TV, 5 January), The Eternals (film, 12 January), The Hate U Give (film, 21 January) Marvel’s Hit-Monkey (TV, 26 January). Paramount+ The Gilded Age TV, US, 2022 – out 26 January Downton Abbey creator Julian Fellowes has moved from early 20th century Yorkshire to late 19th century New York for his new series The Gilded Age. Many essential elements remain the same: namely a focus on extreme wealth (the show being set in NYC high society) and loads of lovely and lavish costumes. Marian Brook (newcomer Louisa Jacobson, who is Meryl Streep’s daughter) moves to the New York home of her aunts and gets caught up in a war between her family and some very loaded neighbours. Yes: there will be top hats and corsets. Honourable mentions: Five Bedrooms season three (TV, 1 January) Gossip (TV, 5 January), The Panthers (TV, 13 January), A Quiet Place II (film, 14 January).As clouds roll overhead, a salty mist lies low over the timid waves of Manly’s Shelly Beach. Despite grey skies, the protected stretch of sand in Sydney’s northern beaches thrums with locals. “This area is an aquatic reserve,” Damien McClellan, founder of tourism company EcoTreasures, tells our tour group. “If you look behind you, you’ll see sandstone cliffs.” McClellan points across the water to jutting, weathered rock faces, with layered, tan ridges. “Sydney’s sandstone coast is beautiful,” he says. I nod along with the tour group in agreement. We are standing at the headland, looking over bays and beaches lining the coast of Sydney’s north. Cabbage Tree Bay is closest. Sheltered by its reef and rocky geography, the bay does not get pummelled by surf, making it perfect for a snorkel or dive. It is where our tour group is heading for a guided lesson in the former. First, we struggle into wetsuits. Then we learn how to enter the water. “You’re going to look over your shoulder and walk backwards down the ramp,” McClellan tells us. “Then dunk yourself under.” It is my first time snorkelling. The water has been made murky by recent rains, and I’m nervous about lots of things, including (but not limited to) the possibility of mysterious creatures lurking deep, out of sight. We are fitted with flippers, goggles, and wetsuits. We are also given pool noodles to help keep ourselves afloat, so our flippers don’t disrupt any life on the sea floor. McClellan says, when fitting snorkelling goggles to your face, to press down until you feel a “suction” around the eyes. He also says to position the strap on the crown of your head, to ensure the goggles are secure enough for no saltwater to get in. But before fitting the goggles to your face, McClellan suggests rubbing a bit of baby shampoo to the lenses and then rinsing with water. This helps prevent your goggles fogging up while you swim. McClellan asks me: “Have you ever looked under the water before? How long did you look for? What did you see?” My answers: Yes (eyes closed, without goggles). Not for long. Not much. “Well, that’s just it,” he laughs. McClellan tells me that “too often”, people forget to pause, breathe, and simply “look” when in the water. “With snorkelling, you never know what you’re going to see,” he says. “And part of it is relaxing.” He explains that many people snorkel “for the disconnection”. As you focus on your breathing while underwater, you slow down. “When you do that, you see the most amazing stuff.” He is right. With your head and body submerged, all sounds are muted. We float across a sea meadow of thick, flowing kelp and algae which lines the left of the reserve. Translucent blobs called jimble float by. Earlier, a stranger in the change rooms told me to “not worry about those,” because “they won’t sting you”. Big, friendly groupers swim up to our faces and schools of small fish jet past, getting lost in the seagrass. Even on low visibility days like this, if you stay still and let yourself sway with the water long enough, you catch glimpses of purple rock beneath the kelp, unmoving on the seafloor. Once I’m accustomed to the water, my goggles and flippers feel less awkward, breathing through a snorkel becomes less laboured, and swimming comes with ease. McClellan recalls a German tourist once describing the experience as being among “the lungs of the ocean”. A perfect description, I think. After the guided tour, we return our gear to McClellan. I ask him about future snorkelling lessons, which cost $79 per adult on group tours. It is something I want to come back and do again, next time with my family. He says snorkelling is “easy entry”. “People get nervous about aquatic activities. But getting nervous is a great human feeling. And snorkelling is a good start at doing something adventurous. “It’s one of those cool activities that generations of family can do together … A lot of adventure activities are strenuous. But kids, parents, grandkids, grandparents can all snorkel.” Plus, it doesn’t take much to start. McClellan says purchasing a “good mask” will cost $80 or less. A wetsuit ranges from $100 to $200; though not essential, it will protect your body from the temperatures of the ocean, allowing you to stay in the water for longer. It will also “last you a decade”, McClellan says. “And the water is free.” The Cabbage Tree Bay aquatic reserve is McClellan’s top snorkelling spot in Sydney. He says conservation efforts made it so. “It has been a no fishing zone since 2002.” Since then, the area has flourished. The aquatic reserve is home to more than 150 species of fish, including protected and threatened species like weedy seadragons and elegant wrasse. Other aquatic reserves – like Clovelly and Fisherman’s Beach at Long Reef in Sydney – are great spots for beginner snorkellers. Outside of the harbour city, would-be snorkellers should look for spots with calm waters, and ideally some kind of conservation status – protection of marine biodiversity means there is lots to see. “This is an awesome example of good conservation management, and we can do better,” McClellan says of Cabbage Tree Bay. “Natural space like this – it is priceless.” This piece was supported by Destination NSW and EcoTreasuresThere’s a reason surfers like to keep their best breaks a secret. For decades, wave riders have blazed a trail into little-known coastal towns – and in their wake come the planners and developers. When Clint Bryan bought his house 40 minutes north of Perth city, one consideration was paramount: it had to be near his favourite surf break. And sure enough, his Kallaroo home is just five minutes’ walk from the Indian Ocean. The suburb name is a Noongar word meaning “road to the water”. But by the end of this summer, the waves that Bryan built his life around will disappear as the beach is redeveloped for the $252m Ocean Reef Marina. The marina is within the Marmion marine park and will transform 1.5km of coastline into shops, restaurants, boat moorings, a protected beach and new homes. The local state MP, Emily Hamilton, says it will create “thousands of jobs” and inject $3bn into the Western Australia economy. But it will also kill three surf breaks – Mossies, Big Rock and Pylons. The community group Save Ocean Reef says it will mount a legal challenge to the project because it is damaging the marine park, and a petition to construct an artificial reef has grown to nearly 2,500 signatures. Ocean Reef has been a surf destination since at least the 1950s, when it was little more than sand dunes and beach shacks, with just a caravan park nearby. “It’s like we are losing our playing field and the grassroots waves we learned to surf on,” says Bryan, a 43-year-old aviation rescue firefighter. “It’s the end of an era and our group [Ocean Reef Artificial Reef] just wants the opportunity to keep the surf community alive in our area.” The fragile magic of the break Sean Doherty, the chair of the advocacy group Surf Rider Foundation, says dozens of surf breaks around the country are at risk from development or sand dune work. “The pressure on the coastline is growing,” Doherty says. “For every surf break that is in some kind of danger, it is the result of some development nearby and it takes different forms.” In some places the developments are similar to those proposed for Ocean Reef. On 1 May almost 700 surfers paddled out to protest against the development of eco-cabins, a conference centre and a restaurant on crown land near a surf spot called the Farm in Killalea, south of Wollongong. Opponents say the state-funded development will impinge on a national surfing reserve that was declared in 2009, although the proponents of the development insist it will affect less than 2% of the reserve. But Doherty says the most endangered breaks now are Narrabeen and South Narrabeen on Sydney’s northern beaches, where construction has begun on a 7m-high 1.3km concrete seawall to save 49 properties, a club and a car park built right on the beach. While the seawall will protect homes from erosion and storm surge, it will also affect the flow of sand. For waves to form, the movement of sand, which helps shape the seabed, is crucial. Waves break when there is a reef or an accumulation of sand under the water, making it shallow enough for the incoming swell to rise up and form waves. In a natural system, sand blows in and out to sea or is brought in by ocean currents. But Doherty says sea walls, houses and vegetation are increasingly anchoring sand to the shore, taking away the lifeblood of waves. “The magic qualities that make a good surf break are quite ephemeral and quite easily disturbed and changed, often as a result of development,” Doherty says. The foundation says other breaks are also threatened by proposals for seawalls, including at Wamberal on the NSW Central Coast and Byron Bay, nine hours north, where locals have been fighting the suggestion for years. Last year, authorities were forced to install emergency sandbagging and close Main and Clarkes beaches at Byron, where erosion caused by natural processes, development on frontal dune systems and changing weather patterns have wreaked havoc. Further threats to surf breaks in NSW, Queensland, Victoria and Western Australia come from climate change, overcrowding and water pollution, the foundation says. A wealth of benefits In 2010, New Zealand became one of only two countries in the world to legally protect surf breaks (Peru is the other). In Australia, neither state nor federal environment legislation protects waves. Ana Manero, an environmental economist at the Australian National University who researches surfing economics, says the legal gap is a “massive blind spot”, but legislation is not the only way to defend surf breaks. “We don’t have environmental laws to protect surfing resources in Australia, but we have an economic argument,” Manero says. “Surfing brings a wealth of benefits, it makes places more desirable to live in, it is good for the local community, so the question is: when waves are impacted, how is that loss of value going to be accounted for?” There are an estimated 2.5 million recreational surfers in Australia and surf tourism expenditure was estimated to be about $91bn a year globally before the pandemic. “It’s crucial we understand the real value of surfing before we lose the many benefits it brings, not only for Australia’s surfing community but also for the hundreds of coastal towns where surfing underpins the local economy and lifestyle,” Manero says. For decades, environmental economics has been applied to quantify the value of recreation activities, such as scuba diving and fishing. Manero hopes surfing research will help inform better decisions when developments affect waves. “The problem for policymakers is that surfing’s ‘intangible’ benefits – such as mental health or social connections – are much harder to measure than jobs and retail sales – but I can tell you that they translate into millions of dollars,” she says. Manero says protecting waves does not mean leaving beaches untouched – there are many examples where the building of groynes, piers or sand dredging have improved the quality of waves. At Snapper Rocks on the Gold Coast, a “superbank” was unexpectedly formed after work to remove sand from the entrance to the Tweed River. “During the planning process, if we could put a little bit of brain power into understanding how waves form and the benefits they bring, then we would have a better chance of improving the wellbeing of coastal communities,” Manero says. “It is difficult, but it can be done.”It’s been more than 10 years since Alex Gaffey’s family home was used as a set for the movie Animal Kingdom, but the house still bears the evidence. “There was a scene that got cut from the film where someone was hacked up by a chainsaw in the bathroom,” Gaffey says. “So there was blood splatter everywhere. And because it was this grey Besser brick, the red food dye and tofu chunks were stuck in the wall.” “I remember after the film was done, the art directors and assistants were scrubbing it out with toothbrushes and stuff. There’s still a few little spots left where we’re just like ‘oh, that’s Animal Kingdom’.” Gaffey was a teenager when his Melbourne home became the main set for the grisly 2010 crime drama, recruited after a location scout dropped a note in their letterbox. A cast and crew of around 70 spent a month there filming, shooting death scenes while the Gaffey family lived around the happy chaos. The shoot temporarily transformed the home – and the lives of the Gaffeys. Their furniture was removed and replaced by items sourced by the art department. To prevent continuity errors, the batteries in their clocks were taken out and any props – giant bongs on coffee tables included – had to be left exactly where they were. When the crew shot at night, the family were put up at hotels. For their trouble, the Gaffeys were paid about $1,000 a week – a relatively small sum as the shoot was on a tight budget. They didn’t mind. “It was awesome,” Gaffey recalls. He remembers running home from school each day, excited to see what they were filming that afternoon – and even snagging work experience on the set. One of his jobs was to run traffic cones outside early each morning, blocking off space for the crew to park their trucks. The Gaffey family aren’t alone: many Australians loan out their properties to big productions. The reason real homes appeal to film and TV crews is simple: “Finding a house that meets the brief is quicker than constructing a set in a studio,” says location scout James Doherty. Animal Kingdom went on to win an Academy Award nomination and sweep Australia’s AACTA awards. But not every local production is destined for such acclaim – in the mid-2000s, the video version of self-help book The Secret was filmed at the Melbourne family home of then-teenager Tom Pitney. He remembers the windows of their Deepdene home being blacked out, big lights being positioned “everywhere” and hordes of crew members running around. Doors were taken off hinges and fake walls constructed to make rooms look smaller. As it was for the Gaffey family, their furniture was taken out and replaced. It was an exciting swarm of activity that, miraculously, left no trace. “When they were there, the whole house was trashed,” Pitney says. “And when they left, it was like they were never there.” And for a growing teenage boy, there were other perks: “Being a young kid, the best thing was just the fact that they had catering. So we raided all the food.” Their home’s appearance in The Secret led to it being used for a big-brand commercial and a Foxtel series called Satisfaction, which followed the lives of sex workers in a Melbourne brothel. Pitney has somewhat uncomfortable memories of the latter. “I was probably mid-puberty and came home after school with Mum and my little brother and they were filming sex scenes on our kitchen bench, which was so awkward,” he says. “They had sex in the laundry too.” Some people invite sex scenes – real ones – to be filmed in their property. In 2010, an all-female pornography company worked its way through Canberra share-houses. This writer was one of those who volunteered their home as a set. “All of our friends were having porn filmed in their house and you got a fee for referring someone else, so it just kind of spread,” my then-housemate Claire recalls. Our end of the deal was to vacuum, tidy up, leave and not return home until the shoot was over. In return we received $300 a day – a big payday for broke university students. “It was riches – so much money for literally just being out of the house for a day,” Claire says. “When I came back some things were in different spots, which was very disconcerting. A bunch of stuff on my desk was kind of moved around – my Post-it notes and my pens were in different spots. So I guess they’d done some desk stuff.” Despite the suspiciously rearranged stationery, Claire didn’t have major qualms about the shoot. “It was an all-female production company, so it wasn’t like there was going to be semen in places. I felt like that is really what made it OK.” For more family-friendly productions, sticking around to watch the shoot can even snag occupants a last-minute role. Cecile Owen had a scene from the Foxtel series Mr Inbetween filmed at her home in the Sydney suburb of Concord – “pure luck”, she says, that followed a letter drop in her street looking for locations. The scene in question featured the show’s central character, hitman Ray Shoesmith, going to visit the home of a man who wanted his pregnant mistress killed. “Because we have three children, we had scooters and toys all through the backyard,” Owen says. “[The producers] explained what the plot was and said: ‘We’re just going to get rid of everything.’ But then, as a joke, my husband said: ‘Wouldn’t it be funnier if the happily married man actually has kids?’ Because it makes the plot even worse: that he wants to get rid of the mistress and her baby when he has kids already.” “Next thing we know the producers were like: ‘Ah, we’ve got a big favour to ask. Do you think we could borrow your kids? Because we hadn’t thought of that and actually it would be good if we had children in the background while they’re talking in the garden.’” In addition to the $1,000 a day Owen received for the shoot, the kids each got $50 for five minutes of work. The Gaffey family ended up appearing as extras in a supermarket scene and their dog, Titian, snagged a role over the “professional dog” the crew was going to pay to bring in. Actor Ben Mendelsohn, who played Pope in the film, took a particular shine to Titian. “He loved our dog and claimed ownership of it,” Gaffey says. He’d be like: ‘No one’s allowed to feed her but me. Her and I are on a pure bacon diet.’” Mendelsohn was a “character”, Gaffey says. “He was definitely the craziest of them all, in the best possible way. He had no filter and was so down to earth. He would hang out with us all the time and bring us food from the catering cart. He’d be like: ‘How was ya fuckin’ day, mate? What’s going on? What are the teachers telling you?’ Then he’d just talk at you.” The Gaffeys’ Ivanhoe East home – a distinctive, mid-century house designed by architect Guilford Bell – became an important part of the film. “[Director] David Michôd wanted to treat the house like a character,” Gaffey says. “It was this grey backdrop, rather than your standard white walls, so it had an energy that matched the dark family that lived there.” Months later, getting to see their home on screen was part of the fun. “It was pretty surreal,” Gaffey says. “Now we have an Animal Kingdom poster up at home.” • The main picture caption and text of this article were amended on 3 January 2022 to correct a grizzly/grisly homophone.Popping a beautifying filter on the TikTok video she was filming seemed harmless to Mia. It made it look as though she had done her makeup, took away the hint of a double chin that always bothered her, and gently altered her bone structure to make her just that bit closer to perfect. After a while, using filters on videos became second nature – until she caught a glimpse of herself in the mirror one day and realised, to her horror, she no longer recognised her own face. “I just felt so ugly … It’s a very scary moment,” she says. “When you’ve got that filter up all the time … you almost disassociate from that image in the mirror because you have this expectation that you should look like that. Then when you don’t, the self-destructive thoughts start. It’s quite vile the way that you then perceive yourself.” Live, augmented reality filters on photo- and video-based social media platforms including TikTok, Instagram and Snapchat aren’t new but they have evolved from silly hats, puppy dog ears and comically enlarged features to more subtle beautifying effects that may not be immediately obvious to other users. As well as adding makeup, many of the popular filters that have crept into app libraries also change the face’s proportions, generally to fit female, European beauty standards, with thinner faces, smaller noses and plump lips. Mia, who asked for her real name to not be used, says she started using filters when one of her TikTok videos unexpectedly went viral and her audience suddenly skyrocketed. “I’m a bigger girl,” she says. “At that point, I was around 100kg, so it was really scary for me to have people looking at me.” As her video clocked up more than 1m views, abusive comments started pouring in. “I was getting a lot of hate,” she says, adding: “The filters on TikTok are so smooth and flawless – they don’t always look like a filter. So it felt so easier to use them, just to make me feel a little bit better … but honestly, it doesn’t even look like me. “I was in bed crying some nights about how ugly and disgusting I felt. I’m almost 30! I shouldn’t feel that way … Imagine a 10-year-old using these filters. That’s scary to me.” There isn’t yet a full body of research on the psychological effects of these filters but Dr Jasmine Fardouly, a body image expert from the University of New South Wales, says a study she conducted last year suggests the more unattainable the beauty standard that young people are exposed to online, the more harmful it can be … “It’s promoting a beauty ideal that’s not attainable for you,” she says. “It’s not attainable for anyone, really, because nobody looks like that. Everybody’s faces are being made to look the exact same way. “The fact that it’s harder to know that it’s a filter may potentially be worse for the promoting of those ideals.” When filters are used through TikTok, Instagram or Snapchat’s in-app software, a small label with the filter name appears on the video. While the introduction of these disclaimers, both in traditional and social media, has been a key focus of policymakers, Fardouly says the research so far doesn’t suggest they work. “The research suggests that unless you show people the actual real version of that person’s appearance, it doesn’t seem to make a difference.” There’s a strong relationship between negative body image and the use of photo editing but Fardouly says it’s less clear which direction this correlation flows; whether people’s self-esteem is lower due to the constant augmentation of their images or if those with low body images are more likely to use these features in the first place. “Body dissatisfaction is an important predictor for eating disorders, and is a predictor for depression and low self-esteem … There is also a link to increased interest in cosmetic surgery.” This is something Amy Hall-Hanson has experienced first hand. The 29-year-old has struggled with body dysmorphia for many years but says she never fixated on her lips until she started using beautifying filters for every Snapchat and Instagram photo she took. “There are a few filters that make my lips look really nice … and it actually made me want to get them done,” she says. “I’ve even played around with overdrawing my lips, and then I’ve stopped myself and gone, ‘Why am I doing this? Like, I’ve never had a problem with my lips before in photos … “I would look in the mirror and my lips would look so much thinner than they probably were in real life … I’ve had to take a little bit of a break from taking photos of myself just to put that buffer in place.” Fardouly says there are no simple solutions – but there are things that social media platforms can do to mitigate potential harm. “I think that the algorithms could be updated to make it so more diversity is being recommended and shown to people,” she says. “The ease [with] which people can use filters [is a problem]. Especially if they’re changing the structure of the face and promoting these unattainable beauty ideals, then it would be helpful to remove those filters from the platforms.” Instagram and its parent company Meta, formerly known as Facebook, have made some moves to limit the use of what they call “face-altering” effects. While their open-source filter creation tool, Spark AR, does allow effects that alter face shape to be uploaded, they will not appear in the “Effects Gallery”, which displays the top effects on the app at that time. Filters that add makeup or smooth skin are discoverable there, and users are still able to use the search function to find face-altering effects. “Effects that directly promote cosmetic surgery are not allowed on Instagram,” a Facebook spokesman says. “We want AR effects to be a positive and safe experience for our community, and we have guidelines for creating and publishing effects using Spark AR. We recognise that creators predominantly use face alteration and feature augmentation to share artistic, playful and fantasy effects, and these effects are a creative way for our community to express themselves.” Snapchat does not have specific restrictions on face altering or beautifying filters submitted by users through the platform’s “Lens Lab” but a spokesperson for the company says the app’s focus on private, rather than public, communication sets it apart from other social media. “[Snapchat] was created at a time where everyone was curating a ‘perfect’ image of themselves online. Snapchat … is private by default to create an environment where people feel free to authentically be themselves.” The spokesperson says Snapchat has “invested in an in-house sociologist who is tasked with thinking about the impact our product and features have on our community”. “When someone sends a snap with a lens to someone else on Snapchat, the recipient is always shown which lens it is.” TikTok doesn’t allowed users to submit their own augmented reality effects; they are created by the company. The ethics of a number of their beautifying filters, including “faux freckles” or “glow”, have been the subject of intense debate among users. TikTok declined Guardian Australia’s request for comment. Fardouly says social media companies should not be held solely responsible for the harm caused by unattainable beauty standards. “It’s kind of human nature … A lot of the problems with the platforms come from people’s desires and motivations offline as well. People have always wanted to present themselves positively to others, that’s not new. “It’s just that social media really gives us the tools to control how we appear, and to really spend a lot of time investing in our self-presentation – and that’s where the harm can come from.” For Mia, it came to a head when she was riding in the car with a friend and mentioned that she was considering fat-dissolving injections to try to get rid of her now practically invisible double chin. “He looked at me like I was a crazy person,” she says. “He was like, ‘What are you talking about? You don’t have a double chin.’” After staring at her eerily unfamiliar, imperfect face in the mirror, it occurred to Mia that she was no longer living up to the message she was using TikTok to send in the first place. “Part of my content was about how we should really embrace who we are and what we look like,” she says. “But one day I kind of realised all of that content was a lie and was going to remain a lie as long as I was using filters. “I just woke up one day and went, ‘No, if I’m posting content any more, I’m not posting with filters.’ And I haven’t.”Exeter might have been showing off their new East Stand but this game nearly went west before Stuart Hogg finished it off with six minutes left. First-half tries from Tom O’Flaherty and Jonny Hill plus almost total dominance of possession gave Exeter a 12-3 lead with 10 minutes to go but it should have been double that. Then the game was turned on its head when the Bristol replacement Henry Purdy intercepted Joe Simmonds’ pass on the halfway line and went in under the posts. The Bears could hardly believe their luck. They had barely landed a punch but were still in with a chance. Exeter had not scored since Hill’s effort on 31 minutes but camped on the Bristol line and Simmonds’ next long pass found its target and Hogg scooted over to settle it. Callum Sheedy’s late penalty did earn Bristol a bonus point which had not seemed likely at half-time. Exeter played with an intensity and zip that has not always been evident this season and may just have turned the corner with the Premiership season around half-gone, but their coaches were dismayed by the lack of killer instinct. “I think the players got nervous,” said the head coach, Ali Hepher. “We had plenty of opportunities, especially at the end of the first half and start of the second, and we tightened up a little bit and made a few errors.” Bristol did lose Charles Piutau after 24 minutes to injury, making them reshuffle the back three, and at the end they had the hooker Harry Thacker on the wing but stayed in the game despite their lineout misfiring. “We are not far away. We didn’t get a chance to fire too much at the start and at 12-3 down it is about staying in the fight. We did a good job to get a bonus point,” said the director of rugby, Pat Lam. But Bristol are still without a league win since 6 November and this was their fourth Premiership defeat in a row. The new stand is not quite finished but it was open for business as Sandy Park hosted its biggest crowd. Once completed, the capacity will be around 16,000 and this attendance of 14,100 beats even the 2015 World Cup. The landmark of scoring the first try in the shadow of the new stand fell to O’Flaherty but it was made by his opposite wing Jack Nowell. Nowell came off his flank, after Hill had won a lineout, and popped up in midfield for the ball before kicking it through to the 22. Hogg picked up without breaking stride and put O’Flaherty over. Nowell was sparky thoughout, looking sharp and back to his England best after losing more than 10kg in the past year and Eddie Jones will have taken note. “He has been incredible for us, and I dare say people will be looking at him. Hopefully, he goes back in the international set-up, because that’s where he deserves to be,” added Hepher. On half an hour Exeter went back to type for their second try with Hill taking two tacklers with him over the line after drives from Dave Ewers and Sam Simmonds. It was only 12-3 but it seemed like a chasm with Exeter having more than three-quarters of the ball in the first period. When Bristol did make it into the 22 after 50 minutes, Exeter kept them out and Nowell turned the ball over on the Chiefs’ line to frustrate the visitors even more. Henry Slade then dived in for an interception on the Bristol line leaving the Bears centre Semi Radrada free to rush upfield in another glimmer of hope for the visitors before the move broke down when the Fijian ignored his support runners. Then Purdy opened the possibility of an away win before Hogg slammed the door shut.Ministers are keen to ease immigration restrictions in a bid to make it easier for thousands of Indian citizens to live and work in the UK as part of forthcoming trade talks. The potential offer will be under discussion when the international trade secretary, Anne-Marie Trevelyan, travels to Delhi this month, reports the Times. Relaxing immigration rules for Indian citizens is a key demand from Delhi. Trevelyan is said to have the backing of the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, who is keen to curb China’s growing influence in the region. However, they are likely to meet strong resistance from the home secretary, Priti Patel, who opposes the offer. According to the publication, visa relaxation options under consideration include a scheme similar to one agreed with Australia which would allow young Indians the right to live and work in the UK for up to three years. Another would be to cut visa fees for students and allow them to stay in Britain for a period of time after they graduate. Visa fees for work and tourism – which can cost up to £1,400 – could also be reduced as a sweetener. India has a GDP of about £2tn but it is a protectionist economy imposing significant tariffs on imports. Ministers believe a trade deal with Delhi would provide British businesses with a head start in what is predicted to be the world’s third-largest economy by 2050. It could also see Britain jump ahead as India does not have bilateral trade deals with either the US or the European Union. Ministers are said to be in agreement that a “generous” offer on visas could be the price for such a deal. One government figure told the Times: “The tech and digital space in India is still hugely protectionist and if we could open up even a slither [sic] of access it would put us ahead of the game.” On Friday Boris Johnson said he would “deliver on the promise of Brexit” and create new trade agreements. A Department for International Trade spokesperson said: “India is projected to become the world’s third-largest economy by 2050 and a free trade agreement will open up huge opportunities for UK businesses to trade with India’s £2.25tn economy. “Companies up and down the country can look forward to the benefits, from manufacturers in the West Midlands to tech experts in Belfast, and we look forward to launching negotiations early next year.”West Ham move to within a point of a Champions League place after surviving a late scare in a lively game at Selhurst Park. Patrick Vieira has just been booked for giving the referee a mouthful. When the dust settles and his gums stop flapping, he’ll be proud of his team’s performance. They were 3-0 down at half-time but didn’t comprehend that they had lost, and in the end they almost grabbed a draw. It was a strange game for West Ham, who in a sense were punished for their own excellence. They were so clinical in the first half, and a 3-0 lead inevitably led to a recurring stick/twist dilemma after the break. Ultimately it’s yet another really good away win, their sixth in the league this season. Only Chelsea and Manchester City have won more. Peep peep! 90+4 min: Great effort from Mateta! Schlupp dumps a long, angled cross towards the penalty spot, where Mateta produces an outrageous overhead kick that drifts a few yards wide. 90+3 min Dawson beats Edouard to a long ball and pokes it back towards Fabianki, who picks it up. alace appeal desperately for an indirect free-kick, but the referee isn’t interested. I think they have a case there. I know West Ham are wearing their 1991-92 tribute kit but that doesn’t mean you can pick backpasses up again. 90+2 min Palace are effectively down to 10 men, with Ayew barely able to walk never mind run. They’ve used all their subs. 90+2 min “I’m sure Palace have scored three late goals at home before?” weeps Matt Dony. 90+1 min Four minutes of added time. Who wants to be Dwight Gayle? Olise’s inswinging free-kick beats everyone and bounces into the far corner of the net! It was a cross rather than a shot, though as with the assist for Edouard it was beautifully struck. 90 min Diop fouls Ayew just outside the penalty box, in line with the left edge of the area. From which... 88 min West Ham’s final change - Mark Noble replaces Manuel Lanzini, who scored twice during an excellent first-half performance. 88 min It doesn’t look like there’s going to be a late flurry from Palace. 85 min Edouard swerves menacingly away from Diop in the D, but Dawson steps across to make an important interception. He’s had a really solid game. Olise cuts inside from the right and curls a lovely inswinging cross to the near post, where Edouard stretches to poke a volley past Fabianski. That was not dissimilar to West Ham’s first goal, and I doubt even the most rabid Hammer would begrudge Palace a consolation. It’s the least they deserve. 79 min Ayew’s snapshot hits Diop and spins behind for a corner. I’m pretty sure that was going in the top corner. Palace have had a lot of openings in this game. 78 min Masuaku is booked for fouling Olise. 77 min Palace are playing with the purpose and enthusiasm of a side who are only one goal down, which says plenty for their morale. Plenty of teams would have turned it in when they were 3-0 down at half-time. 77 min “This could be way off,” says Lakin Brown, “but re: abuse directed at referees, it doesn’t seem to help that we aren’t allowed to hear from the referees themselves, either post-match or during VAR checks. Not as familiar with rugby but in cricket you can hear the conversation during reviews, etc. Even if explanations for decisions were unsatisfactory (to some) this could still encourage fans to recognize that the refs are actual human beings, rather than some blank slate upon which one can project all their grievances and frustrations.” It might improve things, though I fear it would make the foamers foam even more. The cultures of entitled football fans and narcissitic dullards shouting the loudest are too entrenched. 75 min A change for Palace - Hughes off, Riedewald on. 74 min Mitchell’s fast, flat cross is headed wide of the far post by Mateta, lurking near the penalty spot. Not much of a chance. 71 min West Ham bring on Nikola Vlasic for Said Benrahma, whose delicious cross led to the first goal. This is his last game before he joins the Algeria squad for the Africa Cup of Nations. 68 min A Palace change: Michael Olise replaces the excellent Christian Benteke. 67 min “The worst thing about VAR is that it gives us time to think,” says Kári Tulinius. “Before it arrived, football kept going, just one thing after another, so there was never any time to dwell during a match. During normal play, football gives us too much new information to process all the time. Which is part of its inimitable pleasure.” I think the worst thing is that it creates an irrational expectation of subjectively correct decisions. To be fair, they are quite a few contenders for ‘the worst thing about VAR’. 66 min Another chance for Edouard, who shins a shot well wide from 16 yards after a good layoff from Benteke. 65 min A loose ball is collected just outside the Palace area. He flicks the ball and drags a volley on the turn that goes just wide of the near post. The sprawling Guaita probably had it coveredbut it was a fine effort. 65 min The scoreline looks grim but Palace have played well for large parts of this game. There’s a lot to like about this team. 61 min Mitchell’s hanging cross is headed straight at Fabianski by Mateta. There was no pace on the ball so it wasn’t really a chance. 61 min A paradox of football tactics and how they are described: Crystal Palace have made an attacking switch from 4-3-3 to 4-4-2. 60 min An attacking change from Patrick Vieira: Jean-Philippe Mateta replaces Luka Milivojevic. 58 min “I think football, in general, would be made better by fans catching themselves when they get the urge to complain about the officiating and just shutting up,” says Eric Peterson. “Every play is different, and every call is made on that particular play’s own merits. ‘Consistency’ is nothing more than a false equivalency - anyone touting a referee’s need for ‘consistency’ has no desire for any consistency at all other than every borderline call they see going in favor of their team. Those who complain that soccer isn’t more like rugby miss the fact that in rugby, there is universally more respect for how difficult that job is and how little the typical fan actually knows about what it takes to perform it properly.” I completely agree. It’s beyond tedious now. I say that as a fan, never mind a journalist (sic) who is called an effing cee during any liveblog that involves a big club. I used to complain a lot about refereeing decisions before I lost the will to live, and on reflection it’s pretty clear I was an entitled prick. It’s hard to know for sure but it feels like VAR has made that brattish entitlement a lot greater. 55 min Edouard misses a good chance, slicing wide from six yards after a terrific cross from Ayew. He was on the stretch and couldn’t quite get round the ball. 53 min Benrahma moves infield and finds Coufal on the far side. His cross takes a deflection into the path of Benrahma, who pokes over on the half-turn. He was under a fair bit of pressure and had to take it quickly. 51 min Palace have started the second half with commendable intent, given the scoreline. Edouard robs Rice 35 yards from goal, gets the ball back from Hughes and shoots over from the edge of the D. 49 min Edouard finds Mitchell in the area. He shifts the ball to the left and whips a shot that deflects over off Coufal. Nothing comes of the corner. 46 min Palace begin the second half. West Ham have made a half-time change - Arthur Masuaku is on for Ben Johnson at left-back. It might be an injury, though Johnson was also booked in the first half. It’s probably fair to say West Ham’s blip is over. They scored four at Watford on Tuesday and now they are crusing to victory at Selhurst Park. The score is really harsh on Palace, who hit the woodwork twice and have contributed fully to an open, entertaining game. West Ham have been the luckier side, for sure, but they’ve also been much more ruthless. Milivojevic is still protesting, saying he controlled the ball with his chest. He didn’t. It’s a crap penalty to concede - it was all very innocuous, and he didn’t benefit from it - but the law is the law. Manuel Lanzini gets his second, and West Ham are going to move within a point of fourth place. It was a superb penalty, rattled into the bottom left corner. Guaita went the right way but had no chance. PENALTY GIVEN! Milivojevic isn’t happy, but under the laws of the game it’s a penalty. Darren England is going to look at the monitor. I think he’s just inside the area, though it is pretty close. 47 min: VAR check for a West Ham penalty! Milivojevic accidentally controlled a bouncing ball with his arm; the only issue is whether it was inside the area or not. It’s extremely tight. 45+1 min The last man Andersen makes a lovely sliding tackle on Bowen, who had scurried into the area onto Antonio’s pass. 45 min Hughes shoots not far wide from 20 yards. A decent effort, though he did have a ball on to Benteke or Edouard. 44 min Good pressure from Palace, for whom Benteke looks particularly lively. When he’s good, he’s very, very good. 42 min Ward’s cross is met beautifully by Benteke, running round the ball 15 yards from goal, and Fabianski falls to his right to make a decent save. It was sweetly struck by Benteke but not in the corner. 41 min Soucek makes an important lunging tackle to stop Edouard’s pass reaching Benteke in the area. 40 min Antonio has a shot blocked by a defender, though he came from an offside position so it wouldn’t have counted. 38 min Ayew’s hopeful shot on the turn from 22 yards is comfortably saved by Fabianski. 37 min Johnson is booked for a foul on Ayew. Palace are still playing pretty well, certainly in attack, and haven’t let those two quick goals deflate them. 33 min Now Fabianski makes an important save, kicking away Benteke’s shot on the turn. 32 min: Edouard hits the bar! West Ham have scored twice, Palace have hit the woodwork twice. Ayew was found in a lot of space on the right, and moved into the area as Johnson came across to cover. Then he slid the ball back to Edouard, who smacked it off the underside of the bar from 12 yards. 28 min Palace must feel like they’ve been mugged. But West Ham do this far too often for it to be a fluke. 27 min Palace appeal unsuccessfully for a penalty after a grapple between Benteke and Johnson in the area. It looked like a foul by Benteke, if anything, and the referee wasn’t interested. Declan Rice made it with a typical surge from the halfway line. He squared the ball to Lanzini, who had a bit of space in the D. His first touch wasn’t the best, which allowed Andersen to come across and cover. Or so he thought: Lanzini improvised brilliantly to flick the ball away from Andersen and slam a left-footed volley into the net off the underside of the bar. Manuel Lanzini makes it two with a storming goal! Michail Antonio gives West Ham the lead. It was made by Said Benrahma, who put in a wicked, inswinging cross from the left. The ball cleared the leaping Andersen and dropped perfectly for Antonio, who got the wrong side of Guehi and studded the ball through Guaita from five yards. That was a stunning ball from Benrahma. And that’s Blockbusters. 19 min Antonio’s curling cross from the left is headed just wide by Benrahma. He was only six yards out, though he was under a lot of pressure from Mitchell. Still, a presentable chance. 17 min Schlupp, who looks very sharp, beats Diop through sleight of hip and is flattened. Diop might have been booked, though he would argue he was beaten by skill and didn’t deliberately knock Schlupp over. 14 min: Vital double save from Guaita! Johnson’s very deep cross was kept alive superbly by Coufal near the byline. He played it back across to Antonio, whose fierce close-range volley hit Guaita. It rebounded towards Antonio, who was about to score when Guaita flung himself at his feet to punch the ball away. That was brave as well as brilliant goalkeeping; I’m not sure I’d throw myself in front of Michael Antonio’s cocked right foot. 12 min West Ham’s first good passing move. Lanzini feeds the ball into Benrahma, who opens his body to guide a classy first-time pass into the path of Johnson. He tries to pick out Bowen, whose shot is smothered. West Ham keep the ball alive until Coufal blooters the ball into the stars. 11 min Palace continue to dominate possession, with Hughes and Schlupp breaking forward from midfield at every opportunity. 8 min Mitchell’s deep cross finds Schlupp, whose shot is crucially blocked by Johnson. Palace have started jolly well. 7 min Milivojevic flips the free-kick over the wall and a few yards wide. Fabianski didn’t move, so had it been on target he would have scored. 6 min Benteke cuts inside from the left and is fouled by Soucek. Free-kick to Palace in a decent position: 22 yards out, to the left of centre, pretty much the perfect spot for Milivojevic. 5 min Palace have made a bright start, Edouard in particular. 1 min: Schlupp hits the post! Palace almost take the lead straight from the kick-off. Hughes’ left-wing cross deflected off the head of Dawson and flashed across the face the West Ham goal. Ayew collected the ball and laid it back to Schlupp, who dragged a close-range shot off the far post. He probably should have scored. 1 min West Ham, in their 1991-92 tribute away strip, kick off from right to left. Before the match, there is a minute’s applause for all those connected with Palace who died in 2021. Patrick Vieira is back in the Palace dugout, having missed the games against Spurs and Norwich because of Covid. It’s more important than the actual football, you know Palace make two change from the 3-0 win over Norwich: Christian Benteke and Luka Milivojevic come in for Jean-Philippe Mateta and Cheikhou Kouyate. The exciting Conor Gallagher is still unavailable, while Wilfried Zaha is reportedly isolating. West Ham make one change. Declan Rice, who was suspended for the 4-1 win at Watford on Tuesday, replaces Mark Noble. Crystal Palace (4-3-3) Guaita; Ward, Andersen, Guehi, Mitchell; Schlupp, Milivojevic, Hughes; Ayew, Benteke, Edouard. Substitutes: Matthews, Butland, Tomkins, Kelly, Olise, Eze, Riedewald, Mateta. West Ham (4-2-3-1) Fabianski; Coufal, Dawson, Diop, Johnson; Soucek, Rice; Bowen, Lanzini, Benrahma; Antonion. Substitutes: Areola, Fredericks, Masuaku, Alese, Vlasic, Noble, Kral, Yarmolenko, Oko-Flex. Referee Darren England. Hello and welcome to live coverage of Crystal Palace v West Ham United from Selhurst Park. Both teams are playing their third game in seven days, so there is likely to be a bit of rotation from Patrick Vieira and David Moyes. It’s already been a good day for West Ham, with fourth-placed Arsenal losing at home to Manchester City. A win tonight would move West Ham to within a point of a Champions League place, a performance for which Moyes and his players still aren’t receiving enough credit. Palace sit comfortably in mid-table, and will go eighth in they win today. They are very strong at Selhurst Park, where they’ve collected 73.913043478 of their league points this season. West Ham’s away record is equally impressive - only the top three have collected more points - so it should be a decent game. Kick off 5.30pm.This was the kind of ruthless performance that has defined David Moyes’s second spell at West Ham. In front of a raucous New Year’s Day home crowd and against opponents who clearly fancied their chances of bloodying the noses of their London rivals, two brilliant first-half goals from Michail Antonio and Manuel Lanzini – and Luka Milivojevic’s helping hand – ensured that their Champions League dream remains alive and well despite a late Crystal Palace fightback. Had Jean-Philippe Mateta’s last-gasp volley sailed the other side of the post then it could have been a different story but with more than half the season completed, West Ham find themselves within a point of Arsenal and one ahead of Spurs, albeit having played two games more than Antonio Conte’s side. Anyone who had already written them off after their mini-blip last month may have to think again. “It was never comfortable but at this time of the year you take what you get,” said Moyes. “I’m thrilled with us getting these results but we need to get back to being mean and not letting teams have opportunities against us.” Patrick Vieira had been given a warm welcome from the home supporters as he returned from his Covid-enforced two-match absence. Yet the hosts had to do without Wilfried Zaha and Cheikhou Kouyaté as both were isolating ahead of their scheduled departure for the Africa Cup of Nations. That meant a return for Milivojevic in midfield, while West Ham welcomed back Declan Rice from suspension. Despite their stuttering form before Christmas, West Ham’s hopes of finishing in the top four should remain realistic as long as Rice is in the side but Moyes will also know finding defensive reinforcements in the January market could prove vital. They should really have found themselves behind inside the first two minutes when Jordan Ayew’s cutback picked out Jeffrey Schlupp but the Ghanaian somehow managed to hit the post from close range. When Ben Johnson was called on to block another effort from Schlupp, it seemed only a matter of time before Palace found the breakthrough. But having weathered the initial storm, West Ham went 2-0 up after some smart finishing from Antonio and Lanzini. There was nothing Vicente Guaita could do about either: West Ham’s top scorer only had to touch Saïd Benrahma’s wicked inswinging cross to divert it in and Lanzini’s goal three minutes later, after a typically surging run from Rice, was an instinctive strike with his third touch that flew past the Palace goalkeeper. To their credit, Palace kept coming forward and should have pulled one back when Odsonne Édouard let fly after being set up by Ayew, only for his shot to cannon back off the bar. Christian Benteke did at least manage to hit the target twice in quick succession but found Lukasz Fabianski in top form. Yet it was a moment of utter madness in first-half injury-time from Milivojevic that ended any chance of a Palace comeback. The Serbia midfielder probably thought he was being clever when he clearly handled the ball on the blind side of the referee, Darren England, and seemed to have got away with it initially. Unfortunately for him, VAR had spotted that the infringement had taken place just inside the box and it was left to Lanzini to stroke home his second from the spot. Vieira left the pitch at half-time remonstrating with a bemused England and was shown a yellow card after continuing his protestations at the final whistle, even if he later acknowledged it had been the correct call. “You have to give them credit. When they had the chances, they took them,” said the Palace manager. “We had a couple we did not take. We are learning in a hard way.” An early sighter from Benrahma at the start of the second half could have given Palace even more of a mountain to climb. Ayew – who will now meet up with Ghana’s Afcon squad – was the one constant threat down the right flank and his ball across the area could have given them a lifeline had Édouard been able to direct his shot on target. Milivojevic’s miserable evening came to an end when he was replaced by Mateta with more than half an hour to play, while Antonio went close to doubling his tally with a shot from just outside the box. Michael Olise – another substitute – was the architect of Palace’s fightback when his excellent cross was tapped home by Édouard at the far post before he curled home a free kick to set up a tense finale. But it came just too late to throw Moyes and his side off course.Doctor Who has a history of casting comic actors against type in straight roles – think Frank Skinner, Catherine Tate, even Nicholas Parsons back in the day – but in Eve of the Daleks, you couldn’t help but feel as if guest stars Aisling Bea and Adjani Salmon had been cast to play Sarah and Nick as exaggerated versions of themselves. Indeed, at times (while trying to assemble the means to escape from the junk lying around ELF storage) Bea must have felt as if she was back on Taskmaster. Dan (John Bishop) himself described the situation as Groundhog Day. But given there was only an hour of TV for Chris Chibnall to play with, the device of having the time loop shorten each time around, and the characters having completely free rein in each loop until they died, the end result was rather more Russian Doll than Bill Murray classic. Jodie Whittaker’s Doctor, in the first of the three 2022 specials that will see her bow out from the role, continued the more commanding form that we saw during the recent Flux series, fulls of plans and direction. She also had to deal with the Daleks finally learning to combat the sonic screwdriver. As an episode it was fine enough, but it was neither the creepy, claustrophobic, being stalked by Daleks extravaganza it could have been, nor a full-on comedy. It fell unsatisfactorily somewhere in the middle, despite the immense chaotic energy Bea brought to proceedings. In the end, I suppose the message that a “good-hearted weirdo” can still get the girl at the end of a Dalek-infused romcom of death is as appropriate a start to 2022 as we are likely to get. Sum it up in one sentence? The Tardis team and friends face an escape room challenge to get away from Daleks who keep exterminating them in an ever-decreasing time loop. Life on board the Tardis Yaz (Mandip Gill) has fallen in love with the Doctor! We haven’t just been imagining it. Whether the Doctor is going to reciprocate was left up in the air after Dan’s “My mate fancies you” act. It seems as if he has been scarred by Di’s standoffishness at the end of Flux, and doesn’t want anyone else to miss out on love. There was also some lovely interplay between Yaz and Dan, reflecting that they spent several years stranded together in the early 20th century without the Doctor during Flux. The continuing references to rivalries between Liverpool, Manchester and Sheffield might be baffling to the international audience, but when Yaz said there was to be no dissing of her mate, because that was her job, you could feel an evolved relationship. Fear factor There was some social media grumbling before the show – not the Daleks again! It is the third time Whittaker has faced them in a new year special, but then again, it is Doctor Who. It is always going to have Daleks, whose menacing sink-plunger first appeared on 21 December 1963. The Daleks weren’t especially menacing here, though – certainly nothing like the creepiness we have seen in other recent new year specials – although they did get to exterminate the Doctor more times in one hour than they’ve managed in the previous 58 years. Mysteries and questions Doctor Who festive specials tend to either be continuity-free one-offs, or extremely continuity-heavy leading up to a regeneration. Despite Whittaker’s impending departure, Chibnall opted for the former. We only got brief mentions of the Flux being the reason the Tardis needed a reset, and the events of Flux were the motivation for the Dalek’s animosity to the Doctor this time around. The main mystery, to be honest, was what Sarah actually saw in Nick by the end. Deeper into the vortex Was that the longest cold open in the show’s history? Sleep No More and The Woman Who Fell to Earth both skipped the opening credits entirely, but I made it 9min and 17 sec before Segun Akinola’s theme-tune arrangement crashed in. It was Nancy Wilson’s 1963 recording of What Are You Doing New Year’s Eve? that opened the programme – coming from the same year Doctor Who first aired. At one point the Dalek said “I am not Nick”. It very much was. Nicholas Briggs has been providing the Dalek voices since 2005. Doctor Who was the seventh most streamed show on iPlayer in the UK in 2021, behind Line of Duty, the Olympics, Pretty Little Liars, Euro2020, Silent Witness and Waterloo Road, which hasn’t been on since March 2015. The BBC say Doctor Who was streamed 41.8m times. That figure isn’t just for the current series – every episode since 2005 is currently available – but it does suggest the important place the BBC still sees Doctor Who having in its drama lineup. Next time The Sea Devils are back! Looking hilariously true to their original 1970s appearance! We are also going to meet 19th-century Chinese pirate Ching Shih. That airs in spring, and then we will get the end of the Whittaker era in autumn. After that, judging by what he said to the Guardian last week, we’ll have a whole year to wait until Russell T Davies’s second run at the show starts in November 2023. Have a great new year, and I’ll see you here again for Legend of the Sea Devils.A scruffy draw at Newcastle was not the beginning of the end of the Ralf Rangnick era and neither was a disjointed win over Burnley its glorious rebirth. Games against sides in the bottom quarter of the Premier League are not really how Manchester United should be judging themselves – not unless they’re losing them 4-1, in which case it really probably is time for a change. Optimists, though, perhaps could see signs of progress on Thursday: in Scott McTominay’s energy and drive, in Edinson Cavani’s continued sharpness, in the way Jadon Sancho swooped in from the flank for the second goal and the way Cristiano Ronaldo didn’t wave his arms about quite so frustratedly. Body language, slightly oddly, dominated the post-match discussions. There is evidence from sports psychologists that it does make a difference – but then, it’s a lot easier to look happy and motivated when you’re winning; the real test will come next time United are being outplayed by Newcastle or struggling to break down Norwich. Monday’s game against Wolves, whose last seven games have featured just four goals at either end, may offer a more significant insight. Under Rangnick, United have taken 13 points from five Premier League games and lie sixth, five points off fourth with a game in hand. To that extent their season has been rekindled. But, other than Arsenal, whose away form against top sides is atrocious, they have not played a top-four challenger and, apart from a faltering West Ham, won’t do so until the beginning of March. At the moment, it feels as though United are in limbo, waiting for the real challenges ahead. But then limbo does seem to be club policy at the moment. It felt telling that the Newcastle performance prompted such discontent – both from that body language and in subsequent grumbling; much of it must stem from the sense of uncertainty. Not for the first time, the United board has come up with a solution that leaves nobody clear what the plan is – and these are directors, we know, with a tendency to react to events. Lacking football expertise of their own, they drift where public opinion takes them; Rio Ferdinand banging his hand on a desk in the BT Sport studio can change the entire history of Manchester United. Appointing Ole Gunnar Solskjær as an interim manager to detoxify the club after the dismissal of José Mourinho made sense. Giving him the job on a permanent basis three months later did not, however good initial results had been. Waiting till the end of the season would have given the club two months more evidence on which to base a decision and would have cost nothing; it’s not as though Solskjær was going to dash off and accept an offer from somebody else. United ended up winning only two of the 10 games that remained that season, a run that probably would have led to a different appointment and perhaps spared United the two wasted years that followed. Solskjær as temporary manager made sense; he was a popular club legend and it gave the board time to come up with a strategy. Rangnick as interim may make sense, but only if he is allowed to use this second half of the season to get a feel for the club, to assess the squad and to work out how he can shape it. But is that what his consultancy role means? Nobody seems to know. If it is Rangnick making decisions on recruitment, nominating a coach to pursue a vision he largely dictates, then this period of research could be extremely useful. But if that is the case, what is the role of the director of football, John Murtough, and the technical director, Darren Fletcher, both of whom were appointed in March? Rangnick is not Solskjær. He is not a living embodiment of the club’s most glorious period, not somebody to pay obeisance to Sir Alex Ferguson and remind players of the best traditions of the club. He is a technocratic outsider with his own clear vision of how the game should be played. Before arriving at United, he had coached only 88 first-team games in the previous decade, preferring to take on a supervisory role in the background – something at which he was hugely successful at RB Leipzig. He was open about disliking the pressure of frontline management at Schalke – and, big club though they are, the scrutiny there is nothing compared with that at United. His football demands intense physical and mental effort. If players think he will be gone in six months, reduced to a distant figure making the occasional phone call to Richard Arnold, Ed Woodward’s nominated successor as CEO, he is probably quite annoying. Then again, if this the way the new United are going to be, finding out which players find the Rangnick method annoying is a useful process. But there is also an issue of expectation. What is United’s aim for the rest of the season? If this is a fact-finding period before the grand reconstruction begins, then it’s unreasonable to place too much store by results; fourth place may be an aspiration but it cannot be a target. But equally it is understandable if, after eight years of drift, there is impatience among fans, who must look across Manchester and see in City, a club they had patronised for decades, a club that are better resourced, better run and better coached. It could be that Rangnick is the beginning of the process that will narrow that gap. But nobody should be under any illusions of how much work needs to be done. Solskjær’s management was a symptom of the club’s poor decision-making and, because of his status, a mask for it; it was not the cause of the problems. But the danger is that a lack of clarity stymies the revolution from the start, that, against better sides than Burnley, the frustration that was so evident at St James’ Park spills over into a more general indiscipline and that undermines the Rangnick project almost before it has begun. The uncertainty of Solskjær’s caretaker period was useful; the Rangnick uncertainty – interim coach then ill-defined consultancy – risks being self-defeating.As the US is seeing record numbers of daily coronavirus cases driven by the highly transmissible Omicron variant, public health authorities nationwide have said that teens and younger adults are helping fuel this increase. The uptick in Covid-19 among the under-50s coincides with a surge in cases among young children – and a troubling increase in pediatric hospitalizations. The US seven-day average for pediatric hospitalizations increased 58%, to 334, between 21 December and 27 December. The increase in hospitalizations for all age groups was about 19%. Less than 25% of US children are vaccinated, Reuters reported. In Los Angeles county, adults between 18 and 49 accounted for more than 70% of the coronavirus cases recorded between 22 December and 28 December, according to the Los Angeles Times. The case rate per 100,000 people has surged most quickly in that age range. The county saw more than 27,000 new cases on 31 December, dramatically surpassing the winter 2021 daily case average of 16,000. About 25% of all coronaviruses tests in Los Angeles county are positive, according to the newspaper. Broken down further, data show that infection rates in persons from 18 to 29 are more than eight times higher than one month ago. With adults in their 30s and 40s, there are six times as many cases. “Many of the people in this age group are important members of our labor force … and these are also folks that are very likely to be out and about for recreation,” Barbara Ferrer, the county’s public health director, was quoted as saying. “Often this age group doesn’t experience the worst consequences of increased transmission,” Ferrer continued. “And sometimes that’s made it more difficult for individuals to stay attentive to the need to be vigilant about adhering to all of the public health safety measures.” There are concerns that the US economy and healthcare systems could suffer further in January not because of imposed restrictions such as lockdowns but because there is so much widespread sickness, including relatively mild cases, that staff shortages further hamper commerce and public services. Meanwhile, the infection rate for children between ages five and 11 has doubled. In nearby Orange county, California, adults from age 18 to 44 are driving Covid infections, according to the Times’ report. Coronavirus cases are increasing dramatically among teens and younger adults in southern Nevada. Eighteen to 24-year-olds saw 44.7 cases per 100,000 as of 24 December, an 131% increase from one week prior, the Las Vegas Review-Journal reported. In Dallas county, Texas, coronavirus cases rose by 76% in one week, according to a 28 December report in the Dallas Morning News. Adults between 18 and 29 comprised almost 25% of these cases. And in the last week of December, one Michigan hospital system reported a 21% increase in coronavirus cases among 21- to 35-year-olds, compared to the preceding week. Michigan hospitals have also reported seeing more patients in younger age groups in December, many of whom are unvaccinated, according to ABC 12 News. “This is also not by coincidence, an age group that remains under-vaccinated in a significant number,” Bob Riney, president of healthcare operations and chief operating officer at Henry Ford Health System, told ABC 12 News. “The vast majority of the Covid patients in our hospitals are unvaccinated.” Chicago-area children’s hospitals saw their greatest increase in coronavirus case numbers and hospitalizations this week, according to one report. “We’ve seen our biggest numbers in since the pandemic started actually,” Michael Cappello, vice chairman of Advocate Children’s Hospital, told NBC 5 Chicago. Allison Bartlett, who teaches about pediatric infectious diseases at the University of Chicago, told the station: “We are seeing twice as many kids in the hospital who are testing positive for Covid than we saw even back in our bad peak in September.” In New York, the state’s top health official warned of a “striking increase” in pediatric Covid-19 hospitalizations. “The risks of Covid-19 for children are real,” said Dr Mary T Bassett, acting state health commissioner. There was a fourfold increase in pediatric Covid-19 hospital admissions from the week of 5 December through the week of 24 December. As case counts in younger demographics grow, officials are girding for yet another winter surge, though possibly a briefer one that previous surges. Columbia University researchers have said that the US could hit its case peak by 9 January, at about 2.5m weekly cases. However, they said, that metric could hit as many as 5.4m, the New York Times reported. The US has seen 54,747,971 Covid-19 cases, and 825,552 deaths, according to Johns Hopkins University data, since the pandemic hit the US almost two years ago.After an … interesting few years on the big screen, appearing in the Fifty Shades of Grey franchise (as the suavely sadistic protagonist – a performance slightly undermined by the actor’s clear desire to climb out of his own skin to get away from it all) and Wild Mountain Thyme (as – well, you wouldn’t believe me if I told you, but do look it up once you’re in your cups), Jamie Dornan is back on the small screen that gave him his breakthrough. Back then, he was compelling as the still, quiet, psychopathic serial killer Paul Spector in The Fall. Now he is equally compelling in a more action-packed role as a character known only as The Man in the new BBC One thriller The Tourist. It is the latest offering from the acclaimed writers of The Missing, Baptiste and Liar, Harry and Jack Williams, and – from the first of the six episodes, the only available for review – it looks set fair to measure up to their past successes. We meet The Man travelling apparently without a care in the world across the Australian outback, until a Duel-ish truck appears behind him and starts trying to push him off the road. This is greeted by The Man less with shock than resignation – our first sign that The Man may not be quite the everyman he seems. He escapes by driving through a stand of trees but his relief is shortlived. The truck cannons into him from the side and he wakes up in hospital with no memory of who he is, how he got there or what his life was like before. Probationary officer Helen Chambers (Danielle Macdonald) is in charge of the case. You would be looking at her a long time before you were reminded of someone who ought to be responsible for an amnesiac man while investigating an unexplained car accident. Her main contribution so far is to let him go to a lunch appointment – according to the details written on a scrap of paper he finds in the clothes he was wearing when the accident occurred – at a diner 30 miles away on his own (and on crutches). The waitress, Luci (Shalom Brune-Franklin), spills lemonade on him. She is helping him to the loos outside when the diner explodes. They look back as smoke and debris fill the air. “Either I have the worst luck in the world,” says The Man, “or someone’s trying to kill me.” “To be fair,” replies Luci judiciously, “I think having someone trying to kill you would be the worst luck in the world.” In the aftermath, as the police tape up the site, they get a beer. “Fuck me, that’s lovely,” says The Man. “I hope I didn’t used to be an alcoholic.” The hour is peppered with humorous, humane moments like this, that keep an otherwise preposterous premise from exploding into smoke and debris itself. The thick continues to plotten with the addition of scenes of a man buried alive somewhere in the outback (not gratuitously choking and awful, but no fun to watch if you’ve a scintilla of claustrophobia in you) with a ringing phone just out of reach, and a disposable camera is discovered at The Man’s crash site with photos of local landmarks, which puts him on the trail of his forgotten self. CCTV shows him buying a T-shirt and stuffed koala at a roadside shack. The shopkeeper told him how to get to the nearest garage and there is the koala – stuffed behind a bin along with a mobile phone. The final scene is him answering its ring. Guess who it is? I’m not going to tell you because it’s well worth watching this fun, stylish and confident caper, which clearly still has numerous twists up its sleeve and characters to play with. The growing friendship between The Man and Helen – and the toxicity of her marriage currently being sketched in – promises to give the drama heart, too. Dornan is on fine form (and everyone who had begun to worry that they had hallucinated his acting ability in The Fall can sigh with relief and pat themselves on the back at the same time) and five more hours of this Memento-lite production should slip down as easily as The Man’s post-bomb beer. Lovely.The home secretary has said she intends to crack down on eco protesters and end the “legal merry-go-round” of “spurious” asylum seeker claims in 2022. In a new year video message posted on social media, Priti Patel said she was proud of many things the government had achieved in 2021, such as the launch of its strategy to tackle violence against women and girls. But she said there was “much more to do” this year, including cracking down on eco protesters on the country’s roads, who she said had “caused misery to the law-abiding public”. Patel added that she was committed to tightening asylum laws and stopping crossings over the channel from France, after a year that saw more than 25,000 people reach the UK in small boats. In response the shadow home secretary, Yvette Cooper, and a leading human rights barrister said the government needed to look at its own role in asylum claims. Extinction Rebellion also accused the government of not taking necessary action over the climate crisis and wrongly blaming protesters. Looking ahead to 2022, Patel said it was “vital” the government’s police and crime bill passed through parliament. “The bill will introduce mandatory life sentences for those who kill an emergency worker in the course of their duty and also crack down on the so-called eco protesters on our roads and motorways that have caused misery to the law-abiding public,” she said. “I will also continue to prioritise fixing our broken asylum system. It has been untouched for two decades, but passing our (nationality and) borders bill into law in 2022 will finally give us the powers we need to deliver long-overdue change. “A fairer system deterring illegal entry across the Channel by cracking down on people smugglers and ending the legal merry-go-round of spurious asylum claims is what the British people expect and we will deliver.” Patel also said the streets were safer thanks to a reduction in knife crime, gun crime and murders. According to the Office for National Statistics (ONS), there was an 8% decrease in knife-enabled crime in the year ending June 2021, compared with the previous year. Homicides were also down 11%, it said, while offences involving firearms fell by 6%. All figures were for crimes recorded by the police in England and Wales. However the ONS stressed that patterns of crime over that period had been “significantly affected” by the Covid pandemic and government instructions to limit social contact. Patel said: “Whether it be cutting crime, keeping our country safe from terrorism or controlling our borders, we have a range of plans in progress to deliver for the British people. That is an ambitious programme, but one I will be relentless in delivering as we focus on building back safer in the year ahead.” Adam Wagner, a human rights barrister at Doughty Street chambers, said the Home Office needed to review its own role in asylum claims rather than place responsibility on lawyers. “This home secretary, and the government she represents, spend too much time making out that lawyers and legal process are somehow responsible for the broken asylum system,” he said. “The truth is that almost half of all asylum appeals are successful – and the reason for that is a poorly resourced Home Office which blames everyone but itself for shoddy decision-making. The asylum system protects the world’s most vulnerable and we should all focus on doing better by them.” A spokesperson for Extinction Rebellion said: “This is the action of a government who are clinging on to a model of business as usual that is heading us towards disaster and they would rather imprison grandparents, teachers and priests than face the scale of the changes that they need to make.” Labour’s shadow home secretary, Yvette Cooper, said the government had the wrong priorities: “Prosecutions have plummeted, recorded violent crime and antisocial behaviour are up, just 1.4% of rapes are going to court and more victims are being let down. Asylum decisions are down, the backlog is going up, dangerous boat crossings are increasing, and safe, legal routes are being cut. Cooper said that 95% of Windrush scandal victims have had no compensation as yet and added: “The Home Office plan for 2022 should be to put right these deep-rooted problems caused by 11 years of Conservative policies. Instead, this is a Home Office of slogans not solutions so they just keep making things worse.”Boris Johnson has instructed ministers to come up with “robust contingency plans” for workplace absences as it emerged that the government is concerned about the impact record numbers of daily Covid infections could have on businesses in the coming weeks. The Cabinet Office confirmed that, despite the accelerated booster programme, public sector leaders have been asked to prepare for a worst case scenario that would see up to a quarter of workers being off work due to high Covid levels in the population. The department claimed that, so far, disruption caused by Omicron has been controlled in “most parts of the public sector”, but acknowledged that public sector leaders have been asked to play through “worst case scenarios” of 10%, 20% and 25% workforce absence rates, PA reported. Steve Barclay, the Cabinet Office minister and chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, is chairing “regular meetings” with ministers to assess how workforces, supply chains and schools are affected as the Omicron Covid variant is sweeping across the country. The department admitted businesses and public services could face further disruption in coming weeks and that Johnson has tasked ministers to test contingency plans and explore solutions that are hoped to save their relevant sectors from bottleneck scenarios caused by a temporarily significantly diminished workforce. The news comes after the Daily Telegraph reported that the government’s work-from-home guidance in England could remain in place for most of January. Barclay said: “As people return to work following the Christmas break, the high transmissibility levels of Omicron mean business and public services will face disruption in the coming weeks, particularly from higher than normal staff absence. “We have been working through the Christmas period to prepare where possible for this, with all departments liaising closely with public and private sector leaders who are best placed to operationally manage their workforces. The best way to combat Omicron is to get boosted and I encourage anyone who is eligible to get boosted now.” Labour said the prime minister had previously gone missing “for days on end” when he should have been instructing ministers to draft contingency plans. Deputy leader Angela Rayner said: “Boris Johnson’s lack of leadership means his government has dithered and delayed, leaving contingency planning to the very last moment. “Boris Johnson should have instructed his ministers to start planning weeks ago, but instead he went missing for days on end. With record Covid infection numbers, the prime minister must immediately get a grip on workforce pressures, keep essential services moving, keep schools open and keep people safe.” A new record of 189,846 lab-confirmed Covid-19 cases were logged in the UK on Friday, as the British Medical Association called for further public health measures “urgently to prevent the health service being completely overwhelmed”. On Saturday, England on its own reported a record high daily total of 162,572 new cases. Prof Sir David Spiegelhalter, a statistician at the University of Cambridge and a government adviser, said the actual number of daily cases could be closer to half a million. But the health secretary, Sajid Javid, said new restrictions on freedom in England “must be an absolute last resort”.Jürgen Klopp believes Sadio Mané and Mohamed Salah will follow the example of Kobe Bryant by showing the best can cope with failure and using their misses to spur them on. Mané has gone nine games without scoring and spurned a golden chance when he blazed over the bar in Liverpool’s defeat at Leicester on Tuesday, while Salah missed a penalty in the Premier League for the first time since 2017. But Klopp, who will not be on the touchline at Chelsea on Sunday after testing positive for Covid, argued that disappointment is something elite sportsmen encounter more often than lesser players because of their bravery in taking responsibility time and again and getting into the positions to miss. He cited how Bryant, who scored the fourth-most points in the NBA, holds the record for most missed shots, 14,481. “Top, top, top-class players deal constantly with failure,” Klopp said. “That’s our life. That’s what you learn pretty early as a footballer. The better you are, the more often you will fail because you come constantly in these decisive moments. “None of us has ever succeeded in all difficult situations. That’s how it is. Kobe Bryant is still the player with the most missed situations in NBA history and he is one of the greatest players ever. “You have to try it. You have to come in these situations and then you can fail. If you fail there, no problem, go again and everything will be fine. That is pretty much the mindset Mo is in and Sadio as well.” Salah and Mané will make their final appearances before going to the African Cup of Nations but with a very different backdrop. Whereas the Senegalese has equalled his longest drought for Liverpool, the Egyptian has been directly involved in an unrivalled 24 goals in the Premier League this season. As Klopp accepted, Salah rarely needs to respond to major setbacks. “We don’t have a lot of experience with Mo of dealing with ‘crisis’ or whatever because he didn’t have to,” he said. “The penalty just makes him more greedy to score a goal in the game, usually, and if we bring him more often in promising situations then I am pretty sure he would have finished one of them off.” Mané has not scored any of Liverpool’s past 25 goals but does have a propensity to deliver goals in fits and spurts and Klopp is convinced his latest barren run will end. “Sadio has no problem with confidence, but the momentum finishing-wise is not there at the moment,” he said. “Pretty much all strikers have to go through these kind of things. You have to take it from time to time and then it will be good again. It happened to Sadio before and he came out of it. He scored incredibly important goals for us and I’m really positive that he has chances to score [today].” His belief that Mané is performing well was supported by the footage compiled by one of his backroom staff when he got a welcome surprise on Friday. “One of our analysts knocks on my door and asks if I have two minutes.” Klopp said. “He made a video to show Sadio how much he contributes to our game and how good he is at the moments, how good he is there and in situations. “The intention was to show he should not be too worried that the finishing is not there at the moment. He’s still an incredibly important player for us. That is the view we have on him.”All pupils in secondary schools in England should return to wearing masks in classrooms, ministers said last night, as fears grew that the new term could trigger a huge spike in cases of the Omicron variant. The new advice came amid mounting criticism of the government for failing to ensure availability of Covid testing kits in time for the return to schools and workplaces following the Christmas holidays. The Department for Education said the advice was “short-term only to support pupils and teachers as they return to schools this term” and would remain in place until 26 January, when it would be reviewed. However, there are mounting concerns among scientists and in the medical profession that a further rapid rise in infections is possible, particularly in England, where rules on socialising over Christmas and the new year were more relaxed . Yesterday, the number of confirmed cases in England was a record 162,572 cases. A lack of testing equipment is also adding to staffing problems across public services. All state schools have been asked by the government to carry out on-site testing of pupils before lessons begin this week. As ministers desperately tried to avoid sparking a new mood of national crisis with school closures, the education secretary Nadhim Zahawi also announced that 7,000 more air cleaning units would be provided to schools and colleges to improve ventilation in classrooms. In addition many Ofsted school inspections are to be delayed in the first weeks of the new term. With Boris Johnson under renewed pressure over the handling of the pandemic, Zahawi said everything was being done to ensure the education of young people did not suffer again. “The prime minister and I have been clear that education is our number one priority,” he said. “These measures will bolster our support for schools as we do everything in our power to minimise disruption.” The Labour leader Keir Starmer told the Observer that the government’s failure to shore up supplies of tests in response to Omicron’s emergence in November was “unforgivable”. Starmer said parents should be testing their children at least twice a week to ensure they did not spread the disease to the older and more vulnerable, and it was up to government to ensure that tests were available for them to do so. “Schools return next week, and in the past this has seen Covid spreading among children, who then take it home to their families,” the Labour leader said. “As cases begin to rise in the more vulnerable age groups, so does concern for our elderly population. The government’s failure to prepare means it must now prioritise those who most urgently require tests, until it can get supply back to levels of demand. Labour’s priorities, he said, would be protecting learning, the vulnerable and our emergency services and critical infrastructure. “Schools must stay open, because children have missed out on too much learning already.” Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, welcomed the advice on mask wearing. “Face coverings are already advised in communal areas for pupils in year 7 and above. Pupils are accustomed to their use and we are sure the reintroduction of face coverings in classrooms is something that schools and colleges will take in their stride.” Earlier last year secondary school pupils in England were asked to wear masks in classrooms at a high point of infections though this was dropped when they slowed in the spring. Before last night’s announcement, some secondary schools were already taking unilateral action, writing to parents saying masks would have to be worn in classrooms as part of efforts to avoid school closures. In another sign of heightened concern, payouts worth hundreds of pounds are being offered to encourage ex-teachers to sign up to a government-inspired campaign to provide cover to schools hit by high levels of absences. Supply agencies are promising cash or shopping vouchers for anyone who successfully “refers a friend”. Agencies are publicising the “call to arms” with online adverts offering minimum pay rates of about £130 a day. An advert for Axcis Education says: “If you are not interested … but know someone else who might be … we offer up to £250 in shopping vouchers if you refer a friend to us and we place them in the job.” With the full effects of Omicron still unclear, a leading expert on infectious diseases, Professor Mark Woolhouse of Edinburgh University, said a return to another full lockdown should be ruled out. “There is still no good case for a full lockdown. Lockdowns aren’t a public health policy. They signify a failure of public health policy,” he said. “If we end up there again, it will be because we didn’t get the public health messaging right, because we failed to protect the vulnerable and because we didn’t order enough test kits – something which should have been attended to at the beginning of the month when it was obvious that Omicron would cause a huge surge in cases.” In an interview with the Observer, Woolhouse added: “This was an epidemic crying out for a precision public health approach and it got the opposite. We did serious harm to our children and young adults, who were robbed of their education, jobs and normal existence as well as suffering damage to their future prospects, while they were left to inherit a record-breaking mountain of public debt.” He added: “More generally, I hope we will quickly learn not to be surprised by new variants and not to respond to each one in an ad hoc fashion.” Dan Poulter MP, a former health minister who also works as an NHS psychiatrist, said it was “unacceptable” that we were now facing testing shortages, which suggested lessons had not been learned. Poulter, a Tory MP, said ministers should ensure there was a permanent reservoir of PPE and testing equipment “as part of a national pandemic response reserve”.Two of Prince Andrew’s efforts to prevent or stall the progression of Virginia Roberts Giuffre’s sex assault lawsuit against him were blocked on Saturday when a US federal judge ordered the prince’s lawyers to turn over key legal documents, increasing pressure to settle claims before a crucial court hearing this week. Judge Lewis A Kaplan, in a written order, told the prince’s lawyers they must turn over documents on the schedule that has been set in the lawsuit brought by Giuffre who claims she was abused – aged 17 – by the prince on multiple occasions in 2001 while she was being sexually abused by financier Jeffrey Epstein. Kaplan also rejected arguments by the prince’s lawyer, Andrew Brettler, on jurisdiction grounds after they argued last week that the lawsuit should be dismissed because Giuffre, a US citizen, no longer lives in the US. Brettler has called the lawsuit “baseless”. The prince’s lawyers claimed evidence was so strong that Giuffre does not reside in the US that it was pointless to exchange evidence until that question is resolved because it could result in the lawsuit’s dismissal. They argued that Giuffre has lived in Australia for all but two of the past 19 years, has an Australian driver’s licence and lives in a $1.9m (£1.4m) home in Perth, Western Australia, where she and her husband, an Australian national, live with their three children. In a statement, Giuffre’s attorney, Sigrid McCawley, called the request to halt the case “just another in a series of tired attempts by Prince Andrew to duck and dodge the legal merits of the case Virginia Giuffre has brought against him. All parties in litigation are subject to discovery and Prince Andrew is no exception.” Judge Kaplan, in a written order on Friday, noted the prince’s lawyers have requested that “extensive” materials be turned over by Giuffre by 14 January, including documents related to where she has lived. The rulings come before an important case hearing in New York on Tuesday, one day after the scheduled public release on Monday of a 2009 settlement agreement between Epstein and Giuffre that lawyers for Andrew had hoped would protect him from Giuffre’s claims. The developments follow revelations that Giuffre’s lawyers are reportedly claiming they have up to six witnesses linking the duke to his accuser on the eve of the hearing into a civil lawsuit filed by the 38-year-old, in which she accuses Prince Andrew of sexual assault. In a separate development, Andrew’s lawyers are also reported to have not provided documentary evidence that he has the “inability to sweat”, despite the claim supporting his denial against allegations he had sex with Giuffre. The duke is also said not to have so far named any witnesses to support his alibi that he was in Pizza Express in Woking on the night in 2001 he was accused of having sex with Giuffre. The developments intensify Andrew’s predicament as he faces intense pressure over his friendship with Ghislaine Maxwell. Last Thursday Maxwell, 60, was found guilty of recruiting and trafficking young girls to be sexually abused by Epstein. The verdict, which has no direct bearing on the Giuffre civil action, could increase public pressure for further prosecutions and push men in Epstein and Maxwell’s orbit to settle actions against them. “As to whether Prince Andrew is in greater jeopardy in terms of the civil suit now being stronger there could be some pressure on the court because the public wants to know why the users of these young girls were not held accountable,” former sex crimes prosecutor Wendy Murphy told the Observer. “The public wants a pound of flesh from the rapists – not just the pimps – but the civil suit is all about money and when the right numbers are paid the case will go away, assuming it survives the jurisdictional challenges,” Murphy added. But the duke was barely mentioned during the Maxwell proceedings and his lawyers are likely to seize on testimony from the key witness “Carolyn”, who said it was Giuffre who introduced her to Epstein and Maxwell. Separately, it is reported that Giuffre could be permitted to deliver a victim impact statement at Maxwell’s sentencing. Sigrid McCawley, a lawyer for Giuffre, told the Telegraph on Saturday that she anticipates the court will hear from “many, many other women who were not able to be heard at the trial”. At the same time, government prosecutors have made no indication since Maxwell’s conviction that they intend to prosecute further, either other members of Epstein’s staff or alleged customers of the Epstein-Maxwell sex trafficking conspiracy. Instead, they have given signs that they are closing the book. Last week, prosecutors dropped charges against the two detention guards who failed to check on Epstein the night of his suicide. Lawyers representing Epstein’s former PA Lesley Groff, named in Epstein’s 2007 non-prosecution agreement, have said they have been informed that no criminal charges will be brought against their client. On Saturday, it was revealed that David Boies, lawyer for Giuffre, said Maxwell should have “cut a deal”, a decision that indicates she could have become a state witness in a wider investigation into the elite social circle of Epstein, her ex-boyfriend. Boies told the Times: “She could have cut a very good deal early on but she passed up that opportunity. I think that’s proven to be a fatal mistake.” Giuffre’s legal team have made requests for new information in readiness for a possible longer hearing, including proof of his claim during his infamous Newsnight interview that he cannot sweat. Giuffre had stated that the prince was “sweating profusely all over me” at a London club on a night she alleges they had sex. The duke told Newsnight that her account could not be true “because I have a peculiar medical condition which is that I don’t sweat or I didn’t sweat at the time”. He also said that on the day in question he had taken his daughter Beatrice to a children’s party at Pizza Express in the late afternoon and was at home with his children for the rest of the night. As pressure mounts on the duke, he may be gambling on three outcomes – that the Giuffre case is thrown out after jurisdictional or other challenges, that it fails on its own merits, or that he may never have to pay the price if a judgment is made against him. “International proceedings have so much political content. They may be couched in legal terms, but when you are trying to do something internationally, it’s always political,” Murphy says. “You can say I’ve got a judgement and I’d like it enforced, but for political reasons a foreign country can say that’s nice but we don’t intend to do anything about it. Why would we?” • This article was amended on 4 January 2022. An earlier version said Prince Andrew was “not named during the Maxwell proceedings”. In fact, as we reported elsewhere, he was briefly mentioned in testimony as being a guest onboard Epstein’s private plane. It was also amended on 7 January 2022 to correct a misspelling in two instances of Virginia Giuffre’s surname.Here’s a roundup of this evening’s Covid-19 news. England has recorded its highest day for Covid-cases with 162,572 new infections. It broke the record set on Friday of more than 160,000. Italy has reported another 141,262 Covid cases. More than 1 million people in the country currently have the virus. One of its most famous footballers, Giorgio Chiellini, was among those to have tested positive. The country’s latest death count, 111, was also down compared with Friday’s total of 155. Children aged six and above must wear masks on public transport in France, according to a new government order. The country reported more than 200,000 cases for the fourth day in a row on Saturday, as 219,126 infections were confirmed amid the spread of the Omicron variant. Its health minister announced that the number of days that fully-vaccinated people have to self-isolate was to fall from 10 to seven. The new mayor of New York City, Eric Adams, said the city needed to be resilient against Covid-19 as he was sworn into office. He used his inaugural address to urge the city’s 9 million residents to not let Covid run their lives. “Getting vaccinated is not letting the crisis control you,” Adams said at City Hall. The number of new cases of Covid-19 has quadrupled in four days on the French island of Guadeloupe in the Caribbean, according to the AFP news agency. Latest figures show they have risen to 2,191 compared with 543 cases over seven days last week. Young adults and teenagers are driving the record numbers of daily Covid-19 cases in the US as they make up a bulk of those to have the Omicron variant. Brazil registered 49 more Covid deaths on Saturday, with another 3,986 new cases recorded. A total of 619,105 people have now died in the South American country, the second highest death toll globally. Dutch police broke up a rave in a disused factory on New Year’s Eve. Several partygoers were arrested by officers, with hundreds involved in the operation in the town of Rijswijk. France has cut its isolation period for vaccinated people who test positive for Covid from 10 days to 7 days, according to Reuters. Health minister Olivier Veran said fully jabbed people would have their isolation reduced by three days, following countries including the US. He added that some could have it reduced to as little as five days. “This isolation could be lifted after five days in case of a negative test. Those who are not vaccinated will have to self-isolate for 10 days, with a possibility to come out of isolation after seven days under the same terms”, Veran told newspaper le Journal du Dimanche published on Sunday. He also said the new Covid-19 Omicron variant was too contagious to be stopped unless a “strict lockdown” was re-imposed. Brazil registered 49 more Covid deaths on Saturday, with another 3,986 new cases recorded. A total of 619,105 people have now died in the South American country, the second highest death toll globally. More than 22,291,507 positive tests have been registered during the pandemic. Staying in the UK, secondary school pupils have been told to wear face masks in classrooms to stop the spread of the Omicron variant. Term begins next week for pupils aged 11 and above, and the Department for Education said advice was “short-term only to support pupils and teachers as they return to schools this term”. The advice will be reviewed on 26 January. In the UK, Boris Johnson has instructed government ministers to come up with “robust contingency plans” for workplace absences to hit up to 25%, as it emerged that the government is concerned about the impact record numbers of daily Covid infections could have on businesses. The Cabinet Office confirmed that, despite the accelerated booster programme, public sector leaders have been asked to prepare for a worst case scenario that would see up to a quarter of workers being off work due to high Covid levels in the population. The department claimed that, so far, disruption caused by Omicron has been controlled in “most parts of the public sector”, but acknowledged that public sector leaders have been asked to play through “worst case scenarios” of 10%, 20% and 25% workforce absence rates, PA reported. An uptick in Covid cases in the US appears to be mainly concentrated among younger people and teenagers. My colleague in New York, Victoria Bekiempis reports. As the US is seeing record numbers of daily coronavirus cases driven by the highly transmissible Omicron variant, public health authorities nationwide have said that teens and younger adults are helping fuel this increase. The uptick in Covid-19 among the under-50s coincides with a surge in cases among young children – and a troubling increase in pediatric hospitalizations. The US seven-day average for pediatric hospitalizations increased 58%, to 334, between 21 December and 27 December. The increase in hospitalizations for all age groups was about 19%. Less than 25% of US children are vaccinated, Reuters reported. One of Italy’s most famous footballers, Giorgio Chiellini, has tested positive for Covid. Chiellini, who is the captain of Juventus and led his country to success at Euro 2020 last summer, had been isolating after coming into contact with a positive case earlier in the week. A statement on the Turin-based club’s website said: “Juventus Football Club announce that, during today’s screening procedures to which the player Giorgio Chiellini underwent for the resumption of competitive activity, a positive test for Covid-19 was detected.” The number of new cases of Covid-19 has quadrupled in four days on the French island of Guadeloupe in the Caribbean, according to the AFP news agency. Latest figures show they have risen to 2,191 compared with 543 cases over seven days last week. The new mayor of New York City, Eric Adams, said the city needed to be resilient against Covid-19 as he was sworn into office. Adams used his inaugural address to urge the city’s 9 million residents to not let Covid run their lives. “Getting vaccinated is not letting the crisis control you,” Adams said at City Hall. “Enjoying a Broadway show. Sending your kids to school. Going back to the office. These are declarations of confidence that our city is our own.” The city has seen subway lines, restaurants and urgent care centres close because of Covid-related staff shortages. The 61-year-old said he would keep vaccine mandates in place. The former New York City police captain rode the subway from his home in Brooklyn to City Hall according to Associated Press. In his address, he added that the pandemic had put the city through “two years of continuous crisis,” Adams said, “and that insults our very nature as New Yorkers.” “There’s one thing that everyone knows about New Yorkers: We don’t like anyone telling us what to do,” he said. France has reported more than 200,000 cases for the fourth day in a row, as 219,126 infections were confirmed on Saturday. The figure is the second highest to date, after the 232,200 record set on Friday, Reuters reports. It means that it becomes the sixth country in the world to report more than 10m cases since the start of the pandemic. The other countries to cross the mark already are the US, India, Brazil, the UK and Russia. Dutch police broke up a rave in a disused factory on New Year’s Eve. Several partygoers were arrested by officers, with hundreds involved in the operation in the town of Rijswijk. According to AFP, people living nearby said they had seen cars come from Spain and Italy, as well as nearer neighbours France and Germany. A series of Covid restrictions were imposed a week before Christmas, with all non-essential shops and bars closed until 14 January. In France, a rave attracted about 1,500 people in the central eastern town of Saint-Florentin, two hours drive from Paris. My colleague Emma Graham-Harrison reports on how much longer China can keep up its zero-Covid policy. Desperate residents in China’s western Xi’an city are running out of food after they were barred from grocery shopping in a fierce lockdown. In the southern province of Guangxi, people who broke Covid laws were recently publicly shamed by being paraded through the streets in hazmat suits with placards round their necks. The rest of the world is learning, slowly and with some difficulty, to live with Covid-19, but in China, authorities are doubling down on their “zero-Covid” policy: trying to stamp out the disease whenever it appears, and at any cost. A single case in a border town led to 200,000 people being locked down late last month. Read more: Children aged six and above must wear masks on public transport in France, according to a new government order. Masks had already been compulsory for those aged 11 and over, but new rules have been announced in response to the spread of the Omicron variant. The new restrictions will come in from Monday. Operators will not be able to sell food or drink on services from the same date, according to AFP. The rules will apply on the channel-crossing Eurostar service. Another 232,200 cases were confirmed on Friday, breaking the country’s previous record. Italy has reported another 141,262 Covid cases, meaning that more than 1 million people in the country currently have the virus. Saturday’s case figures were a drop on the previous day, when tests confirmed 144,243 new infections. The Italian Ansa news agency said it meant 1,021,697 now had the virus. The country’s latest death count, 111, was also down compared with Friday’s total of 155. Almost 3,000 passengers on a cruise ship had to spend New Year’s Eve ashore in Lisbon because of Covid, after an outbreak of infections among the crew. The 53 cases among the 1,353 staff meant the German-owned Aida Nova and its passengers had to stay in the Portuguese capital, rather than go to Funchal in Madeira to watch a firework display. None of the ship’s passengers tested positive, the German news agency DPA reported. The infected crew members were taken to hotels in Lisbon. The ship is now waiting for replacement staff so it can carry on to the Canary Islands. England has broken its record for confirmed new Covid infections, after 162,572 were reported on Saturday. The previous highest total was set on Friday, the final day of 2021, when 160,276 were registered. It’s the fifth day in a row on which confirmed infections have risen in England. Figures for Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland will be published after the new year weekend. A further 154 people have died within 28 days of a positive test, down from 178 in England the day before. Good evening, Harry Taylor here bringing you the latest coronavirus updates from the UK and around the world as we round off the first day of 2022. If you have any comments, tips or suggestions, drop me an email or get in touch via Twitter @HarryTaylr, where my DMs are open. Below are the latest news stories on Covid-19 from around the world: The United Arab Emirates will ban unvaccinated citizens from travelling abroad from 10 January, the state news agency WAM reported on Saturday, citing the foreign ministry and the National Emergency Crisis and Disaster Management Authority. In the UK the NHS Confederation’s chief executive, Matthew Taylor, agreed with the health secretary that the record-breaking Omicron wave of infection will “test the limits of finite NHS capacity even more than a typical winter”, with reports suggesting that a requirement to work from home in England could be in place for most of January. Leading figures of UK science and medicine during the coronavirus pandemic have been feted in the Queen’s new year honours list, including the chief medical officer for England, Prof Chris Whitty, who is to receive a knighthood for his role in battling Covid-19. The Omicron coronavirus variant dampened new year festivities around much of the world, with Paris cancelling its fireworks show, London relegating its show to television, and New York City scaling down its famous ball-drop celebration in Times Square. China ended its final week of 2021 with its biggest tally of local coronavirus cases for any seven-day period since subduing the country’s first epidemic nearly two years ago, despite an arsenal of some of the world’s toughest Covid-19 measures. India reported 22,775 new Covid-19 infections over the past 24 hours, health ministry data shows, adding to concerns among authorities around the country about the rising number of cases. Restrictions on freedom “must be an absolute last resort” and the UK must “live alongside” coronavirus in 2022, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, has said. A health boss has said the “next few days are crucial” in the fight to reduce the impact of the Omicron variant, and that the government “must be ready to introduce new restrictions at pace if they’re needed”. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents health trusts in England, said staff were working “flat out” and that the NHS was under “arguably more pressure” compared with this time last year. It came after Sajid Javid, the health secretary, warned restrictions on freedom “must be an absolute last resort”. Figures showed that hospital admissions in England have risen to their highest level since January 2021, while the number of NHS hospital staff absent as a result of the the virus nearly doubled in a month. A further 189,846 lab-confirmed Covid-19 cases were registered in the UK on Friday, another new daily record, as the British Medical Association called for further public health measures “urgently to prevent the health service being completely overwhelmed”. Hopson wrote on Twitter: “NHS preparing for worst &amp; hoping for best. “Staff flat out, esp. given level of staff absences. We will need to ask them to perform flexible heroics again if hospital Covid numbers continue to rise. We can’t keep doing this. Long term NHS capacity issues must be addressed.” Hopson said the latest infection data showed a “rapid increase in community infections” that is leading to rising hospital admissions. He added that if growth rates go back up again after the socialising that will have taken place at Christmas, then hospital trusts will have to “start standing up extra surge capacity late next week”. Hopson said this would put pressure “on less-urgent elective activity”. Hopson said there were fewer severely unwell elderly people needing intensive care treatment, so the problem was “less one of patient acuity” and more “one of sheer volume of patient numbers” needing general and acute beds. The United Arab Emirates will ban unvaccinated citizens from travelling abroad from 10 January, the state news agency WAM reported on Saturday, citing the foreign ministry and the National Emergency Crisis and Disaster Management Authority. The report said that vaccinated citizens would also require a booster shot to be eligible to travel. The ban will not apply to those with medical or humanitarian exemptions. Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific adviser to the government says he is “really pleased” to see scientists being recognised in the new year honours list. England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, and his deputy, Prof Jonathan Van-Tam, have been given knighthoods, along with the chief medical officers for Wales, Dr Frank Atherton, and Scotland, Dr Gregor Smith. There are also damehoods for Dr Jenny Harries, who leads the UK Health Security Agency, and Dr June Raine, chief executive of the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). Around a fifth of those recognised have been involved in the fight against Covid. The annual New Year’s Day parade in central London has returned after being cancelled last year due to Coronavirus restrictions. The scaled-back event is just getting under way with this year’s event down to just 600 people in a ticketed arena. It was a contrast to the 600,000 people that would have normally lined the two-mile route from Piccadilly to Whitehall. Germany wants to use its presidency of the Group of Seven (G7) to support the economic recovery from the Covid-19 pandemic, the country’s finance minister, Christian Lindner, has said. In a tweet, Lindner, party leader of the liberal Free Democrats (FDP), junior partner in Olaf Scholz’s three-way ruling coalition said: “Germany has taken over the G7 presidency for 2022 - the G7 countries stand for freedom, democracy and progress. “With this in mind, we must overcome the pandemic and drive the global economic recovery,” he added. He also called for a strengthening of efforts to improve climate protection, Reuters reports. A leading diabetes doctor who was also among the first to identify the disproportionate impact of Covid-19 on ethnic minority groups has been recognised with a royal honour, PA reports. Prof Kamlesh Khunti, a University of Leicester scholar, Sage member and GP, has been made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the new year honours list. Alongside Prof Melanie Davies CBE, Prof Khunti established the globally-recognised Leicester Diabetes Centre, which employs more than 170 researchers. He has also improved the health of ethnic minority people by leading a body of research throughout the pandemic, and working as chairman of the Sage ethnic sub-panel. Khunti described being recognised by Buckingham Palace as a “huge honour”, and paid tribute to his colleagues and his family. Russia has reported 847 deaths from Covid in the past 24 hours. It also reported 19,751 new coronavirus cases in the same time period, up from 20,638 on the previous day. The NHS Confederation’s chief executive, Matthew Taylor, agreed with the health secretary the record-breaking Omicron wave of infection will “test the limits of finite NHS capacity even more than a typical winter”, with reports suggesting that a requirement to work from home in England could be in place for most of January. Taylor also said some hospitals could be forced to exclude visitors as part of the “difficult choices” made to stop the spread of Omicron on wards. It came as figures showed that hospital admissions in England have risen to their highest level since January 2021, while the number of NHS hospital staff absent because of the virus nearly doubled in a month. A further 189,846 lab-confirmed Covid-19 cases were registered in the UK on Friday, another new daily record, as the British Medical Association called for further public health measures “urgently to prevent the health service being completely overwhelmed”. Prof Sir David Spiegelhalter, a Cambridge University statistician and government adviser, said the actual number of daily cases could be closer to half a million. Japan’s Emperor Naruhito offered prayers for those who died during the pandemic, taking to video for the second straight year for his New Year’s greeting, having canceled public palace gatherings to curb coronavirus infections. Sitting before a bonsai tree with his wife Masako, Naruhito praised and thanked doctors and other health care workers, and expressed concern for countries lacking access to vaccines and adequate hospital systems. “By treasuring more than ever the connections among people, sharing our pain and supporting each other, I hope from the bottom of my heart that we will overcome these hard times,” he said. Japan has recorded more than 18,000 Covid-19-related deaths, but the pace of deaths has fallen in recent months. Naruhito also voiced worries about the fast-spreading omicron variant. Before the pandemic, the imperial palace in central Tokyo would open at the start of each year to cheering, flag-waving crowds. The emperor does not have political power but he carries symbolic significance for Japan and is fairly popular. Naruhito’s father abdicated in 2019. Hirohito, the wartime emperor, was Naruhito’s grandfather. In the UK, leading figures of science and medicine during the coronavirus pandemic have been feted in the Queen’s new year honours list, including the chief medical officer for England, Prof Chris Whitty, who is to receive a knighthood for his role in battling Covid-19. The prime minister, Boris Johnson, paid tribute to the 1,122 individuals celebrated – 361 receiving a British Empire Medal (BEM), 508 an MBE and 253 an OBE – thanking them for their contribution to the country. “These recipients have inspired and entertained us and given so much to their communities in the UK or in many cases around the world,” he said. “The honours are an opportunity for us to thank them, as a country, for their dedication and outstanding contribution.” The North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, vowed to further bolster his military capability, maintain draconian anti-virus measures and push hard to improve the economy during a speech at a key political conference this week, state media reported on Saturday. A state media report on Kim’s speech didn’t carry any comments on dealings with the United States and South Korea. Some experts say this implies Kim has no interest in resuming talks with Washington and Seoul anytime soon and would rather keep his country’s borders closed while seeking a self-reliant economy to overcome pandemic-related difficulties. “The increasingly unstable military environment on the Korean Peninsula and international politics have instigated calls to vigorously push forward with our national defence build-up plans without any delay,” Kim said, according to the official Korean Central News Agency. Kim ordered the production of powerful, modern weapons systems to improve his military forces and called for the military’s “absolute loyalty and allegiance” to the ruling party led by him. The Omicron coronavirus variant dampened New Year festivities around much of the world, with Paris cancelling its fireworks show, London relegating its show to television, and New York City scaling down its famous ball drop celebration in Times Square. The illuminated ball made of Waterford crystal panels slid down its poll at the midnight hour in Times Square, but only 15,000 spectators were allowed into the official viewing area instead of the usual 58,000. A year ago, the newly available vaccine offered hope that the pandemic may be under control by the start of 2022. Instead, the sudden arrival of Omicron has brought a surge in coronavirus cases across the globe. China ended its final week of 2021 with its biggest tally of local coronavirus cases for any seven-day period since subduing the country’s first epidemic nearly two years ago, despite an arsenal of some of the world’s toughest Covid-19 measures. The National Health Commission reported 175 new community infections with confirmed clinical symptoms for 31 December, bringing the total number of local symptomatic cases in mainland China in the past week to 1,151. The surge has been driven mostly by an outbreak in the northwestern industrial and tech hub of Xi’an, a city of 13 million. The deepening outbreak in Xi’an will most likely firm authorities’ resolve to curb transmissions quickly as and when cases emerge. The city, under lockdown for 10 days as of Saturday, has reported 1,451 local symptomatic cases since 9 December, the highest tally for any Chinese city in 2021. While China’s case count is tiny compared with many outbreaks elsewhere in the world, forestalling major flare-ups in 2022 will be important. Beijing will be hosting the Winter Olympic Games in February, and the ruling Communist party will hold a once-every-five-years congress, expected in the fall, where President Xi Jinping is likely to secure a third term as party secretary. India reported 22,775 new Covid-19 infections over the past 24 hours, health ministry data shows, adding to concerns for authorities around the country about the rising number of cases. The data indicates that thickly populated metros, such as the national capital New Delhi, financial centre Mumbai and Kolkata in the east, are seeing some of the sharpest rises. In the eastern state of West Bengal, infections rose to 3,450 in the last 24 hours with at least 1,950 cases reported in Kolkata, the capital. Sixteen Omicron cases have been reported in West Bengal. Kolkata’s municipal corporation declared 17 micro containment zones in residential clusters where more than five infections have been reported. People living in the zones are not allowed to leave the area to try to contain the spread of the disease. Ajoy Chakrobarty, the state’s director of health services, said he was holding meetings with private hospitals to ensure health facilities are ready to deal with the rising number of cases. Restrictions on freedom “must be an absolute last resort” and the UK must “live alongside” coronavirus in 2022, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, has said. But Javid added the record-breaking Omicron wave of infection will “test the limits of finite NHS capacity even more than a typical winter” as reports suggested a work from home order in England could be in place for most of January to slow the spread of the highly transmissible variant. Government figures showed a further 189,846 lab-confirmed Covid-19 cases had been recorded in the UK on Friday, another new record for daily reported cases. A leading statistician said the actual number of daily cases could be closer to half a million, with the UK going into the new year in the midst of an “unprecedented wave” of infections. Javid, writing in the Daily Mail, said England had “welcomed in 2022 with some of the least restrictive measures in Europe”, with the UK government at odds with the devolved nations in choosing to keep nightclubs open and to allow hospitality to operate without further measures for new year celebrations. “Curbs on our freedom must be an absolute last resort and the British people rightly expect us to do everything in our power to avert them,” the health secretary continued. “Since I came into this role six months ago, I’ve also been acutely conscious of the enormous health, social and economic costs of lockdowns. “So I’ve been determined that we must give ourselves the best chance of living alongside the virus and avoiding strict measures in the future.” The cabinet minister said the time lag between infections and hospital admissions meant it was “inevitable that we will still see a big increase” in Covid patients over the next month as he warned that, as the coronavirus crisis entered its third year, the pandemic is “still far from over”. Welcome to the Coronavirus live feed, where you can follow updates on what is happening surrounding the virus from around the world. If you have any questions, comments or news tips then please send them over to me via any of the channels below. Happy New Year to everyone! Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.comMichael Smith knocked out the defending champion and No 1 seed, Gerwyn Price, in a thriller to reach the semi-finals of the PDC world championship at Alexandra Palace. Smith, the runner-up to Michael van Gerwen in 2019, has the chance of another final appearance and will face James Wade in the semi-finals after his 5-4 victory over Price. The Welshman threw a nine-darter early on but he missed two match darts at the end of the eighth set, lost the next leg with the throw, and could not recover. Peter Wright came through another close-fought quarter-final, defeating Callan Rydz by the same score. Wright will face Gary Anderson next – in a clash of two 51-year-old Scots – after fighting back from 3-1 down. Wade reached his first PDC world championship semi-final in nine years with a 5-0 win over Mervyn King, while the two-times world champion Anderson was forced to battle before coming past Luke Humphries with a 5-2 victory. Wade, the No 4 seed, has not made the last four since 2013 but had too much for King, who had also rolled back the clock in this tournament, reaching the quarter-finals for the first time since 2009. In the day’s second quarter-final Anderson, world champion in 2015 and 2016 and a finalist last year, lost the opening set and was pegged back at 2-2 before reeling off three sets on the spin to secure a semi-final spot.The number of UK households living in fuel poverty could climb to the highest level on record by this spring unless the government moves to soften the blow of a looming record high energy bill hike, according to a fuel poverty charity. Around 4 million homes in the UK were already classed as fuel poor before a surge in global energy market prices triggered one of the steepest ever energy bill hikes in October, but campaigners are braced for a record increase in the numbers unable to pay their energy bills following another hike this spring. The charity National Energy Action warned that the double blow to household bills could cause at least 2 million more homes to slip into fuel poverty compared with the start of 2021, taking the total to 6 million households. This would be the highest level of fuel poverty across the UK since records began in 1996. The looming energy price hike has not yet been finalised by the regulator but Adam Scorer, chief executive of National Energy Action, told the Observer that the number of households in fuel poverty would “skyrocket” in April. This is expected to deepen the UK’s national energy crisis and compound the “year of the squeeze”, predicted by the Resolution Foundation last week, which threatens to trigger a “cost of living catastrophe” for hard-pressed families. Households are already paying record prices to put petrol in their cars, and can expect the cost of consumer goods to rocket as fuel prices and supply-chain disruptions take their toll on major companies. “Those on lowest incomes and in less-efficient homes will not just face financial hardship but intolerable living conditions, ill health and, for too many, a shortened life,” Scorer said. “This is not just conjecture. It will happen and we’ve had enough time to see it coming and act.” Energy market prices climbed steadily over 2021 before leaping to record highs in October and fresh record highs in December. The market rally has fuelled one of the steepest energy price hikes in the history of the UK’s liberalised energy market. Ed Miliband, shadow secretary of state for climate change and net zero, said: “Working people are being hit by a cost-of-living crisis which has seen energy bills soar, food costs increase and the weekly budget stretched. The government must take urgent action to support those people struggling to pay bills.” Senior officials from the Department of Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, the Treasury and No 10 have met with the industry regulator, Ofgem, and executives from the UK’s biggest energy suppliers in recent weeks to thrash out a plan to avert the looming national energy crisis. No measures have so far been agreed, and further meetings are scheduled for this week. The government’s energy price cap could allow the average energy bill to rocket further to almost £2,000 a year when it is reset in April, from £1,138 in the previous year, to help cover the cost of dozens of failed energy suppliers, according to industry experts. Labour has called for VAT on energy bills to be cut as a first step to help every household this winter, and the party would also “ramp up ambition with our plan to retrofit 19 million homes” to make them more energy efficient and help bring down household bills. “It is a moral and social scandal that fuel poverty exists in modern Britain. But with national leadership, we can beat it – and ensure everyone has the warm, secure home they deserve,” Miliband added. A government spokesperson said protecting consumers was its “top priority” which is why it was keeping in place the energy price cap, alongside schemes such as the £500m household support fund, the warm home discount, winter fuel payments for over-65s and cold weather payments. Meanwhile several Conservative politicians have written to the prime minister, urging him to scrap taxes on rapidly rising energy bills. About 20 Tory MPs and peers have written in the Sunday Telegraph asking for help for consumers facing fuel poverty, including Craig Mackinlay, chair of the net zero scrutiny group of Conservative MPs, former work and pensions secretary Esther McVey, and MPs Robert Halfon and Steve Baker. They argue that high energy prices “are felt most painfully by the lowest paid” and suggest VAT on energy bills and environmental levies which fund renewable energy schemes.