Death rates from ovarian cancer in the UK are predicted to have fallen by 17% in 2022 compared with five years ago, according to research. Researchers said the trend was mainly due to the use of oral contraceptives, a factor that also explains the difference between the UK and European Union countries, which are projected to record a drop in death rates of 7% this year. The findings were published in the journal Annals of Oncology. “The earlier and greater use of oral contraceptives in the UK than in most EU countries for generations of women born since the 1930s has a major role in these trends,” said the lead author, Prof Carlo La Vecchia, of the University of Milan. “In Italy, Spain, Poland etc, oral contraceptives were made available considerably later, and hence the favourable trends in these countries started later and are smaller.” The research predicts 4,000 women will die from ovarian cancer in the UK in 2022. The death rate is projected to be 4.57 women per 100,000. In the 1970s, the UK had the highest death rate in Europe at nearly nine per 100,000, the researchers said, but the rate has declined ever since. “Long-term use of oral contraceptives reduces the risk of ovarian cancer by 40% in middle-aged and elderly women,” said La Vecchia. “Other factors may also be partially responsible, such as a reduced use of hormone replacement therapy.” Improvements in diagnosis and treatment may also be contributing, he added. “However, these factors are minor compared to the long-term protective effect of oral contraceptives,” he said. “We expect these favourable trends in ovarian cancer deaths to continue.” Annwen Jones, the chief executive of the charity Target Ovarian Cancer, said: “We can be cautiously optimistic about this news, which shows the protective effects of hormonal contraception against ovarian cancer. These effects are thought to occur because they limit the number of ovulations in a lifetime, which may lower the risk of cancer developing. “However, whereas ovarian cancer death rates are falling in the UK, our survival rates still lag behind, and numbers diagnosed are set to increase because of an ageing population. Eleven women still die every day in the UK and we urgently need to find better ways to detect the disease earlier and develop new treatments.” More widely, the new research predicts that death rates from the 10 most common cancers will continue to fall in the UK in 2022, although the overall numbers dying will go up because of the ageing population. There will be 176,800 deaths from cancer in the UK in 2022, the research says. This corresponds to a fall of 7% (113.2 per 100,000) in men and 6% (87.6 per 100,000) in women in the UK since 2017. The researchers warned that their predictions should be interpreted with caution and could yet be affected by the pandemic this year.For Roy Hodgson, the “easy thing would have been to disappear off into retirement”. So said Dan Ashworth in February 2019, as he reflected on Hodgson’s failed tenure as the England manager, and the view of the Football Association’s former technical director would have found broad agreement. Only not with Hodgson. What happened with England remains the biggest stick with which to beat the 74-year-old, even if the Liverpool support might beg to differ. The quarter-final showing at Euro 2012, after Hodgson had been parachuted in at the last minute, was creditable but then came the group stage exit at the 2014 World Cup. And then came Iceland at Euro 2016. Hodgson is not the sort of man for whom the easy option appeals. And nor is he the type to embrace retirement – even at this stage of his life. It was why he jumped at the challenge to get back in at Crystal Palace in September 2017, despite the club he supported as a boy being in disarray – with no points and no goals from the opening four matches of the Premier League season. It was why, when he departed at the end of last season, head held high after giving Palace the top-flight comfort they had craved for years, he refused to rule out another comeback. And it is why we are where we are, with Hodgson having signed at Watford, eager to throw himself into another highly daunting assignment. Hodgson is already the oldest person to have managed in the Premier League; he broke Sir Bobby Robson’s record when he led Palace to a 4-1 win over Leicester at the age of 71 years and 198 days. He has been out of the game for the past eight months. But those who ask why he still needs it, why he ought not simply to walk away from the remorseless mental and physical pressures, clearly do not know him. “It is a sadistic pleasure,” Hodgson told the Guardian in January 2018. “The suffering never stops – that’s the problem … if anything, it gets worse. Getting that first foot on the rung of the ladder, that’s where you find it easier to shrug off those times when your foot slips off and you have to get yourself going again. When you have been lucky enough to move up, all you see is the slide back down. You don’t see the further steps upwards. “You learn to harden yourself towards it but, the longer you are in, it isn’t something you can give up lightly. Even if you’re not winning, it is possible to derive some satisfaction from the fact you are working properly.” Watford have not won since 20 November and the manner of last Friday’s 3-0 defeat at home to lowly Norwich – the club’s seventh loss in eight league matches, the other was drawn – made the dismissal of Claudio Ranieri feel inevitable. The team looked bankrupt on every level and Hodgson will need to hit the training ground running before his first game on Saturday week – the trip to Burnley, the only club below Watford in the table. Still, few managers are hired in good times and Hodgson has been in similar situations before, particularly in the Premier League. At Fulham in December 2007 and West Brom in February 2011, he took over teams at low ebbs and in serious danger of relegation only to steer them to safety. And he would do the same at Palace. Forget Big Ron or Big Sam. It is Big Roy that a struggling club needs. At Fulham, Hodgson drove them to seventh and 12th in the following two seasons, reaching the Europa League final in the second; at West Brom, it was 10th in his one full campaign and at Palace, it was 11th, 12th, 14th and 14th. Hodgson likes to put down firm foundations and build on them but, if he has to look no further than the end of the season at Watford, then fine by him. It is all about instilling solidity and quickly, providing the platform for a little flexibility in the final third, and Hodgson has been doing this since his first managerial role at Halmstad in Sweden, in 1976. Back then, Hodgson inherited a team who had avoided relegation on goal difference the previous season and were widely tipped to go down. He changed to a back four, encouraged his players to push up, pressure the ball and also transition quickly, using long passes in behind the opposition defence. Halmstad won the league straight away. If ever a team needed tightening up, it is Watford; their defence is regularly referred to as being of Championship level. But Hodgson will get them organised in meticulous fashion, running the same session over and over, drumming home his principles of shape, structure and pattern of play. It can be monotonous for the players, even boring, and Hodgson’s teams have not always been an easy watch, which is probably why it did not work out for him during that unhappy six-month spell at Liverpool in 2010-11. Or with England. But there is a method to it and Watford are sorely in need of something. Hodgson consistently said that as long as he retained his energy and enthusiasm, he would carry on. As he prepares for his 22nd job as a manager, there is no sign of it fading.Users of self-driving cars should have immunity from a wide range of motoring offences, including dangerous driving, speeding and jumping red lights, Britain’s law commissions have jointly recommended. The Law Commission for England and Wales and the Scottish Law Commission propose creation of an Automated Vehicles Act to reflect the “profound legal consequences” of self-driving cars. The person in the driving seat would no longer responsible for how the car drives; instead, the company or body that obtained authorisation for the self-driving vehicle would face regulatory sanctions if anything went wrong. In a summary of the report, published on Wednesday, the commissions say: “While a vehicle is driving itself, we do not think that a human should be required to respond to events in the absence of a transition demand (a requirement for the driver to take control). It is unrealistic to expect someone who is not paying attention to the road to deal with (for example) a tyre blow-out or a closed road sign. Even hearing ambulance sirens will be difficult for those with a hearing impairment or listening to loud music.” The report says that there should be a clear distinction between driver support and self-driving and that a vehicle should only be classified as the latter if it is safe even when an individual is not monitoring the driving environment, the vehicle or the way that it drives. The commissions say it should be permissible for an autonomous car to create a transition demand for the driver to take control if it confronts an issue it cannot deal with but it must make the demand in a clear fashion, give the individual sufficient time to respond and be able to mitigate the risk if a human fails to take over, by at least coming to a stop. In the US, Tesla’s self-driving technology, sold under the brand names Autopilot and Full Self-Driving, have been involved in multiple crashes, including several fatalities, when neither the system nor the driver intervened. The US Department of Transportation is reviewing Tesla’s use of the term “full self-driving”. In Britain, the commissions recommend new safeguards to stop driver assistance features from being marketed as self-driving. Public law commissioner Nicholas Paines QC said the recommendations presented “an unprecedented opportunity to promote public acceptance of automated vehicles”. Transport minister Trudy Harrison said: “The development of self-driving vehicles in the UK has the potential to revolutionise travel, making every day journeys safer, easier and greener. “This government has been encouraging development and deployment of these technologies to understand their benefits. However, we must ensure we have the right regulations in place, based upon safety and accountability, in order to build public confidence. That’s why the department funded this independent report.” Under the recommendations, which will now be considered by the respective governments, the user-in-charge of a self-driving vehicle would still retain responsibilities such as such as carrying insurance and ensuring that children wear seatbelts. Where vehicles are authorised to drive themselves without anyone in the driver seat, a licensed operator would be responsible for overseeing the journey.The UK advertising watchdog has banned a high-profile marketing campaign by Swedish alt-milk brand Oatly after ruling its green claims were misleading. The Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) launched an investigation into the campaign after receiving 109 complaints from members of the public and the campaign group A Greener World. In one national newspaper ad the company, which attracted investment from Blackstone, Oprah Winfrey and Jay-Z last year ahead of floating on the US stock market in May, claimed “climate experts say cutting dairy and meat products from our diets is the single biggest lifestyle change we can make to reduce our environmental impact”. The ASA said consumers would understand the claim to be a “definitive, objective claim that was based on scientific consensus,” when instead it was the opinion of one climate expert. Oatly maintained that following a vegan diet would reduce a person’s environmental impact more than cutting down their flights, buying an electric car, or purchasing sustainable meat and dairy. In paid-for ads on Twitter and Facebook, Oatly claimed the “dairy and meat industries emit more CO2 than all the world’s planes, trains, cars, boats etc, combined”. However, when the ASA investigated the claim it found Oatley had “overstated” the emissions of the meat and dairy industry because the company did not take into account emissions covering the full life cycle of transport, only emissions when a vehicle is driven. Oatly said it had no plans to repeat the claim and removed posts making similar claims from its own social media channels. Furthermore, two TV ads, which featured children questioning their dads’ decision to drink cow’s milk, claimed that Oatly “generates 73% less CO2e v milk, calculated from grower to grocer”. The ASA said it expected to see the blanket claim based on evidence comparing all Oatly products and types of cow’s milk. However, it was based on a single product. “We concluded that because the evidence was not sufficient to support the claim as consumers would understand it, the ads were misleading,” said the ASA. Oatly spokesman, Tim Knight, said: “It’s clear that we could have been more specific in the way we described some of the scientific data. “We’re a science-based company and take pride in being precise, but we could have been clearer. We talk about these things a lot, because we want to make it easy for people to make an informed switch from dairy to oat drink.” Oatly is the latest big brand to be called out by the ASA after a pledge the watchdog made last September to crackdown on unsubstantiated or misleading green claims being made by firms. Last week, the watchdog banned ads run by Lipton, which is owned by drinks giant Pepsi, over misleading claims that all parts of its bottles are made from 100% recycled plastic.Gains from a UK trade deal with India could be on a par with those from an agreement with the US but risks exposing the economy to tougher competition, a report says. The Resolution Foundation thinktank said successful talks between London and New Delhi had the potential to gain “first-mover” advantage in India and replicate the success of German manufacturing exporters to China. But the report noted there was a risk of Britain’s business services firms – one of the economy’s strongest sectors – being undercut by lower-cost Indian rivals in a repeat of the hollowing out of US manufacturing by Chinese competition. India has traditionally been one of the toughest markets to break into, but is forecast to become the world’s biggest importer by 2050. Anne-Marie Trevelyan, the international trade secretary, opened talks with India’s minister of commerce and industry, Piyush Goyal, earlier this month. The move is part of a pivot towards trade with Asia following Britain’s departure from the EU and slow progress in talks with Washington. The UK is seeking to become a member of the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) – an 11-nation group that includes Japan, Chile, Australia, Canada and Singapore. Sophie Hale, principal economist at the Resolution Foundation, said: “While much of the focus has concentrated on becoming the first European country to join the huge CPTPP region, the far bigger potential economic gains and risks lie in more trade with the huge, rapidly growing, but still relatively closed Indian economy. “Trade liberalisation with India is expected to boost UK manufacturing in the short term, but could also benefit business services, where UK firms already enjoy a competitive advantage, and where demand is set to soar.” Hale’s report said UK firms exporting to India currently face far higher tariffs (19%, on average) than they do to the US (2%), providing far more scope for trade liberalisation. Securing a free trade agreement with India could also give UK firms a first-mover competitive advantage over exporting firms in the US and EU, which don’t have preferential access to the Indian economy. India is forecast to become the world’s third-largest import market by 2050, while its demand for business, telecommunications and computer services – sectors where UK export firms already perform well – is expected to treble over the course of the 2020s. “But India is changing as well as growing, so any trade deal means accepting uncertainty about the competition that will face UK firms, as the price for access to a fast-expanding market,” Hale said. The report noted India had a comparative advantage in the export of business services – especially the high-end business services sector clustered in London and the south-east.Here is a summary of the latest key developments: Boris Johnson is braced for the most perilous 48 hours of his premiership, with exasperated Conservative MPs due to see an official inquiry by the senior civil servant Sue Gray, reportedly set to be published this week. The Metropolitan Police has launched an investigation into alleged parties held in Number 10 during lockdown. Officers were looking into “potential breaches of Covid-19 regulations” in Downing Street and Whitehall since 2020, Commissioner Cressida Dick said. Number 10 said it had not yet received Sue Gray’s report but reports say the PM could make a statement on it in the House of Commons on Wednesday afternoon. Many Conservative MPs said they are waiting for the report before deciding whether to try to remove Johnson. North West Leicestershire MP Andrew Bridgen said he hoped the report would be published “unredacted” on Wednesday. Northern Ireland minister Conor Burns claimed the prime minister had been “ambushed with a cake” during his birthday when, according to reports, his wife Carrie Johnson organised a surprise birthday get-together on 19 June 2020 against Covid restrictions. Labour leader Keir Starmer said trust in Boris Johnson is at an “all-time low”, adding that some members of the Cabinet “need to look themselves in the mirror and ask themselves why they are still supporting this prime minister.” Tory MPs have told The Telegraph that Boris Johnson would have to go as prime minister if he was fined for breaching Covid laws. One said: If you are found to have broken the laws that you yourself have set, I do think that would be impossible for you to continue. And frankly, anyone with decency would not do so. And another told the paper: If the Met rules against the PM, he will have to go. From their associate editor, Christopher Hope: The findings of the Sue Gray inquiry will not be handed to Downing Street this evening, according to reports. The Times’ Steven Swinford says this means the report will likely not be published before Thursday. The Daily Telegraph’s Ben Riley-Smith also quotes sources that the report has not been handed to Downing Street. The Daily Mirror’s Pippa Crerar maintains there is still speculation that the report will be published tomorrow. From ITV News’s Anushka Asthana: Tory whips have reportedly told MPs that Sue Gray’s report will be published tomorrow. From PoliticsHome’s senior correspondent, Adam Payne: But the Daily Telegraph’s Christopher Hope said there is a huge amount of uncertainty in parliament and that no one really knows when the report will be published. As Boris Johnson prepares to face possibly his most difficult day in politics, Tory MPs said his fate was “hanging in the balance”. Two tumultuous months could come to a head with the publication of a report by the senior civil servant Sue Gray, whose gathering of evidence and interviewing of key witnesses for her inquiry into Downing Street parties could provide the spark for a leadership challenge. Arch-critics of the prime minister are hopeful that Gray’s findings will be damaging enough to trigger what they believe will be the final trickle of letters needed to get to 54 and force a no confidence vote. One said: “No 10 has shifted the goalposts so far now, but it’s clear Johnson misled the House when he assured us no rules were broken in Downing Street. There’s no chance many others will be able to escape that conclusion.” Another was confident that colleagues would take the choice to “end this nightmare ourselves” and when asking themselves “how much they are willing to put up with”, decide this week that inaction was “not sustainable”. Read the full article here: Northern Ireland Minister Conor Burns, one of the PM’s staunch allies, has claimed that Boris Johnson was “ambushed with a cake” when, according to reports, his wife Carrie Johnson organised a surprise birthday gathering on 19 June 2020. Speaking to Channel 4 News this evening, he said: It was not a premeditated, organised party in that sense, that the prime minister himself decided to have. As far as I can see, he was, in a sense, ambushed with a cake. They came to his office with a cake, they sang Happy Birthday, he was there for 10 minutes. I don’t think most people looking at that at home would characterise that as a party. Here’s a clip from the interview: Tory MP Andrew Bridgen said he hoped Sue Gray’s report would be published on Wednesday. Speaking to Channel 4 News, he said the conclusions of the civil servant’s inquiry should be published “unredacted”. He added: I think the sooner the report comes out now the better, if it is completed, because we can’t sit under this cloud, paralysing the Prime Minister, paralysing the government. Referencing the threat of Russian invasion into Ukraine, he continued: These issues that are hanging over our government at the moment, they need to be dealt with as soon as possible and I do hope that Sue Gray gets her report in tonight and it is published tomorrow. Boris Johnson spent several hours today meeting with a number of Tory MPs who were wavering in their support of him, PoliticsHome reports. Sources told the website that MPs have apparently been in and out of his office all day and that those invited are a “real mixture” of the Tory cohort, including several less rebellious MPs that may seem “surprising”. They said Johnson met with 2019-intake MPs this morning, before meeting with other rebel MPs across the afternoon and into the evening. An update from ITV News’ Robert Peston The Sue Gray report will “make for very uncomfortable reading” for Boris Johnson and Tory MPs, ITV News reports. Its political editor, Robert Peston, said the PM may have already seen the report, adding that it would “make clear that it is up to the police to decide if the law has been broken, civil service HR to decide whether officials should be punished and Tory MPs whether the PM should be sacked”. Rishi Sunak accidentally attended Boris Johnson’s birthday gathering on 19 June 2020, Yahoo News UK reports. According to a Treasury source, the chancellor went to the cabinet room for a Covid strategy committee meeting, and happened upon the celebration. From their political correspondent, Nadine Batchelor-Hunt: Keir Starmer has said trust in Boris Johnson is at an “all-time low”. Speaking this evening, the Labour leader has said some members of the cabinet need to “look themselves in the mirror” and ask why they are still supporting the prime minister. He added: There’s a Metropolitan police investigation into the goings on in Downing Street. It’s time that some of those cabinet members spoke out and said we’re not tolerating this any longer. The shadow attorney general, Emily Thornberry, said the public “all know what happened”. Speaking to BBC News, she said: He was having parties in No 10. He wasn’t applying any of the rules to himself. He thought he was Julius Caesar or something, like the rules didn’t apply to him. Crispin Blunt, a long-serving Tory backbencher, has characterised partygate as a “premier-class Whitehall farce”. Speaking to BBC Radio 4 this evening, he said: This whole episode is really beginning to descend into a premier-class Whitehall farce. We’ve lost our sense of perspective on this. Everybody needs to take a step back and try to put themselves in the same situation as the centre of the government was, in 2020 – the fact we very nearly lost our prime minister. You know how hard civil servants work at the heart of our government – they work every night God sends combating a completely unprecedented public health crisis for our country. We’ve now got the Metropolitan police investing alleged criminality – in breathless tones from the deputy leader of the opposition about some terrible offence – which would attract a fixed penalty notice. No one is suggesting that if the prime minister had been caught speeding that he should be sacked – I hope. He shouldn’t be driving himself in any case! But let’s try and get it into perspective. Sky News’ Beth Rigby reports that No 10 is preparing the ground for a statement by Boris Johnson on Sue Gray’s report tomorrow. Government officials have handed over images of alleged parties in Downing Street to investigators, Sky News reports. The photographs, seen by Sue Gray, are believed to feature Boris Johnson and show people close together with wine bottles. From Sky News’ deputy political editor, Sam Coates: Savanta ComRes has published some new polling on partygate. It suggests more than half of voters do not trust the Metropolitan police to investigate partygate, and more than half of voters think fines would be too lenient as punishment for breaches of the Covid rules. Here is an extract from the news release. Half (51%) of the British public say that they do not trust the Metropolitan police investigation to uncover whether Coronavirus rules and regulations were broken at a series of lockdown get-togethers in No 10 Downing Street according to a snap poll by Savanta ComRes. And although two in five (42%) say that they do trust the Met’s investigation, only 8% say that they trust it “a great deal”. The investigation by the Metropolitan police is likely to only have the power to issue fines to those it finds have breached Coronavirus regulations, and a majority (59%) of the public say that this is too lenient, including 42% of 2019 Conservative voters. A third (32%) of the public say that fixed penalty notices are about a fair punishment. The poll also suggests 67% of people think Boris Johnson should resign - “although this figure is practically unchanged from earlier this month when the prime minister admitted to briefly attending a BYOB drinks event in the Downing Street garden while Britain was in its first full lockdown”, Savanta ComRes says. That is all from me for today. My colleague Leonie Chao-Fong is taking over now. From ITV’s Anushka Asthana Conor Burns, a Northern Ireland minister and one of the arch Johnson loyalists in government, told BBC News that, with the Covid pandemic easing, the PM would “relish getting back to the domestic agenda”. He also said he thought Boris Johnson would see off the threat to his leadership. He said: I believe that there will not be a vote of confidence, I believe that Boris Johnson will be prime minister for many years ahead, and I believe that Boris Johnson will win the next general election. The lack of doubt on show from the Johnson Praetorian Guard today (see Jacob Rees-Mogg this morning at 11.51am for another example) is certainly a notch or two beyond what we have heard from them in the past. But their public certainty is probably in inverse proportion to the confidence they feel in private about the PM’s chances of survival. ITV’s Robert Peston has also been told that the Sue Gray report is set for publication within the next 24 hours. Pippa Crerar, the Daily Mirror’s political editor, says No 10 is expected to get the Sue Gray report tonight. No 10 has always said it expects to release the report to MPs, and to the public, soon after receiving it from Gray and her team. Opposition parties are renewing their calls for the Sue Gray report to be published in full this week. Kirsten Oswald, the SNP’s deputy leader at Westminster, said: Sue Gray’s report cannot be kicked into the long grass while the Metropolitan police conduct their investigation. There is nothing stopping Ms Gray’s report from being published as planned, given that the Metropolitan police has not raised any objections. And this is from Alistair Carmichael, the Lib Dem home affairs spokesman. At the afternoon lobby briefing the PM’s spokesman denied claims that No 10 wanted to delay publication of parts of the Sue Gray report. He told reporters: I have seen reports suggesting that we were seeking to prevent the publication and that is not accurate. (Actually, those reports were based on what Downing Street itself was saying this morning. See 12.55pm.) But, in terms of what would be published, the spokesman said this was unresolved. He said: There are discussions still ongoing between the investigations team and the police. That still needs to be worked through both in relation to what may or may not be published and the ongoing work of both the police and the investigation. At the afternoon lobby briefing No 10 insisted that it was not trying to block publication of the Sue Gray report. But it said that discussions between the police and the inquiry team were still ongoing as to what could be published. And the Times is now reporting this as definite. “Sue Gray, the civil servant investigating lockdown breaking parties in Downing Street, still intends to publish her report this week despite a police investigation into potential criminality,” Fiona Hamilton, Oliver Wright and Steven Swinford report in their story (paywall). They go on: Whitehall sources said that Gray had cleared publication with the Metropolitan Police and plans to hand it over to Boris Johnson later this week. They added that while the final decision on whether to publish would be in the hands of the prime minister they expected that it would be released in full. The Sun’s Harry Cole also thinks we now may get the whole of the Sue Gray report this week (as originally expected at the start of the day). John McTernan, who worked for Tony Blair in Downing Street at the time of the cash-for-honours investigation (see 12.26pm), has posted a thread on Twitter with some advice for No 10 staffers who get questioned by the police. It starts here. Douglas Ross, the Scottish Conservative leader, has renewed his call for Boris Johnson to resign. This is from the BBC’s Glenn Campbell. The BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg is getting the same steer that Sky’s Sam Coates has been getting. (See 3.19pm.) Despite what No 10 said at the lobby briefing (see 12.55pm) and Michael Ellis, the Cabinet Office minister, told MPs (see 12.41pm), Sam Coates from Sky News says he has been told that the Sue Gray report may now be published in full - and that the plan to publish the findings about the non-criminal No 10 events first, but to leave the findings about the events being investigated by the police until later (see 12.55pm) has been shelved. Coates told on Sky News that publishing the full report was an option, but that it was not clear yet how probable an option it was. The terms of reference (pdf) for the Gray investigation say: As with all internal investigations, if during the course of the work any evidence emerges of behaviour that is potentially a criminal offence, the matter will be referred to the police and the Cabinet Office’s work may be paused. No 10 seems to have been treating this as evidence that publication of the findings relevant to the Met inquiry should be paused. But the wording only says the Gray inquiry “may” have to be paused on these grounds. The wording also talks about criminal offences. A breach of lockdown rules dealt with via a fixed-penalty notice (a fine) would not count as a criminal offence; for example, it would not have to be declared to an employer. (Dame Cressida Dick, the Met police commissioner, made it clear this morning that these were the sort of offences that would result in a fine - see 11.03am.) And the whole rationale for pausing a civil service investigation would be to avoid prejudicing a police inquiry and a possible court case. But the Met has signalled that it does not expect these matters to end up in court, and it is hard to see how the investigation would prejudice the police inquiry because the police inquiry seems to be almost entirely based on what the Cabinet Office has discovered. YouGov has released polling suggesting 62% of Britons think Boris Johnson should resign. Two weeks ago it was 56%. James Johnson, a pollster who worked in Downing Street when Theresa May was prime minister, reckons Keir Starmer is the big winner from today’s events. He explains why in a short Twitter thread. Deputy assistant commissioner Jane Connors, the Metropolitan police’s lead for Covid-19, is responsible for the investigation into alleged rule-breaking parties in Downing Street, PA Media reports. A Scotland Yard spokesperson said: The special enquiry team will lead the investigations. DAC Jane Connors will oversee the investigation in her role as the Met’s lead officer for Covid. Sir Edward Leigh, the Conservative backbencher, has told Sky News that he thinks the mood in his party is more “stable” now than it was. He said he thought the flow of letters to the 1922 Committee chair calling for a no-confidence vote in Boris Johnson was drying up, and that the public were “moving on” from the partygate story. In a statement on the police inquiry into parties at No 10 from the Green party, the Green peer Jenny Jones said: I welcome this much delayed police investigation into rule breaking by the prime minister’s office. The decision, finally, to investigate partygate suggests there were serious and flagrant breaches of the rules at the time ... I hope the Met will now look at the charge of “misconduct in public office” as this allows the use of search warrants and goes beyond what Sue Gray has been able to do. It would also be good to see the Met police add other matters to their list of questions such as cash for peerages, the fast track scheme of PPE contracts and cash for access involving the decoration of the Downing Street flat. Jones may have been reading these tweets from Adam Wagner, the lawyer and lockdown regulation specialist. Here is the start of the PA Media story about Boris Johnson’s statement to MPs about the Russsian threat to Ukraine. Britain is prepared to deploy troops to protect Nato allies in Europe should Russia invade Ukraine, Boris Johnson said, as he warned Vladimir Putin faces “ferocious” Ukrainian resistance. The prime minister also said the UK and its allies stand ready to impose “heavy economic sanctions” on Russia and voiced fears that any invasion would result in “bloodshed comparable to the first war in Chechnya or Bosnia”. Johnson told the House of Commons: “If Russia pursues this path, many Russian mothers’ sons will not be coming home. The response in the international community would be the same and the pain that would be inflicted on the Russian economy will be the same.” He made an appeal for diplomacy to resolve the tensions and avoid a war that would “earn and would deserve the condemnation of history”. Labour leader Keir Starmer said his party “stands resolute” in supporting Ukraine’s independence and sovereignty. Earlier, foreign secretary Liz Truss failed to rule out UK combat troops being sent to help defend Ukraine - but told MPs such a scenario is “unlikely”. Johnson, making a statement to the Commons, went on to say: “The British army leads the Nato battle group in Estonia and if Russia invades Ukraine, we would look to contribute to any new Nato deployments to protect our allies in Europe.” In a blog with his asssessment of the implications of the police decision to investigate the No 10 parties, Robert Peston, ITV’s political editor, also concludes this is a bad development for the Conservative party. Here’s an extract. Some will say it gives the PM more time to prepare his excuses for whenever the Met reaches its conclusions and Gray publishes, and gives him more time to lobby his anxious MPs that this is not the time to throw him out. But the Gray report will be what it is, whenever it is published. And those close to the investigation tell me that although she will not pass explicit judgment on whether the PM has lied to public and parliament, breaching the ministerial code – and will not do so because that is not her remit – neutral readers of what she eventually publishes would struggle to reach any other conclusion. Gavin Barwell, chief of staff for Theresa May when she was PM, has posted a thread on Twitter on the implications of the police decision to investigate No 10 parties. It starts here. And here is one of his conclusions. The decision to pause the publication of the parts of the Sue Gray report relating to events being investigated by the police seems to have been taken by government, not by the Met, my colleague Vikram Dodd reports. He has been told, by sources with knowledge of its discussions and actions, that the Met did not raise any objection to the publication of the Gray report. In his response to Johnson, Keir Starmer said Labour supported the government’s moves to help Ukraine to defend itself, and to deter Russia from further aggression. He said for too long the west had allowed Putin to think he could do what he liked. That message had to change, he said. Russia should be shown that further aggression would result in severe consequences. Starmer also said the government should do more to stop the UK being used as a “laundromat” for illicit money from the Russian elite. Johnson is now talking about the Russian threat to Ukraine. He says he shudders to contemplate what would happen if there were an invasion. Ukrainian resistance would be “dogged and tenacious”, and the bloodshed comparable to that in the Chechnya or Bosnia conflicts, he says. Russia would create a wasteland and there would never be peace. He says that when he spoke to President Putin in December, he told him that Nato had no thought of encircling or threatening his country. But he also told Putin that Ukraine had the right to protection too, he says. He says he told Putin that an attack on Ukraine would be met by tougher sanctions. He summarises what was agreed at the video conference of leading Nato leaders last night. Johnson says the UK has provided Ukraine with anti-armour missiles. If Putin chooses the path of bloodshed and destruction, that will be “tragic and futile”, he says. He says that when he spoke to Putin in December, he said Russia and Britain had stood together in the past. And he says both sides would yet find a path to mutual security “through patient and principled diplomacy”. Boris Johnson is making his statement to MPs. It will mostly be on Ukraine, but he starts by talking about the police investigation. He says he commissioned the investigation into events in Downing Street. That involved sharing information with the police continuously, and so he welcomes the Met police decision to launch their own investigation, he says. I believe this will help to give the public the clarity it needs and help to draw a line under matters. But Johnson says he also wants to assure people that the government is focused “100% on dealing with the people’s priorities”, including defending freedom around the world. UPDATE: Johnson said: A few weeks ago I commissioned an independent inquiry into a series of events in Downing Street, in the Cabinet Office as well as some other Whitehall departments that may have constituted potential breaches of the Covid regulations. That process has quite properly involved sharing information continuously with the Metropolitan police, so I welcome the Met’s decision to conduct its own investigation because I believe this will help to give the public the clarity it needs and help to draw a line under matters. But I want to reassure the House and the country, that I and the whole government are focused 100% on dealing with the people’s priorities, including the UK’s leading role in protecting freedom around the world. Justin Madders (Lab) asks why the PM is still in his job when he told MPs there was no party. Ellis says people work are entitled to a “reasonable break”. He says eating cake for 10 minutes does not constitute a party. Back in the Commons Lia Nici (Con) claimed her constituents were “sick and tired” of hearing opposition MPs go on continually about partygate. She asked Michael Ellis, the minister, to pass on to the PM their support, and their desire for him to carry on implementing his policies. Ellis said other MPs were passing on the same message. This is what the PM’s spokesman told journalists at the Downing Street lobby briefing about the PM’s reaction to the Met police inquiry. Firstly, the prime minister thinks it is entirely right for the police to investigate these matters. He commissioned the Cabinet Office to establish the facts and, as set out in the published terms of reference, and as the [Met] commissioner has said this morning, the independent process has always involved the sharing of information with the Met and the ability for the Met to take forward and investigate matters pertaining to the law, as is right. The PM fully acknowledges the public’s anger and concern about what has been reported, he has taken responsibility for his judgments made and it is right the Met should be now given the time and space to undertake their investigations. It will provide the public with welcome clarity and help draw a line under these events and everyone required will fully co-operate in any way they are asked. The spokesman also said that Boris Johnson knew before cabinet started that the Met commissioner would be announcing a police investigation. But he did not mention it during cabinet, apart from an allusion to it at the end, the spokesman said. Mark Jenkinson (Con) says the opposition benches are “in cahoots with the media” to undemocratically unseat the prime minister because he is a threat to them. In the Commons Stuart Anderson (Con) tells MPs that calling for Boris Johnson’s resignation is only “strengthening Putin’s hand”. Every time the opposition call for our prime minister to resign, does my right honourable friend agree that we’re only strengthening Putin’s hand and destabilising negotiations? In the Common Giles Watling (Con) say this urgent question is “a vexatious waste of everybody’s time”. The Speaker, Sir Linsday Hoyle, says that is a reflection on his judgment in granting it. Watling withdraws his question. In the Commons some Conservative MPs are defending Boris Johnson. Sir Edward Leigh urges colleagues to maintain “a sense of proportion” about the PM being given a piece of cake by staff. And Richard Bacon said this was not as serious as Tony Blair being interviewed by the police about cash for honours (see 12.26pm), or a Labour MP taking money from a Chinese spy. The Downing Street lobby briefing has just finished, and the PM’s spokesman has confirmed that the findings of the Sue Gray inquiry into the events now being investigated by the police will not be published until the inquiry is over. In the Commons a few minutes ago Michael Ellis, a minister, said the Gray inquiry would continue. But at the lobby briefing the spokesman implied that the Gray inquiry would be effectively split in two. The findings relating to events that were not deemed illegal might be published soon, he implied. But the other findings would be held back. The spokesman told journalistss: As the terms of reference make clear, they won’t publish anything that relates to the work of the police, there are a number of events and allegations that they have looked into that the police said don’t reach their threshold, which they are able to continue looking into. And it is my understanding that they will be able to publish detail about those events rather than ones which the police might be taking forward. It’s up to the investigation team when they publish, it’s my understanding they are able to publish the aspects that aren’t a matter for the police. The spokeman also told reporters that Boris Johnson thought it was “entirely right” for the police to investigate. The prime minister think it is entirely right for the police to investigate these matters. He commissioned the Cabinet Office to find out the facts. The spokesman sidestepped questions about whether Johnson is now getting legal advice ahead of the police inquiry. But he said Johnson still does not think he broke the law. Ellis says Rayner he agrees with her they should be focusing on cost-of-living matters instead. The fact that the police are investigating does not mean people will be fined, he says. He says “potentially” is an operable word. He cites the statement from Cressida Dick. (In fact, unusually, the Met statement about this investigation implied there was little doubt about the law having been broken in this case. See 11.03am.) Angela Rayner, the deputy Labour leader, says the terms of reference for the Sue Gray inquiry say if evidence of criminal behaviour is found, it must be referred to the police. When will the Gray report be published? Will it be published in full, with accompanying evidence? What will Gray do while the police investigation is under way? Is the chancellor cooperating with the Gray inquiry, as a resident of Downing Street? Rayner says only a few weeks ago the PM said there was no party. How does Ellis explain that? Michael Ellis, the Cabinet Office minister, is responding to the Labour UQ. He says he recognises public indignation that people setting the rules “may” not have been following them. That “may” prompts some laughter. He repeats the point he made two weeks ago about how, if evidence of criminality occurred, the matter could be referred to the police. He says there has been contact between the police and Sue Gray’s team. But the Cabinet Office investigation led by Gray will continue, he says. He says the findings of the investigation will be provided to MPs, and made public. He says he cannot comment on an ongoing police investigation. From my colleague Jessica Elgot A reader has been in touch to ask if Downing Street has ever been investigated by the police before. The answer is yes, and not that long ago. When Tony Blair was PM, the police investigated claims that honours had been effectively sold by No 10 (the cash-for-honours scandal). The prime minister’s chief fundraiser, and a key No 10 aide, were arrested as part of the inquiry, but eventually the CPS decided not to press charges. Blair himself was interviewed by the police as part of the inquiry. But, in what may set a precedence of sorts for this case, Blair was not interviewed under caution. In other words, he was interviewed as a witness, not as a suspect. Around that time it was reported that the police were told by Downing Street that, if they did interview Blair under caution, he felt would have to resign. Whether Boris Johnson will feel the same principle ought to apply in his case is yet to be revealed. Michael Fabricant, the Conservative backbencher, has been one of Boris Johnson’s most vocal supporters in recent days, but not all his contributions to the public debate have been judged wise or helpful by colleagues. This may be another contribution to the collection. For an alternative view, this is from Iain Dale, the broadcaster and former Conservative party aide. The Conservative MP Simon Hoare has said Boris Johnson’s situation is “increasingly difficult”, Bloomberg’s Kitty Donaldson reports. Lord Evans, the chairman of the Committee on Standards in Public Life, said this morning that MPs should have “less direct involvement” in “judging each other” on their conduct. Giving evidence to the Commons standards committee on the code of conduct for MPs, he said: I think that in terms of the public credibility of disciplinary processes, if you want to put it in those terms, I think the general sort of direction of travel in recent years has been towards more independence. So ... 40 years ago, many of the professions would have looked to their professional body to regulate them. I think, increasingly, that has proved not to be as effective as there has been a public appetite for - so, accountancy ... has a separate regulator now, and that’s true of many of the other professions. I think there is a scepticism as to whether ... adjudicating on the behaviour of your friends and close associates is credible. So our view was that in terms of the effectiveness and credibility of the system... less direct involvement of MPs in judging each other would have greater credibility. Sadiq Khan, the Labour mayor of London, has welcomed the news that the Met police are investigating lockdown breaches at No 10. He said: I welcome confirmation that the Met police is investigating a number of events that took place at Downing Street and Whitehall in the last two years in relation to potential breaches of the law. The public rightly expect the police to uphold the law without fear or favour, no matter who that involves, and I have been clear that members of the public must be able to expect the highest standards from everyone, including the prime minister and those around him. No one is above the law. There cannot be one rule for the government and another for everyone else. Boris Johnson is due to make a statement to MPs about the Russian threat to Ukraine. It will start at around 1.15pm. At the London assembly committee hearing Dame Cressida Dick, commissioner of the Metropolitan police, was asked if any of the officers guarding Downing Street had expressed concerns about parties. She replied: There are a number of officers posted in the surrounds of Downing Street and indeed what we call generally the government security zone. They have a very clear role and that is protective security. You’ll be aware that the ones you see are all armed, and they have a job to do. In relation to anything they may have seen or heard, or done or not done. Again, I’m afraid I’m not prepared to comment. But I can assure you that we are carrying out our investigations and if that is a relevant matter, we will find out about that. This is from David Davis, the former Brexit secretary, who last week told Boris Johnson at PMQs that he should resign. As he left No 10 after cabinet, Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons and one of Boris Johnson’s stronger supporters, brushed off questions about the police investigation. He told reporters: The government is going from strength to strength. The government has done an amazing job: the vaccine rollout, the furlough programme, the economy [bouncing back to] pre-pandemic level. The leadership of Boris Johnson this country has had has been so brilliant that he’s got us through this incredibly difficult period and he’s got all the decisions right. We have opened up faster than any other European country thanks to the prime minister and I’m honoured to be under his leadership. Sue Gray will not publish her inquiry until the Met police have concluded their investigation into alleged criminal activity in Downing Street, according to sources. The Met police confirmed that Gray had handed over her preliminary findings. A Cabinet Office spokesman said work would continue on the inquiry. “The investigation being carried out by Sue Gray is continuing,” the spokesman said. “There is in ongoing contact with the Metropolitan police service.” The inquiry’s terms of reference state: As with all internal investigations, if during the course of the work any evidence emerges of behaviour that is potentially a criminal offence, the matter will be referred to the police and the Cabinet Office’s work may be paused. Matters relating to adherence to the law are properly for the police to investigate and the Cabinet Office will liaise with them as appropriate. In a statement, the Metropolitan police said: The MPS has had ongoing contact with the Cabinet Office in relation to its inquiry into allegations of gatherings. Throughout this process specialist MPS detectives, supported by senior officers, have continually considered whether criminal investigation into any of these events was proportionate based on the available information. In recent days the Cabinet Office has provided outline findings from its inquiry to the MPS. The Sue Gray report into partygate will now be delayed, according to the FT’s Sebastian Payne. What is not clear yet, though, is how long the Gray report will be delayed. In the Commons two weeks ago Michael Ellis, a Cabinet Office minister, told MPs that if there was a police investigation, the Gray report might be shelved until the police inquiry had concluded. “If evidence emerges of what was a potentially criminal offence the matter would be referred to the Metropolitan police and the Cabinet Office’s work may be paused,” he said. Neil Coyle, the Labour MP who referred the parties to the Metropolitan police, said Dame Cressida Dick, the Metropolitan police commissioner, had “serious questions to answer about why the investigation could only be launched now”. Coyle told the Guardian: It has taken a civil servant whose boss is the prime minister to insist the Metropolitan police investigate these alleged breaches - including taking evidence from its own officers. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, has been granted an urgent question in the Commons on the Met police investigation into partygate. It will start at around 12.30pm. And she has issued a statement saying she does not see how Boris Johnson can continue as prime minister in the light of the investigation. She said: We welcome this investigation by the Metropolitan police. With Boris Johnson’s Downing Street now under police investigation, how on earth can he think he can stay on as prime minister? Millions of people are struggling to pay the bills, but Boris Johnson and his government are too wrapped up in scandal to do anything about it. Boris Johnson is a national distraction. Conservative MPs should stop propping him up and he should finally do the decent thing and resign. And this is what Dame Cressida Dick told the London assembly’s police and crime committee in her opening statement about the criteria used to decide when the Met would investigate historic complaints about lockdown breaches. But, recognising that there might be some occasions where we would investigate retrospectively, we generated some guidelines, only guidelines, but guidelines that we have stuck to. And you will be aware that we have, on occasion, investigated retrospectively. Some of my own officers, a few, have received penalty notices when we heard after the fact that they had breached the guidelines. One or two high-profile people also, when it was plain that they had admitted, and there was good evidence, they also after the fact, a few weeks after the fact, received penalty notices. And the occasions on which we have done that have been where we were looking at something which appeared to be the most serious and flagrant type of breach, and where three factors came into play. There has to be some kind of evidence - not just somebody saying something. But my three factors were and are: that there was evidence that those involved knew or ought to have known that what they were doing was an offence; where not investigating would significantly undermine the legitimacy of the law; and where there was little ambiguity around the absence of any reasonable defence. So in those cases, where those criteria were met, the guidelines suggested that we should potentially investigate further and end up giving people tickets [fines]. These are not criteria that have been widely publicised by the Met before. The fact that Dick says some No 10 parties are now being investigated therefore means that the Met considers that they appear to constitute “the most serious and flagrant type of breach”. This is what Dame Cressida Dick told the London assembly’s police and crime committee about why the Met generally has not investigated historic complaints about lockdown breaches. We do have finite resources, and even more so during the worst periods of the pandemic, when our officers fell ill as well as other people. And our view was, and is, that it would not normally be a proportionate use of officers’ time to spend their time, bearing in mind the nature of the offences, after the fact investigating what could have been thousands of complaints. These are summary only offences. The people who commit them get a fixed-penalty notice. I think in general the public would understand that we need to focus on violent crime and terrorism and other priorities, as well, of course, as doing our bit during the pandemic. Ed Davey, the Lib Dem leader, has responded to the Met police’s announcement by saying he expects to see Boris Johnson interviewed under caution at his local police station. He said: This is the first step towards justice for millions across the country who have felt so much pain and anger at Boris Johnson’s behaviour. Boris Johnson is not above the law, he must be treated like anyone else. I now expect the Met to question Boris Johnson under caution at his local police station. If found guilty, he and any others in Downing Street who have broken Covid rules should be fined in the same way as ordinary members of the public. Here is the statement from Dame Cressida Dick, the Metropolitan police commissioner, announcing that No 10 is now being investigated for breach of lockdown rules. We have a long-established and effective working relationship with the Cabinet Office, who have an investigative capability. As you well know they have been carrying out an investigation over the last few weeks. What I can tell you this morning is that as a result of the information provided by the Cabinet Office inquiry team and, secondly, my officers’ own assessment, I can confirm that the Met is now investigating a number of events that took place at Downing Street and Whitehall in the last two years in relation to potential breaches of Covid-19 regulations. The fact that we are now investigating does not, of course, mean that fixed-penalty notices will necessarily be issued in every instance and to every person involved. We will not be giving a running commentary on our current investigations. Q: Is the alleged party at CCHQ included? Dick says there have been various reports in the media. She will not say which ones are being investigated and which are not. But she repeats her previous points about how some events are not being investigated. The questioning on partygate has now finished. Dick is now taking questions about the Stephen Port case. Dick says she is “confident” in the inquiry the Cabinet Office has carried out into these events. Q: When will you update the public on this investigation? Dick says she cannot say. But she says they will not give a running commentary. Dick says she is going to explain her general approach. They have followed the four E’s: explain the rules, engage with people, [encourage people to obey] and only enforce as a last resort. She says most people responded very well to police engagement. The police have “finite resources”, she says. This was a particular problem during the pandemic when people fell ill. Normally it would not be a “proportionate” use of officers’ time investigating offences committed in the past. These are summary offences that attract fines. She says it was better to focus on serious crime. The police have guidelines. And sometimes the police have investigated retrospectively. Some police officers were investigated after the fact for breaking Covid rules. And some high-profile people were investigated too. She says these cases were “the most serious and flagrant” kind of breach. Four conditions had to apply. There had to be evidence, she says. She says those involved had to know they were committing an offence, the cases had to risk undermining the law, and there had to be little ambiguity about a reasonable defence. She says the Met has a good relationship with the Cabinet Office. On the basis of what they have said, and on the basis of an assessment by the police, she says she can now confirm that the Met is investigating “a number of events that took place at Downing Street and Whitehall in the last two years in relation to potential breaches of Covid-19 regulations”. She says other cases are not being investigated because they do not meet the threshold for criminal investigation. The police will not give a running commentary, she says. The first questions are about partygate. Unmesh Desai, a Labour member of the committee, asks about government Covid breaches not investigated by the Met. He says public trust in the Met has waned. Will the commissioner review the way she polices the government? Dick says the Met police “without fear or favour”, impartially, and in an operationally manner. She says she has investigated more politicians than any other senior officer. She says: I absolutely understand that there is deep public concern about the allegations that have been in the media in recent weeks. Dame Cressida Dick, the Metropolitan police commissioner, is appearing now before the London assembly’s police and crime committee. There is a live feed here. Gordon Brown, the former Labour prime minister, told ITV’s Good Morning Britain that Boris Johnson’s failure to follow lockdown rules was a moral issue. He explained: I could not go to the funeral of a very close relative last year at the same time. I couldn’t visit a dying friend in hospital, and there are thousands and thousands of families who were in that position. Therefore, this is not a political issue. This is a moral issue about whether the standards you ask people to follow are standards you are prepared to follow yourself. Brown was on the programme to talk about his call for the international community to find billions of pounds to prevent starvation in Afghanistan. According to the Guido Fawkes blog, Dame Cressida Dick, the commissioner of the Metropolitan police, will tell the London assembly’s police and crime committee that the Met will now investigate partying at No 10 when she gives evidence this morning. The hearing starts at 10am. There is a live feed here. Good morning. There have now been reports of so many parties or gatherings at No 10 during lockdown that it is hard to keep track (my colleague Aubrey Allegretti has a list here), but different events provoke outrage for different reasons. Some were outrageous because they were clearly full-on parties, by any definition, that could not remotely be described as work events. Two were inflammatory because they took place the night before Prince Philip’s funeral, when civil servants were supposed to be acting with particular decorum. The party in the garden on 20 May 2020 was a shocker too, because it took place despite the organiser being told being advised it was a mistake, and Boris Johnson turned up himself and now claims not to have realised it was against the rules. In some respects the latest revelation is less serious. Whether it was a proper party is in dispute. But because it was a birthday event, it has huge resonance for all of us who did forgo proper birthday parties during lockdown because we were prepared to follow the rules outlined so often by Johnson himself. Here is our overnight story, from my colleagues Jessica Elgot and Aubrey Allegretti. By chance or design, Grant Shapps, the transport secretary, was doing the broadcast round for the government this morning. Shapps is one of the best broadcast performers in government, and if anyone can put a relatively positive gloss on a PR monstrosity, it’s him. But today he didn’t really try. Yes, he argued that the event was not technically a party. He stressed that it was important to wait for the Sue Gray report into partygate. He praised Johnson’s record on Covid and the vaccine rollout, and he argued that events like the Russian threat to Ukraine were more important. But, in his interviews, Shapps did not try to defend the birthday party/gathering and he did not contest claims that it was against the rules. “I don’t want to present a defence because I would be adding speculation to speculation,” he told the Today programme’s Justin Webb. And later Shapps said: What’s in dispute is how many people were there, how long, whether people were socially distanced. But I’m not seeking to defend it. I’m merely saying that with a little bit of patience we can get the facts [from the Sue Gray report]. When it was put to him that the birthday event should not have gone ahead, Shapps said: I think it’s clearly unwise to do those things, and the prime minister has already said, with reference [to the party in the No 10 garden on 20 May 2020] that he should have sent people inside. Webb then put it to him that Adam Wagner, a lawyer who’s an expert on lockdown rules, says the birthday celebration in the cabinet room was clearly against the rules. Shapps did not contest that. He said the event was “unwise, I’m sure, given the circumstances as we know them”. And Webb put it to him that he knew, in his “heart of hearts”, this was not defensible. Again, Shapps did not try very hard to disagree. The prime minister has already been categorical. He’s said that he accepts everything that’s happened under his watch, that he takes ultimate responsibility, and that mistakes are made, a better way of putting it. Other ministers giving interviews on partygate in recent weeks have struggled, but it is hard to recall anyone putting up the white flag quite so easily. If the person put up to defend No 10 won’t even try to defend it, the PM might be in even more trouble than he realised. Here is the agenda for the day. 9.30am: Boris Johnson chairs cabinet. 10am: Dame Cressida Dick, commissioner of the Metropolitian police, is questioned by the London assembly’s police and crime committee. 10am: Lord Evans, chair of the Committee on Standards in Public Life, gives evidence to the Commons standards committee on the code of conduct for MPs. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. 11.30am: Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, takes questions in the Commons. 2pm: Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, gives a Covid statement to MSPs. 2.30pm: Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, gives evidence to the Commons defence committee on Afghanistan. 2.45pm: Ian Hislop, editor of Private Eye, and colleagues give evidence to the Commons standards committee about the code of conduct for MPs. At 3.30pm the MPs Jess Phillips and Sir Desmond Swayne will give evidence. 4pm: Sajid Javid, the health secretary, gives evidence to the Commons health committee. I will be covering some UK Covid developments here, but for further coronavirus coverage, do read our global live blog. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.com“Cold,” one news outlet reported of the young woman’s expression. “Frosty,” said another. “Visibly uncomfortable,” ran a subheading, describing the manner that affected her pose beside the man – hung back, unsmiling, eyes hooded with mistrust. Yes, the scene described was of outgoing Australian of the Year, survivor advocate Grace Tame, obliged into a photo event with prime minister Scott Morrison. The occasion was a formal morning tea to commemorate the end of Tame’s eventful year in the AOTY role. “Tense,” explained the copy under the published photographs. Twitter, of course, is under no such expectation of equanimity or politeness as old mastheads. “Iconic behaviour,” said Brisbane artist @nordacious of the resulting photograph. “Dear @TamePunk, I do believe you have unlocked a new level of legendary status today,” echoed trade union leader @SallyMcManus. “Fuckin Lolllllllll,” wrote performer @ChristieWhelan. Tame herself did not make a comment at the event. There was no ruckus and she did shake the prime minister’s hand – yet one imagines the prime ministerial advisory circle need only have seen the look in Tame’s eyes to know the damage was done. Never has Australia had a prime ministership so self-conscious of image-based branding. Morrison’s most intimate encounters with meal preparation, poultry housing and even his own pants are so relentlessly thrust into the national consciousness that one longs to de-invent photography. You can understand the political energy for an aggressive visual strategy. It was footage of another young woman’s refusal to demur to the PM’s authority that dealt Morrison’s “daggy dad” image such damage some deadly fires and a whole killer pandemic ago. Remember fire-ravaged Cobargo? The prime ministerial press office would prefer you didn’t, and would prefer you to look at this curry … these Christmas lights … or barre. The image of the reticent Tame on Tuesday was so reminiscent of that earlier PR disaster, it was with unsurprising alacrity Liberal MPs and conservative media spruikers leapt into their attempts to discredit her. Liberal senator James McGrath chose to scold her as “childish” and dared her to hand back her honours. Peter van Onselen decided she was “ungracious and rude”. Sorry, boys. Live by the photo op, die by the photo op. And Grace Tame owes Scott Morrison nothing. This was the Scott Morrison who told the march of sexual violence survivors and their allies who Tame accompanied to Parliament House that the women were lucky to have not been “met with bullets”. The Scott Morrison who ignored key recommendations in the Respect@Work report, the Morrison who did not demote the minister who called alleged rape victim Brittany Higgins “a lying cow”. This is the Scott Morrison who elevated to assistant minister for women one Amanda Stoker – after Stoker had promoted men’s rights activist Bettina Arndt, who herself had platformed the man who raped Tame as a child. The Scott Morrison who responded to Tame’s speech at last year’s Australia Day awards ceremony with the remark, “Well, gee, I bet it felt good to get that out.” Morrison, a world leader and adult man, who infamously had to have it explained to him by his wife why sexual violence was bad. Yet the prime minister’s talent for image manipulation, media management and blame shifting has repeatedly saved his political skin. One suspects a thousand monkeys on a thousand typewriters in the backrooms of the prime minister’s office are already drafting the copy for the PM to place the blame for Tuesday’s Grace Tame incident on the Victorian Labor premier, Daniel Andrews. Truly, it may have worked a week ago. But a week ago Morrison had not yet suggested that children should drive forklifts. That announcement so profoundly revealed his disconnection from the electorate that, like teeth ripping into a raw onion skin, the excuses and obfuscations layered over his failures have been suddenly ripped away. It is a rule of human behaviour that to gain advantage over an opponent you evaluate how the source of their strength may be exploited as a weakness. And it is a truth universally acknowledged that leaders who coat themselves with Teflon can rarely keep a firm grasp on any details. Nothing in Morrison’s political behaviour or public comments would suggest he has been paying the kind of attention to Tame’s work that he really should. As an advocate and champion for the survivors of sexual violence, Grace Tame has spent a long year explaining how power works, from the perspective of someone who learned so cruelly and unfairly – and so young – what it is like to have absolutely none. On Tuesday, Grace Tame demonstrated in a single photo shoot an understanding of power that goes deeper than even a sitting prime minister’s. What a warrior. What a great Australian.The tornado struck Joplin, Missouri, in May 2011 with such fury that afterward, even those who had lived here their entire lives struggled to recognize it. The nearly mile-wide storm wiped away entire neighborhoods and killed 161 people in less than an hour. It felled trees, leveled buildings and flung power lines and vehicles all over the roads with winds of more than 200mph. “We lost all our landmarks,” said Ryan Stanley, who was born in Joplin and serves as its mayor. “I was looking at our church and didn’t recognize it.” But more than a decade later, Joplin’s transformation has been a positive one. A locally led recovery effort has created a thriving city with a larger population, new educational institutions, more businesses and thousands of houses that are better able to withstand extreme weather. Joplin has managed to achieve an often elusive post-disaster goal: not just restoring what was there before, but building a more resilient community. As the climate crisis intensifies natural disasters, residents here say Joplin offers crucial lessons in how cities can recover and how the US can better prepare. Whether it be towns leveled by wildfires in the west, or by tornadoes like the ones that hit Kentucky last month, catastrophe can also present an opportunity to improve. Jane Cage, a small business owner who became a leader of Joplin’s rebuilding efforts, says communities face a choice between rebuilding as quickly as possible, often the same way things were before, or taking the time to plan and build in a more resilient way. “People want to return to normal,” she said, “but at the same time the disaster very often presents a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for a community to build back better.” A citizen-led effort that solicited feedback By the time it dissipated, the 22 May 2011 tornado was among the deadliest in US history. The storm had violently torn through Joplin, killing people seeking refuge wherever they could find it, such as a Pizza Hut manager who shepherded people into the restaurant’s freezer and a family scrambling for safety inside a Home Depot. It had destroyed a third of the city, including a hospital and several schools, and displaced more than 9,000 residents. The recovery ahead was monumental: Joplin had lost 4,000 homes, more than 500 businesses and critical infrastructure such as segments of the sewage system. The storm affected everyone in the city of 50,000 in some way, and took a toll on mental health. Eighteen people died by suicide after the tornado, said Stephanie Brady, the executive director of the Community Clinic of Southwest Missouri, who co-chaired the long-term recovery team. Calls about domestic violence grew in the first year. The scale of the catastrophe was so staggering, federal officials warned the city it should expect to lose at least 25% of its population. But the city insisted on a message of unrelenting hope and optimism for its future. Residents mobilized from the earliest moments, bringing injured people to safety and cleaning streets. Volunteers showed up in large numbers. And Joplin had an advantage, Brady said – it was a town built on strong connections. “We have a spirit in our community that we are going to work together,” she said. “Our city works well with our county, the city works well with the hospitals.” Officials and residents were quick to organize, helping displaced residents secure housing, supplies and mental health support. Another key to recovery was soliciting feedback about what people wanted the new Joplin to look like. Committees such as a citizen advisory team, chaired by Cage, were formed to seek input. Residents had a vision: a community with more parks, trails and sidewalks, which the city incorporated into its recovery plan. “After a disaster that’s the government’s focus: we’re going to get you back to where you were,” Brady said. “We said: ‘we’re gonna use this as an opportunity to be better than we were before’.” ‘They didn’t just wait for Fema’ In Joplin, rebuilding took place at a rapid pace, with an average of five houses built a week since May 2011, according to city figures. More than 182,000 people volunteered in the town, including building hundreds of homes. Those involved with the recovery efforts say that by harnessing federal funding and the national spotlight it gained during the early days of the tornado, the city was able to grow. Cage and Brady point to new parks, an art center, a medical school and incoming dental school as indicators of how Joplin has changed. Officials also updated design standards so that houses would be better able withstand extreme weather, and schools could provide shelter to residents in the event of another tornado. “All of these things came out of looking at how we make our community better,” Brady said. Most businesses reopened, and more than 300 new businesses opened between May 2011 and February 2016, according to the city chamber of commerce. The city’s immediate organizing played an important role in its success, said Robert Olshansky, an expert in post-disaster recovery. “It was a huge tornado that took out lots of different parts of Joplin. It affected businesses, it affected the economy, it affected a lot of vulnerable people,” Olshansky said. “What was impressive is, a place that had never really been through this before, they self-organized very effectively. They took control. They didn’t just wait for the state emergency management agency or Fema.” Not every community can rebound in the same way, Olshansky cautions. Small towns that were declining before a disaster will probably return as smaller, still-declining places unless they can find a formula that works for them, he added. In Paradise, California, where affordability and natural beauty drew people to the area, increasing costs and severe wildfire damage have deterred some residents from returning, though the community has acted admirably in its recovery efforts, Olshansky said. Joplin’s rebuild was not without error. The city partnered with a master developer run by two men the US Securities and Exchange Commission had already accused of misrepresenting investments. The firm failed to deliver and Joplin took the company to court trying to get back more than $1m, the Springfield News-Leader reported. “I would encourage other communities to be very careful of who they partner with,” Stanley said. “It was a frustration and an embarrassment.” Leaders of the rebuild efforts have sought to share their lessons with other cities – Cage now teaches at the Fema Institute about the role of community in disaster. Those in Joplin and outside it see the city as an important example of what’s possible. In the years since, Brady helped found the Disaster Leadership Team, which travels to different communities to aid them in developing a recovery plan. The team has deployed to Texas after Hurricane Harvey and to Paradise after the Camp fire, where they’ve offered up their own experiences. “You have to know your neighbors, you have to work together, you have to not bring ego into it. We had things we wish hadn’t happened, things we wish we had done differently,” Brady said. “But communities can recover.” • In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 and online chat is also available. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgThe new Australian of the Year, Dylan Alcott, has joined calls for people with disability to be given free rapid antigen tests, arguing it would help them take part in society as the country opens up. Alcott, a tennis champion and the first person with a visible disability to be awarded the gong, also used his acceptance speech on Tuesday night to emphasise the importance of fully funding the national disability insurance scheme (NDIS). After Guardian Australia reported many people with disability were receiving no federal support for rapid tests, the Morrison government this week announced it would allow NDIS participants to dip into their core funding to buy the devices. But the decision was met with a mixed response because, although participants would no longer be out of pocket, they would be required to use funding otherwise allocated for support. On Wednesday, Alcott expanded on his call for free tests for people with disability in an interview on ABC Radio National. “We’re always talking [to] people with multiple disabilities about what they need,” he said of his consulting firm, which hires people with disability. “Especially for people who are immunocompromised and vulnerable at the moment – first of all how good that Australia is opening up – but when you go to think about it, it’s actually quite scary. “Because they are worried that if they do get Covid they’re going to be in trouble. If somebody needs a free daily rapid test for them and their family and their carers so they can feel confident to get out and live their life, we’ve got to give them that. Straight away.” The government’s announcement to allow NDIS participants to dip into their funding was “cautiously” welcomed by the peak body, People With Disability Australia. But it added it was “concerned that the government is requiring NDIS participants to source their own Rats and to spend their core funding”. “This funding is already allocated to pay for reasonable and necessary disability supports,” People With Disability Australia said. “Rats should be free for all people with disability.” Labor has called for free rapid tests for all under the Medicare system, but the government has rejected the idea. Instead, it has created a scheme that allows concession card holders to obtain 10 free tests over three months from pharmacies. About 18% of NDIS participants are ineligible for the scheme. Last week, Guardian Australia revealed that while NDIS participants living in group homes and their providers could claim the cost of Rats, those residing in their own homes could not. Among them is Carolyn Campbell-McLean, who has a form of muscular dystrophy that means she is unable to cough or blow her nose by herself. She told Guardian Australia she had already spent $1,300 on rapid tests for her support workers. Under the government’s new policy, she will now be able to claim back that money, which will be subtracted from her “core funding”. Another man, Max Burt, who had spent about $1,000 on rapid tests for his support workers, noted access was still an issue. Some people with disability were unable to shop around at pharmacies to find one with tests in stock. Alcott also called on the government to “guarantee” the NDIS would be fully funded. While the Morrison government has pledged to do so, it has also increasingly raised concerns about the cost of the scheme, and was last year forced to ditch reforms advocates believed were aimed at cost-cutting. “I’ve been talking about the NDIS with the government for years,” Alcott said. “It is fully funded, but it’s got to be guaranteed, forever. Without the NDIS so many people with disability can’t be the people they want to be. “They can’t get the care they need, first and foremost, get the resources they need, the equipment they need to get out there and start living their life. To get out and get a job, to get out and so their families can stop caring for them and they can go out and get a job.” Alcott noted only about 500,000 of the 4.5 million people in Australia with a disability were on the NDIS. “They need support too, so they can be the people they want to be,” he said.New Zealand’s prime minister Jacinda Ardern has said “at no point was I worried about my safety” after her van was chased and forced on to a curb by anti-vaccination protesters. Footage of the incident, which took place last week, was posted to social media in recent days. It shows protesters shouting slogans at the van, including “shame on you,” and “we do not consent”. A person filming inside a car is heard saying “there’s Jacinda” and “Oh this is fun, we’re on a chase.” The car pursues the prime minister’s van and at one point someone inside calls the prime minister “a Nazi” and shouts various obscenities. As their vehicle tries to block the van, the van is forced on to the curb to avoid it, then continues on. Asked about the incident on Tuesday afternoon, Ardern said it was “just another day”. “At no point was I worried about my safety or the safety of anyone that was with me,” she said. “Every day is faced with new and different experiences in this job … We are in an environment at the moment that does have an intensity to it that is unusual for New Zealand. I do also believe that with time it will pass.” The incident comes amid a small but notable rise in threats against politicians and public figures involved in the pandemic response in New Zealand. According to police data released under the official information act to 1News this week, threats towards MPs reached a three-year high in one month last year. Threats to politicians serious enough to trigger a report to police are still relatively rare in New Zealand, reaching an average of about five a month toward the end of 2021, but sometimes spiking to 16 a month. NZ Police told 1 News the incidents included threats to injure, harm and assassinate politicians, including one person who had threatened to send a bomb to parliament. Ardern said on Tuesday that being subject to these kinds of incidents was part of the job. “I see that as just being a reflection of the fact that we are the decision makers. And if people don’t like the decisions that are being made, then it’s us that of course will hear the feedback about that.” In late 2021, New Zealand’s parliament stepped up security measures after reports from MPs that they were being targeted for harassment by anti-vaxxers, and parliamentary services added a small budget to help MPs change locks or security systems. Covid response minister and leader of the house Chris Hipkins told the Guardian in November that one of his electoral offices had been subject to repeated attacks from anti-vaxxers, and that he had stepped up security. Having to adopt additional security measures ran counter to the highly accessible government that New Zealand valued, he said. “I’ve always believed that New Zealand parliamentarians being as accessible as we are is something special about New Zealand, and I’m generally reluctant to see that change,” Hipkins said last November. “The actions of a small group of individuals is the problem here, and it would be sad to see the openness of our democracy being undermined by a small group of vocal and aggressive people.” The vast majority of New Zealanders have supported the country’s vaccination drive, with close to 95% of adults vaccinated. But some have strongly resisted either vaccination itself, or the mandates that have accompanied it: with about 40% of the country’s workforce are covered by vaccine mandates. Under current regulations, people without a vaccine pass cannot dine indoors, or visit high-contact businesses like hairdressers and gyms. The New Zealand police had not responded to a request for comment by time of publication. The prime minister’s office has also been approached for comment.That’s all from me, Samantha Lock, for today. We will be launching another live Covid blog a little later today but in the meantime you can catch up with all the latest developments here. Thanks for following along and, as always, I appreciate your tips and reader insights. You can email me at samantha.lock@theguardian.com or via Twitter @Samantha__Lock Here are all the international Covid updates from today: Europe: Boris Johnson said he welcomes a police inquiry into Downing Street parties and will help “draw a line” under matters. Earlier, Metropolitan police said they would begin investigating parties held at No 10 during coronavirus lockdowns. The development piles further pressure on the prime minister after fresh revelations of two more gatherings, including one to celebrate his birthday. Sue Gray’s inquiry report is reportedly set to come this week after the Met said there is no need to hold material back. The UK reported 439 deaths within 28 days of a Covid-positive test. That’s the highest tally since February 2021. Tuesday’s data showed 94,326 new daily cases. The figures are often higher on a Tuesday when most deaths at the weekend are included in the tally. Last Tuesday, 438 deaths were reported. The UK’s health secretary, Sajid Javid, said 77,000 NHS workers remain unvaccinated, and Covid policies – including on mandatory jabs for NHS staff – should be kept “under review”. Scotland will allow people to return to offices from Monday, in a “phased” plan announced by Nicola Sturgeon. The first minister asked employers to begin a phased return to work by introducing hybrid working next week after a continuing decline in Omicron variant cases in Scotland, in an update to MSPs at Holyrood. Italy’s daily cases have more than doubled in a day to 186,740. This is up from 77,696 a day earlier, the health ministry said. The number of deaths jumped to 468 from 352, though more tests had been taken in the past day than on Monday. In Germany, the anti-vaccination movement is ramping up, with thousands of people taking part in weekly protests across the country. More than 2,000 rallies were held on Monday. Russia has cut the isolation time for Covid contacts from 14 days to seven, amid a surge in infections driven by the Omicron variant. On Tuesday, daily cases reached the record high of 67,809, official figures show. Doctors have discovered an “antibody signature” that can help identify patients most at risk of developing long Covid. Malta will start to scrap a requirement for people to present a vaccination certificate for entry to restaurants and other venues from next month. Bars, restaurants and theatres in the Netherlands can reopen on 26 January, Prime Minister Mark Rutte said, further relaxing restrictions despite record infection levels. United States: The US Department of Labor said it will withdraw its Covid-19 vaccine-and-testing requirement for large employers after the Supreme Court blocked the rule. Asia: South Korea’s daily count of new cases topped 8,000 for the first time, despite the recent extension of strict social-distancing rules.* Two years since its first infection, Australia recorded one of its highest number of Covid-related deaths in a day. Japan expanded regions subject to tighter curbs to cover 70% of the country, as the government tried to counter a record wave of Covid-19 cases caused by the Omicron variant. Middle East: An Israeli government advisory panel has recommended offering a fourth vaccine dose to all adults, on condition that at least five months have passed since they received the third or recovered from the illness. Pfizer and its German partner, BioNTech, have begun testing a vaccine specifically designed to fight the Omicron variant of the coronavirus, the companies have announced. Elton John has postponed two farewell concert dates in Dallas, Texas, after contracting Covid-19. The singer was reportedly vaccinated and boosted. According to a statement, John is experiencing “only mild symptoms”. “Elton and the Farewell Yellow Brick Road tour look forward to returning to the stage shortly.” John was due to hit the American Airlines Centre stage in Dallas on 25 January and 26 January but fans “should hold on to their tickets as they will be honoured at the rescheduled dates to be announced soon.” John’s rescheduled 2020 North American tour kicked off on Jan. 19 in New Orleans and was scheduled to make stops in Houston, Chicago, Detroit, Toronto, New York and Miami. John previously said he was postponing European dates on his world tour until 2023 so that he can have an operation on an injured hip. An appeals judge has temporarily restored New York’s mask mandate on Tuesday, a day after a judge in a lower court ruled that Governor Kathy Hochul’s administration lacked the constitutional authority to order people to wear face coverings. Judge Robert Miller in New York City granted the state’s request for a stay of a Long Island judge’s ruling while the governor’s administration pursues an appeal, the Associated Press reports. Arguing before Miller on Tuesday, Judith Vale, an attorney for the state, said judge Thomas Rademaker’s earlier ruling would “radically disrupt the status quo” and endanger the health of students and staff at schools. The state’s court filing read: The order, if not stayed will allow individuals to refuse to wear face coverings in indoor public settings where the risk of Covid-19 spread is high, including in schools where many children remain unvaccinated against Covid-19.” Attorney Chad Laveglia, who brought the challenge on behalf of a group of parents, vowed to take the challenge “as far as it needs to go.” “The judge got it wrong entirely. It’s so blatantly unconstitutional to grant a stay whatsoever,” he said. It’s Samantha Lock with you on the blog again as we catch up with all the latest Covid headlines. My colleagues in the UK have been busy covering all the latest on the Downing Street parties with the Sue Gray report expected to be released shortly. You can follow all the live coverage here. As I’m reporting to you from Sydney, here’s a snapshot of how Covid is unfolding across Australia. The country’s most populous state of NSW is expected to report its one-millionth infection of the pandemic today. Half of those cases were added in the last two weeks and more than 90% of them in the last two months. State premier Dominic Perrottet announced that reintroduced restrictions for mask use, hospitality density limits and bans on singing and dancing – due to end on Thursday – would be extended until the end of February in a bid to suppress the spread of Omicron as children return to school. He said extending restrictions to February 28 was “the right approach” as it would suppress the spread of Omicron ahead of increased movement once schools return next week, he said. A total of 73 Covid deaths were recorded across Victoria, NSW and Queensland. Summary Here are the global Covid updates from today: Pfizer and its German partner, BioNTech, have begun testing a vaccine specifically designed to fight the Omicron variant of the coronavirus, the companies have announced. Boris Johnson said he welcomes a police inquiry into Downing Street parties and will help “draw a line” under matters. Earlier, Metropolitan police said they would begin investigating parties held at No 10 during coronavirus lockdowns. The development piles further pressure on the prime minister after fresh revelations of two more gatherings, including one to celebrate his birthday. Sue Gray’s inquiry report is reportedly set to come this week after the Met said there is no need to hold material back. The UK reported 439 deaths within 28 days of a Covid-positive test. That’s the highest tally since February 2021. Tuesday’s data showed 94,326 new daily cases. The figures are often higher on a Tuesday when most deaths at the weekend are included in the tally. Last Tuesday, 438 deaths were reported. The UK’s health secretary, Sajid Javid, said 77,000 NHS workers remain unvaccinated, and Covid policies – including on mandatory jabs for NHS staff – should be kept “under review”. Scotland will allow people to return to offices from Monday, in a “phased” plan announced by Nicola Sturgeon. The first minister asked employers to begin a phased return to work by introducing hybrid working next week after a continuing decline in Omicron variant cases in Scotland, in an update to MSPs at Holyrood. Italy’s daily cases have more than doubled in a day to 186,740. This is up from 77,696 a day earlier, the health ministry said. The number of deaths jumped to 468 from 352, though more tests had been taken in the past day than on Monday. In Germany, the anti-vaccination movement is ramping up, with thousands of people taking part in weekly protests across the country. More than 2,000 rallies were held on Monday. Russia has cut the isolation time for Covid contacts from 14 days to seven, amid a surge in infections driven by the Omicron variant. On Tuesday, daily cases reached the record high of 67,809, official figures show. Doctors have discovered an “antibody signature” that can help identify patients most at risk of developing long Covid. The US Department of Labor said it will withdraw its Covid-19 vaccine-and-testing requirement for large employers after the Supreme Court blocked the rule. That’s all from me, folks. Thanks for joining the feed today. We’re going to pause the global Covid blog for a while, but do head over to our politics live page which will keep running updates on “partygate” and more … When pressed on the issue of mandatory jabs for NHS staff, Sajid Javid said Covid policies should be kept “under review”. The health secretary said patient safety was the principle behind the decision to make jabs mandatory, but noted that this was decided when Delta was the dominant variant. Javid told the health and social care committee: “That was the principle and we weighed it up. The dominant variant at the time was Delta, that was the dominant variant. The dominant variant now, in fact, almost all cases, are Omicron.” Javid said people had “made representations” to him about Omicron being “very different” to Delta, suggesting while the former is more transmissible it is “intrinsically less severe”. He said: “I think it is right in light of Omicron that we reflect on all this and keep all Covid policies properly under review. Because Omicron is different to Delta. Equally, we don’t know what the next variant is going to be.” Sajid Javid has said about 77,000 NHS workers have not been jabbed. He added it was the “professional duty of every NHS worker to get vaccinated”. Javid told the health and social care committee: Even before the mandate, the vast majority had [been jabbed]. Since the mandate, since we announced a consultation in September, we’ve had around 100,000 in the NHS that were unvaccinated at that point that have come forward. So there’s been a very good response. I think now almost 95% of NHS workers that have had at least one jab. The latest numbers I have is that around 77,000 that have not. That is improving every day. I think it’s also reasonable to assume that not everyone ultimately is going to come forward. He said the NHS was asking trusts to set out the estimations for the staff who “will ultimately just not come forward, and then to break down what kind of roles they are and see how they would manage that”. Russia has cut the isolation time for Covid contacts from 14 days to seven, amid a surge in infections driven by the Omicron variant. On Tuesday, daily cases reached the record high of 67,809, official figures show. AP reports: The prime minister, Mikhail Mishustin, announced the new rules apply to those who had close contact with someone who has tested positive for Covid, not for those with a confirmed infection. Those who have Covid are still required to isolate for 14 days, with a mandatory test on day 10 or 11. Daily new infections in Russia have been rising sharply for the past two weeks, increasing more than four-fold – from about 15,000 on 10 January to 67,809 on Tuesday, the highest daily tally in the pandemic. However, according to health minister, Mikhail Murashko, there has been no significant increase in hospitalisations nationwide. Hospital admissions grew by 6.4%. About 116,000 Covid patients were being treated in hospitals on Tuesday, leaving about 50,000 remaining hospital beds unoccupied. According to Anna Popova, head of Russia’s public healthcare watchdog Rospotrebnadzor, more than half of all new infections have hit the capital, Moscow, and St Petersburg, Russia’s second-largest city. The surge in Moscow, which reported nearly 19,000 new cases on Tuesday, has put a strain on the city’s outpatient clinics. Social media users have posted long lines of people waiting to see a doctor. Moscow mayor, Sergey Sobyanin, said that the influx of patients to outpatient facilities has grown four-fold. In Germany, protests against Covid rules are escalating, with more than 2,000 rallies being held across the country on Monday alone. Our Berlin correspondent Kate Connolly takes us to the heart of the action: On Monday evening at 7pm people emerged from dimly lit side streets and gathered on the Oberkirchplatz square in Cottbus for what has become a weekly ritual in towns and cities across Germany: a protest against coronavirus restrictions. The demonstrations have grown in strength as cases of the Omicron variant have surged, and in recent weeks a looming decision on bringing in a vaccine mandate has become the focus of protesters’ ire. In Cottbus, a university city south-east of Berlin, a familiar pattern played out. Moments after the protest started, police declared over megaphone that it was illegal – the participants did not wear masks or physically distance from each other. Groups then broke away and began the Spaziergänge, walks that snake in a variety of directions and are designed to overwhelm any police response. “I just want my freedom back,” said one woman. Another younger woman said she was trying to stop the government from forcibly vaccinating her nine-year-old, though there is currently no plan to oblige parents to have children vaccinated. A physiotherapist, one of the few protesters who was wearing a mask, said she was fearful of losing her job if she refused to get vaccinated under plans for a mandate for medical staff due to be introduced next month. Asked why there was need for resistance, Maik, a landscape gardener who refused to wear a mask – calling them “chin nappies” – said: “When injustice becomes law, resistance is our duty.” The US Department of Labor said on Tuesday it will scrap its Covid-19 vaccine-and-testing requirement for large employers after the Supreme Court blocked the rule. Earlier this month, the Supreme Court had ruled against president Joe Biden’s vaccine and testing mandate aimed at large businesses, but it allowed a vaccine mandate for certain health care workers to go into effect nationwide. Biden’s controversial mandate for large employers – requiring workers to be vaccinated against Covid-19 or undergo weekly testing and wear a mask on the job – was designed to convince hesitant Americans to get their shots. But the court’s conservative majority concluded the administration overstepped its authority by seeking to impose the Occupational Safety and Health Administration’s (Osha) vaccine-or-test rule on US businesses with at least 100 employees. More than 80 million people would have been affected. Back to Downing Street parties now...Sue Gray’s report into the events could arrive at No 10 tonight, said Pippa Crerar, the Daily Mirror’s political editor. It’s up to the prime minister, Boris Johnson, when the report will be made public. No 10 has always said it expects to release the report to MPs, and to the public, soon after receiving it from Gray and her team. ITV’s Robert Peston has also been told that the Sue Gray report is set for publication within the next 24 hours. There’s plenty to digest from the Guardian’s lobby journalists, who have been documenting the day’s twists and turns: Italy recorded 186,740 Covid-linked cases on Tuesday. This is up from 77,696 a day earlier, the health ministry said. The number of deaths jumped to 468 from 352, though more tests had been taken in the past day than on Monday. Some 1.4m Covid tests were carried out in the past 24 hours, compared with a previous 519,293, the health ministry added. Italy has registered 144,343 deaths linked to the virus since its outbreak emerged in February 2020, the second-highest toll in Europe after Britain and the ninth highest in the world. The country has reported 10.2m cases to date. Patients in hospital with Covid – not including those in intensive care – stood at 20,027 on Tuesday, increasing from 19,862 a day earlier. This makes for bleak reading considering yesterday, a health official said Italy has reached a peak in the number of Omicron infections with cases of the variant now declining. Covid emergency commissioner Francesco Paolo Figliuolo told journalists in Milan: There is good news: it seems that we have reached the plateau of the curve for what concerns Omicron and it is going downhill. In the past two days, even in Lombardy [where death rates are highest] the number of admissions to the hospital is lower than the number of discharged. This bodes well. Western Australia, which has mostly dodged the virus by sealing itself off from the rest of the world, has scrapped plans to reopen next month due to fears of Omicron spreading. But experts say more public health measures are needed to ease the burden of staff shortages. The president of the Australian Medical Association, Dr Omar Khorshid, said: It takes something to be really on the horizon for you to understand how urgent it is to actually prepare. One of the good things about the 5 February date was it focused the health system’s collective mind on getting ready. You could finally see some action. Now the 5 February border reopening has once again been delayed Khorshid is concerned some of that earlier momentum will be lost and may lead to a false sense of security. But with Covid-19 already spreading in the community, Khorshid said it was only a matter of time before health plans would need to swing into action. On Sunday the state’s health minister, Amber-Jade Sanderson, conceded it would not be possible to eliminate Covid in WA. The premier, Mark McGowan, said the delay in border reopening was to give people more time to get their booster shot. But Khorshid said borders should be opened to help address critical health worker shortages. At the same time, he wanted public health measures like venue density limits and social distancing to be introduced to slow spread and reduce the health system burden. Guardian Australia’s medical editor, Melissa Davey, has the latest: Our science editor, Ian Sample, sheds light on an antibody signature that may help doctors identify who is most at risk of long Covid: Doctors have discovered an “antibody signature” that can help identify patients most at risk of developing long Covid, a condition where debilitating symptoms of the disease can persist for many months. Researchers at University hospital Zurich analysed blood from Covid patients and found that low levels of certain antibodies were more common in those who developed long Covid than in patients who swiftly recovered. When combined with the patient’s age, details of their Covid symptoms and whether or not they had asthma, the antibody signature allowed doctors to predict whether people had a moderate, high or very high risk of developing long-term illness. Onur Boyman, a professor of immunology who led the research, said: Overall, we think that our findings and identification of an immunoglobulin signature will help early identification of patients that are at increased risk of developing long Covid, which in turn will facilitate research, understanding and ultimately targeted treatments for long Covid. Although there is no effective cure for long Covid, being able to work out who is most at risk could help doctors direct patients to clinical trials for long Covid therapies and arrange early rehabilitation. Another hope is that early identification of long Covid patients will help doctors work out what causes the condition in particular people. Researchers have proposed several possible drivers, from long-term damage wrought by the virus to a misfiring immune system and pockets of virus hiding out in the body. In the last 24 hours, 94,326 people have tested positive and 439 people have died within 28 days of a positive Covid-19 test, the government said. This is up from 88,447 new Covid cases and 56 deaths within 28 days of a positive test recorded a day earlier. Our Scotland editor, Severin Carrell, reports from Holyrood: Scottish office workers will be allowed to return to their desks from Monday after Nicola Sturgeon lifted strict guidance urging non-essential staff to work from home. The first minister asked employers to begin a phased return to work by introducing hybrid working next week after a continuing decline in Omicron variant cases in Scotland, in an update to MSPs at Holyrood. Sturgeon also announced an easing of face mask rules from Friday. People not wearing face coverings, such as church ministers, will be able to stand one metre away from other people rather than 2m. School pupils must still wear face coverings in class, however, despite calls from the Conservatives and others for that regulation to be lifted. Sturgeon said cases numbers in under-15 year olds had grown 41% in Scotland since the return of schools, despite significant reductions in all other age groups. Sturgeon has faced significant pressure from businesses and opposition parties to lift Scotland’s stricter Covid measures, which heavily hit spending in shops, bars and restaurants over the Christmas and Hogmanay holidays. Sturgeon insisted the tougher rules were proportionate and had helped suppress the Omicron wave far more effectively than in England. “We would not expect to see a wholesale return to the office next week – indeed, given that the level of infection, though falling, remains high, a mass return at this stage is likely to set progress back,” Sturgeon said. “But we know there are many benefits to both employees and employers, and to the economy as a whole, in at least a partial return to the office at this stage.” Douglas Ross, the Scottish Conservative leader, said Sturgeon was still unnecessarily controlling what people could do. “While some people will still want to work from home, why doesn’t the first minister leave that decision up to employers and workers?” he asked. In the week to 21 January, 704 people were admitted to hospital with Covid, compared to 1,026 in the previous week. The number of Covid-positive people in intensive care had fallen to 49 from a total of 59 people last Tuesday. In pictures: the City of London returns to the office after easing of Covid rules PA report that Covid guidance in Scotland that required people to work from home where possible is being ditched in favour of hybrid working. Nicola Sturgeon said the “significantly improved situation”, with cases of coronavirus falling, meant the changes could be made. She announced the current guidance on working from home, which had been strengthened after the emergence of the Omicron variant, was being updated. The first minister said: “Instead of recommending home working whenever practical, the new guidance will pave the way for a phased return to the office. “It will recommend that, from Monday 31 January, employers should consider implementing hybrid working, following appropriate guidance, with workers spending some time in the office and some time at home.” However, she warned that a “mass return” to offices was “likely to set progress back”. Other changes will mean adults taking part in organised activities with children will no longer need to wear face coverings. But staff and pupils in secondary schools will still need to wear face coverings. Tokyo has reported a record high of Covid cases, as Japan prepares to roll out fresh curbs amid surging infections driven by the Omicron spread. AP reports: The capital city logged 12,813 new cases, while Osaka, Japan’s second business hub, also reported a record caseload of 8,612. Rising infections have begun to disrupt hospitals, schools and other sectors in some areas. “We must do everything not to overwhelm the medical systems, so the lives that can be saved will not be lost,” the economy revitalisation minister, Daishiro Yamagiwa, who is also in charge of Covid measures, told reporters. Nationwide, more than 62,000 virus cases were reported, according to Japanese media, for an accumulated total of about 2.2m cases and some 18,500 deaths. Large swathes of the country – including Tokyo and other metropolitan areas such as Osaka and Kyoto – will be placed under new restrictions from Thursday, with shortened hours for bars and restaurants and curbs on large public events. Our economics editor, Larry Elliott, reports on the dampened outlook for the global economy: The International Monetary Fund has sharply cut its growth forecast for 2022 with a warning that higher-than-expected inflation and the Omicron variant have worsened the outlook for the global economy. In a quarterly update to predictions made in October 2021, the IMF said it anticipated growth of 4.4% this year – down 0.5 percentage points – and emphasised the risks were of a weaker performance. The Washington-based organisation blamed the downgrade on rising cost pressures and the rapid spread of Omicron, and said while the 2022 outlook was markedly worse for the world’s two biggest economies – the US and China – few countries would be spared a slowdown. The UK is expected to grow by 4.7% in 2022, a cut of 0.3 points to the IMF’s forecast in its October 2021 World Economic Outlook. Despite the reduction, the IMF anticipates the UK growing faster this year than the other six members of the G7 industrial nations – the US, Japan, Germany, France, Italy and Canada. “News of the Omicron variant led to increased mobility restrictions and financial market volatility at the end of 2021. Supply disruptions have continued to weigh on activity”, the IMF said, noting bottlenecks had shaved between 0.5% and 1% off global growth in 2021. Let’s turn to Boris Johnson who is making his statement to MPs about the Russian threat to Ukraine. My colleague Andrew Sparrow has live updates. Johnson says he commissioned the investigation into events in Downing Street. That involved sharing information with the police continuously. I believe this will help to give the public the clarity it needs and help to draw a line under matters. But Johnson says he also wants to assure people that the government is focused “100% on dealing with the people’s priorities”, including defending freedom around the world. Johnson said: A few weeks ago I commissioned an independent inquiry into a series of events in Downing Street, in the Cabinet Office as well as some other Whitehall departments that may have constituted potential breaches of the Covid regulations. That process has quite properly involved sharing information continuously with the Metropolitan police, so I welcome the Met’s decision to conduct its own investigation because I believe this will help to give the public the clarity it needs and help to draw a line under matters. But I want to reassure the House and the country, that I and the whole government are focused 100% on dealing with the people’s priorities, including the UK’s leading role in protecting freedom around the world. A Covid outbreak has hit an Australian aid ship bound for virus-free Tonga. Twenty-three Covid cases were found among sailors onboard an Australian warship expected to arrive in Tonga on Wednesday to deliver humanitarian aid, Australian authorities said on Tuesday. There are more than 600 crew onboard, who are all fully-vaccinated. The Australian Associated Press reports: The Department of Defence confirmed the positive cases and close contacts were isolating as per Covid-safe protocols, adding the ship would continue on to Tonga and arrive off its coast early Wednesday morning. HMAS Adelaide would fulfil its mission to support the relief effort, with humanitarian and medical supplies, engineering equipment and helicopters on board, the department said in a statement. “Defence recognises the Covid-free status of Tonga, and will ensure the humanitarian supplies and equipment on board are delivered in a Covid-safe manner,” it said. HMAS Adelaide has “excellent” medical facilities on board and a 40-bed hospital. The recorded positive cases are mild or asymptomatic. The Australian defence minister, Peter Dutton, said the government was working with Tonga to ensure no threat to the Pacific nation. “They need the aid desperately but they don’t want the risk of Covid,” the minister told Sky News. We will work through all of that as quickly as we can. We are not going to put the Tongan population at risk.” It is the second aid shipment from Australia where a positive case has turned up. A C-17 plane turned around mid-flight after someone was diagnosed with Covid-19. What does the police inquiry into alleged parties mean for Boris Johnson? Earlier, the Metropolitan police commissioner, Cressida Dick, said officers are investigating events where lockdown rules were allegedly broken. The move is a significant change of tack by the Met, which previously said its policy was not to undertake retrospective investigations of lockdown breaches. What will this mean for the Sue Gray inquiry? The pivotal inquiry by Gray was expected to be published late this week. But publication will now be delayed until the Met has concluded its investigation, according to sources, which could take weeks. No timeline has been given. Many MPs were awaiting the results of the Gray inquiry before deciding whether to submit letters of no confidence in the prime minister. How serious is this development for the prime minister? Very. The investigation raises the prospect of sanctions for Johnson and his staff if regulations are found to have been breached. Dick raised the prospect of fixed penalty notices being issued for some, but not all, of those attending, depending on the conclusions of the investigation. The launch of a criminal inquiry and delay of the Gray report could create breathing space for Boris Johnson. Some commentators are already arguing the moves will be a form of reprieve for the prime minister, with interest and fury waning by the time the findings are published. But it could also spur MPs to submit their letters now. A total of 54 letters would trigger a no-confidence vote, and the prime minister would be forced to resign if 180 or more MPs vote against him in a secret ballot. Hospitals in the Czech Republic are recording a surge in Covid patients as the Omicron variant spreads through the country. According to figures released by health ministry, the number of hospitalised people with Covid jumped to 1,695 on Monday, up from 1,537 the previous day. It had been declining since 6 December when the previous wave, caused by the Delta variant, peaked at 7,135 people needing hospital treatment. Anticipating the surge, the government has shortened the isolation period for those testing positive for Covid-19 from 14 to five days, and also similarly cut the quarantine time for close contacts of infected people. Czech doctors, nurses and care home workers are allowed to keep working even if they have Covid, the government announced on 14 January. Those who are infected but are required to keep working will only be allowed to go from home to the workplace and back. School leaders want the government in England to look again at how exams will be graded this year, as Covid continues to tear through classrooms in England. Paul Whiteman, general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, said: “Schools are struggling to keep things running with nearly 10% of their staff off on average – but for some this is much higher. Our members are repeatedly telling us that they are having to drop everything to find cover and that just keeping things going is a challenge. “This disruption is putting huge pressure on students in exam years. The government needs to look again at its plans and do more to reassure students that exams can be fair and will take into account differences in missed learning.” In pictures: Tight controls in Beijing, a week before the Winter Olympics begin Our education editor Richard Adams gives us a schools update: The Department for Education’s latest attendance figures show that more than 5% of state school pupils in England were absent for Covid-related reasons (previously 3.9%), almost all with confirmed or suspected infections. That accounts for 374,000 pupils. The figures estimate 9% of teachers were off – half with Covid. Concerns over children’s safeguarding and education are being raised as attendance in both primary and secondary schools slips to below 90%. Pfizer and BioNTech have begun enrolment for a clinical trial to test the safety and immune response of their Omicron-specific Covid-19 vaccine in adults aged up to 55, the companies said in a statement on Tuesday. Earlier this month, the chief executive of Pfizer, Albert Bourla, said an Omicron vaccine would be ready to file for regulatory approval by March, and the company was already manufacturing doses. AFP reports: Pfizer’s head of vaccine research, Kathrin Jansen, said in a statement that while current data showed that boosters against the original Covid strain continued to protect against severe outcomes with Omicron, the company was acting out of caution. “We recognise the need to be prepared in the event this protection wanes over time and to potentially help address Omicron and new variants in the future,” she said. Uğur Şahin, chief executive of the German biotech company BioNTech, added the protection of the original vaccine against mild and moderate Covid appeared to wane more rapidly against Omicron. “This study is part of our science-based approach to develop a variant-based vaccine that achieves a similar level of protection against Omicron as it did with earlier variants but longer duration of protection.” The trial will involve 1,420 people aged 18-55. A spokesperson for Pfizer said that it did not include people older than 55 because the goal of the study was to examine the immune response of participants dosed, rather than estimate vaccine efficacy. The trial is taking place across the United States and South Africa, and the first participant was dosed in North Carolina. The Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine was the first Covid shot to be approved in western states, in December 2020. Because it is based on messenger RNA technology, it is relatively easy to update to reflect the genetic code of new variants. Public health academics at Imperial College London have warned that people with Covid should be careful not to end their isolation too early. Since last Monday, people with Covid in England have been able to leave isolation after five full days, provided their lateral flow test shows up negative on both day five and day six and they do not have a temperature. But a new research paper by Imperial College’s Azeem Majeed, professor of primary care and public health, and Dr Michael Soljak, public health researcher and consultant, says Covid-positive cases should not just rely on the results of the lateral flow tests to decide when they can leave isolation. Their take home message is: “Base your recovery on how you feel and not just on your test results.” In an accompanying Imperial blog post, they write: Some people will remain infectious after five days, so there are risks from this policy. A lateral flow test will identify many of the people who are infectious but some will be missed by the tests. It’s essential therefore that people also focus on their symptoms and not just rely on the results of their lateral flow tests. We need to remember the expression that doctors have: “Treat the patient and not the test result.” If you remain unwell after five days – for example, if you have a high temperature or a bad cough – you should continue to isolate. Although many people of working age will have a mild infection – particularly if fully vaccinated – some people will have a more prolonged illness. The government does not mention cough as one of the symptoms that should lead to a longer isolation period – probably because a cough can persist for some time after a respiratory infection. If you feel well and have a mild cough, that is acceptable. But if you have a severe cough, you should consider extending your isolation period to longer than five days. The saga of Downing Street parties rumbles on. Sue Gray’s report into “partygate” will now be delayed, according to the FT’s Sebastian Payne. As Andrew Sparrow writes in our politics blog, we’re still unsure how long the Gray report will be delayed. In the Commons two weeks ago Michael Ellis, a Cabinet Office minister, told MPs that if there was a police investigation, the Gray report might be shelved until the police inquiry had concluded. “If evidence emerges of what was a potentially criminal offence the matter would be referred to the Metropolitan police and the Cabinet Office’s work may be paused,” he said. But in any case, Labour aren’t loosening their tight hold on partygate.The deputy leader, Angela Rayner, has issued a statement saying she does not see how Boris Johnson can continue as prime minister in the light of the investigation. She said: “We welcome this investigation by the Metropolitan police. Millions of people are struggling to pay the bills, but Boris Johnson and his government are too wrapped up in scandal to do anything about it. “Boris Johnson is a national distraction. Conservative MPs should stop propping him up and he should finally do the decent thing and resign.” A quick snap from Reuters: Denmark is expected to scrap all Covid restrictions by the end of this month, Danish daily newspaper Jyllands-Posten reported on Tuesday citing several sources. It is believed the prime minister, Mette Frederiksen, will announce the changes tomorrow. The Netherlands is also expected to lift Covid rules later today, despite record numbers of infections. Investigators in South Africa have flagged Covid contracts worth about 2.1bn rand (£102m) for possible corruption and fraud, a report into Covid-linked corruption showed. The country’s Special Investigating Unit (SIU), an independent statutory body accountable to parliament and the president, led the inquiry. It has referred 224 officials in government for disciplinary action after finding 2,803 contracts were irregular. Reuters reports: President Cyril Ramaphosa authorised the investigation into his government’s coronavirus spending in 2020 following a spate of scandals that caused public outrage. The SIU had said previously that it had uncovered instances where personal protective equipment was overpriced, procurement rules flouted and services not delivered despite money being paid. In a statement accompanying the SIU’s final report on Tuesday, Ramaphosa’s office said: “It is unacceptable that so many contracts associated with saving lives and protecting livelihoods were irregular, unlawful or fraudulent.” The 2.1bn rand of contracts under suspicion have been enrolled in the special tribunal, which is mandated to recover public funds lost through corruption, fraud and illicit money flows, the report said. The SIU identified some of those officials facing accusations and estimated that the value of cash and assets to be recovered was around 552m rand. South Africa has reported more Covid cases and deaths than any other country on the African continent after being hit by four infection waves. Earlier, UN data highlighted the colossal number of children who have lost out on their schooling during the pandemic – a “nearly insurmountable” figure. In South Africa, schoolchildren are between 75% and a whole school year behind where they should be, with up to 500,000 having dropped out of school altogether between March 2020 and October 2021. Greetings from London! I’m Georgina Quach and I’ll be at the helm for the next eight hours. Please contact me with any tips and stories @georginaquach on Twitter, or georgina.quach@theguardian.com. All contributions welcome! Elaine Simons, a 61-year-old substitute art teacher in the Seattle, Washington area, was on a 10-month contract and hoping to settle into a more permanent role at the school where she was teaching when the Covid-19 pandemic hit the US in March 2020. Her school shut down for the remainder of the school year, with Simons having to pack up her classroom and learn to navigate the technology necessary to teach remotely. In June 2020, Simons was informed her teaching contract would not be renewed. About 5.7 million workers ages 55 or older lost their jobs in the US in March and April 2020, 15% of workers in an age demographic that has also experienced the vast majority of Covid-19 deaths. The unemployment rate for workers ages 65 and older hit a record rate of 7.5% in 2020. Simons was able to find a summer teaching position but had to file for unemployment assistance before the fall 2020 school year began. Since then, she has switched back and forth between taking periods of substitute teaching jobs whenever they’re available, and reverting to unemployment during periods where she’s been unable to find work. She found, despite claims of substitute teacher shortages, that longer term substitute contract positions weren’t being offered, and older workers at higher risk for Covid-19 like herself aren’t willing to take substitute gigs day by day, at various different schools without any compensation for quarantine if they catch or are exposed to Covid-19. Simons is fully vaccinated and boosted, but still worried about catching Covid-19 and exposing her elderly mother, whom she helps care for. Read more of Michael Sainato’s report from Florida here: Too young to retire but at risk for Covid, older Americans struggle to find work Dame Cressida Dick, the Metropolitan police commissioner, is appearing now before the London assembly’s police and crime committee, and has confirmed there is a criminal investigation into parties at No 10 and Whitehall. She says she can now confirm that the Met is investigating “a number of events that took place at Downing Street and Whitehall in the last two years in relation to potential breaches of Covid-19 regulations”. She says other cases are not being investigated because they do not meet the threshold for criminal investigation. The police will not give a running commentary, she says. Follow the latest here with Andrew Sparrow: Prof Sir Andrew Pollard is director of the Oxford Vaccine Group, University of Oxford. He writes for us today, saying that vaccines will always be our best weapon against Covid: We don’t yet know exactly how the future of Covid-19 will manifest. Perhaps Covid-19 will decline and then return in regular seasonal waves, as with RSV and influenza. It is also possible that outbreaks at other times of year will continue, but get less spiky due to higher levels of immunity in the population. Have we learned how to fight back? Yes. What has changed most dramatically over the past 12 months is not the virus, but us. Immunity is the armour that means we can now walk the streets again. Vaccines have changed the world. But we must accept that protection against infection is, and will continue to be, incomplete. Over time, as the armour wears thinner, infections will occur again. But protection against severe disease will be largely maintained. We should not expect to return to the vulnerable situation we were in before the vaccines were first made, where we had to hide behind closed doors. (At least, not until the next pandemic, with a new disease, for which we must be better prepared.) This is why the next phase of the battle against Covid-19 must involve making vaccination available everywhere during 2022. With the huge increase in global capacity since the first doses were give 13 months ago, there really is no excuse for failure. Read more here: Andrew Pollard – Vaccines will always be our best weapon against Covid – here’s how to deploy them The scale of the number of children who have lost out on their schooling during the pandemic is “nearly insurmountable”, according to UN data. Up to 70% of 10-year-olds in low- and middle-income countries cannot read or understand a simple text, up from 53% pre-Covid, the research suggested. Classroom closures continue to affect more than 635 million children globally, with younger and more marginalised children facing the greatest loss in learning after almost two years of Covid, according to children’s agency Unicef, which called for intensive support to help students recover. Across the world, from Ethiopia to the US, children have lost basic literacy and numeracy skills and their mental and physical health has suffered. In South Africa, schoolchildren are between 75% and a whole school year behind where they should be, with up to 500,000 having dropped out of school altogether between March 2020 and October 2021. Read more of Karen McVeigh’s report here: UN data reveals ‘nearly insurmountable’ scale of lost schooling due to Covid Andrew Sparrow is live with his UK politics live blog for the day – I think it might prove to be quite a busy one for him. You can find that here. I’ll be continuing on this blog with all the latest coronavirus news from around the globe, and any major Covid developments that emerge in the UK, so stay tuned. Authorities in the United Arab Emirates have published new information about Abu Dhabi’s entry requirements, saying that unlike residents and citizens, vaccinated tourists do not need to show proof of a booster shot to cross into the capital. Associated Press report that the tourism-specific change comes as confusion swirls around entry rules for Abu Dhabi, which has taken a more stringent approach to containing the coronavirus than neighbouring city Dubai. The pandemic had prompted Abu Dhabi to erect a hard border with Dubai, forcing all drivers to come to a halt for vaccination and Covid checks before entering. Ever-changing requirements have caused some headaches for commuters, with drivers from Dubai who had not received booster shots unexpectedly turned away from the capital last week. The emirate later clarified that all citizens and residents seeking entry must now show proof of a booster shot to be considered fully vaccinated and maintain a “green status” on the government health app. The updated Abu Dhabi tourism website now says that the new rule does not apply to international visitors, who may enter the city-state if they have received both doses. Our community team would like to hear from you: In another party allegation, No 10 has admitted that Carrie Johnson held a party for the prime minister and up to 30 staff on 19 June 2020 as part of a surprise lockdown birthday party. At the time, Covid rules banned indoor social gatherings and outdoor ones were limited to groups of six. We would like to know what your birthday celebrations were like during the first lockdown in 2020. Did you or members of your family miss a significant one? How did you celebrate it within the restrictions at the time? You can in touch with them here: Here’s Jessica Elgot and Jamie Grierson with their round-up of what happened this morning in reaction to the Boris Johnson birthday party revelations: Boris Johnson’s gathering with birthday cake in the cabinet room was not a party, the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, has said, denying the prime minister had organised the event. “The prime minister clearly didn’t organise to be given a cake,” Shapps told Sky News after the latest revelations about lockdown breaches in Downing Street. “Some people came forward and thought it would be appropriate on his birthday.” But he suggested it was “unwise” for the prime minister have been given a cake at the gathering of staff. He told BBC Radio 4 Today that he shares “the sense of unease about all of this”. Asked if, at the time, he would have advised someone at a Downing Street press conference that the gathering as described would be allowed, Shapps said: “I think it’s clearly unwise to do those things … This is in a workplace with a bunch of people who were working together all of the time, who decide to give the prime minister a birthday cake on his birthday. Unwise, I’m sure, given the circumstances as we know them.” Shapps confirmed that the event on 19 June 2020 would be considered by the official inquiry into the breaches by Sue Gray, saying she was “already aware of this particular incident, so she will be using that in her report and we’ll wait to see what she says”. Read more of their report here: Cake and singing on PM’s birthday was not a party, says Grant Shapps A quick snap from Reuters here that Japan’s daily count of new Covid-19 infections surpassed 60,000 for the first time on Tuesday, broadcaster FNN has said. Russia has reported a record number of daily new Covid cases for the fifth successive day, the government coronavirus task force said. Reuters report that the new daily cases jumped to 67,809, from 65,109 a day earlier. The previous single day peak of Covid in Russia was in November 2021, when the country briefly recorded just over 40,000 cases in one day. Gordon Brown, the former UK prime minister, has described the row over Downing Street lockdown parties as a “moral” issue. PA Media quote him telling ITV’s Good Morning Britain: I could not go to the funeral of a very close relative last year at the same time. I couldn’t visit a dying friend in hospital, and there are thousands and thousands of families who were in that position. Therefore, this is not a political issue. This is a moral issue about whether the standards you ask people to follow are standards you are prepared to follow yourself. Something has got to be done - both to help families in need and get the attention of the Government to the people I am really worried about and that is people facing rising food bills and tax rises. They are facing heating bill rises, food bill rises and at the same time benefits were cut by £20 a week a few months ago. Following the UK government’s decision to ease coronavirus testing and self-isolation requirements for people arriving in England, Heathrow Airport chief executive has John Holland-Kaye warned there are “other things we will need” if international travel is to recover from the pandemic. He seems to be asking that the UK government makes a promise not to return to any anti-Covid measures, even if a new variant of concern emerges. PA Media quote him telling Sky News: We need to get the tests lifted at the other end of the journey, because for most countries you might need to go to you will still need testing before you’re allowed into those countries. So that’s something we’ll work on. And also a playbook for what happens if there is another variant of concern, that is quite likely to occur. So that we don’t have this handbrake being slammed on by the government, and most people can travel with confidence, even if there is a new variant of concern. During the last couple of weeks UK government ministers have been very quick to invoke the name Sue Gray in order to avoid answering any questions that might implicate the prime minister in the Downing Street lockdown party scandal, but often happy to repeat denials that also would be pre-judging the outcome of her report. Grant Shapps has taken a slightly different line here this morning. Some conservative voices have been critical of the media – in particular the BBC – for the prominence given to the story. However the i Paper’s political correspondent Paul Waugh points out exactly why Shapps is expressing frustration on the airwaves this morning that he can’t get to talk about the message the government wants to get across. First Minister of Wales, Mark Drakeford, has also been doing the UK media round this morning, and he has said: “I just don’t think that the prime minister has the moral authority to lead a country like the United Kingdom,” following the claims that Boris Johnson attended a party in June 2020. PA Media quote Drakeford saying on the BBC Today programme: “You cannot be someone who asks other people to do things – difficult, upsetting things – that you are so patently unwilling to do yourself.” There might be a few bleary heads in Scotland this morning, as last night was the first time that nightclubs have been open since before December. There are plenty of pictures coming through the wires of people very much appearing to enjoy their newly-rediscovered night life. There’s another novel line being taken by the UK’s transport secretary Grant Shapps on the airwaves this morning – he appears to have argued on BBC Breakfast that British people would not consider a gathering of people with a birthday cake “a party”. PA Media quote him saying: I think most people would think of a party as being an arranged event rather than something where on somebody’s birthday in the office that they work in with the people that they always work with, someone says ‘it’s your birthday here’s a cake’. But that is for Sue Gray to get to the bottom of, I do agree and understand why - not least from my own personal experience - this would cause upset. The Dutch government is expected to announce later today that it will allow restaurants, bars and theatres to re-open, despite record numbers of coronavirus infections. Prime Minister Mark Rutte and Health Minister Ernst Kuipers are expected to announce the new rules at a news conference at 7pm (1800 GMT). Late last night, the government released official advice of health experts and local government officials who support the end of a strict lockdown that has been in effect since mid-December. Reuters note that despite record infections, the experts said the Omicron variant of the coronavirus, which is now dominant in the Netherlands, “has a less serious clinical picture” than the Delta variant, which caused an earlier wave. Foreign studies show hospital admissions with Omicron are between 40% and 60% lower, while intensive care admissions halved, they said. Government advisers said bars, restaurants and theatres should be allowed to open until 10pm. A quick update from Reuters on France, where health minister Olivier Veran has told LCI TV he hoped the country would reach the peak of the current Covid-19 wave in the next few days. Almost 400 people in France who were hospitalised due to a Covid infection died over the past 24 hours, official data showed for Monday, the highest figure since April. Labour’s shadow foreign secretary in the UK, David Lammy, has been on the BBC Radio 4 Today programme talking about the allegations that the prime minister attended a birthday party in his honour during the lockdown period. PA Media quote Lammy saying: The prime minister tweeted a letter he sent to a young woman, Josephine, seven she was, and he said to her: ‘Well done for not having your birthday party. We must do all we can to protect the NHS.’ Why should Josephine forgo her birthday party? Indeed. Why should the Queen forgo her birthday party? The semantics of what constitutes a party is frankly not the subject that I as shadow foreign secretary want to be debating on the Today programme on a Tuesday morning. That’s very sad that we have to do this, what I would say is it is very, very serious. The prime minister and his government had to make a set of rules, but they’re actually laws that restrict people’s going about their affairs, their socialisation, that meant they couldn’t go to funerals. It meant they couldn’t do all sorts of things, and that included my own family. That is why this is serious, and when you take on that duty as prime minister, you need to reflect on your ability to then live by those rules. And week after week, we have this drip drip drip of a behaviour, a culture. Was he at a party? Did he know he was at a party? He didn’t realise the rules? He is the prime minister of our country, and he has breached that trust. A quick snap from Reuters here which appears to show a shift in position in Israel. Earlier we reported the health minister had appeared to rule it out, but the health ministry has recommended offering a fourth Covid-19 vaccine dose to all adults, on condition that at least five months have passed since they got the third or since they recovered from the illness. Here is what the Grant Shapps defence of the Downing Street birthday party allegations appears to boil down to – that the prime minister was surprised with a cake that he didn’t organise himself, and that everybody was already in that building for work purposes anyway. Understandably UK transport secretary Grant Shapps has been questioned on Sky News about allegations that Boris Johnson was present at some kind of birthday party in his honour during a period of lockdown restrictions. Shapps has done his best to argue variously that Downing Street is both an office building and a home, and so therefore the rules are somewhat blurred, and then at another juncture he also said that the prime minister hadn’t organised any event himself. He also seemed to try and widen the argument out to argue that a lot of people may have unwittingly transgressed the rules at some point. He finished the segment by saying: I understand the sense of frustration. I say to you, I could not see my own dad who we didn’t think we were going to see again, when he went to the hospital. I feel personally very upset when I see stories about lockdowns being broken in any form … I don’t seek to defend it. It will be up to Sue Gray to decide on whether this was appropriate. The UK’s transport secretary Grant Shapps is on Sky News – he has been championing the government’s decision to drop Covid testing and quarantine requirements for international travel from 11 February, which he pointed out was in time for half-term holidays in England. He said: It’s been a long time coming, but when you go abroad there are no more tests to take when you come home. So you don’t need to take a test before you leave, wherever you’re coming from, to get here. You don’t need to take a day two test, it’s already gone. You can just come home, and the only thing we ask you to do is fill in a passenger locator form, which we are going to simplify. That’s it. No quarantine. No testing. And all that cost would fall away. A couple of other small things, including children 12 to 15 being able to use the NHS Covid app to demonstrate that they’ve been vaccinated. That’s where countries require that. And under-eighteens are exempt anyway. It’s going to be a big change, much cheaper, and I’m really delighted. In all the furore over allegations of parties at Downing Street during lockdown, it is easy to lose track of where we are with the current Covid caseload in the UK. Here is a quick catch-up. There were 88,447 new Covid cases recorded yesterday. Over the last seven days there have been 652,679 new coronavirus cases recorded in the UK. Cases have decreased by 6.8% week-on-week. There have been 1,843 deaths within 28 days of a positive test recorded in the last week, including 56 deaths recorded yesterday. Deaths have decreased very slightly by 0.1% week-on-week. Hospital admissions data is up to 18 January 2022, and they have decreased by 12.6% week-on-week. At the latest count on the UK government’s own dashboard, there were 17,523 people in hospital in total, of whom 640 are in ventilation beds. According to the government’s figures, the peak of hospitalisations during the pandemic was in January 2021, with 39,254 patients in hospital. Testing has decreased by 5.8% in the last week. There were 1,229,253 tests carried out and officially recorded yesterday. The most recent peak was 2m tests on 4 January. Hello from Martin Belam in London, taking over from my colleague Samantha Lock in Sydney. Here are a couple of links you might find immediately useful just to get a handle on where we stand. This is a timeline of fifteen social gatherings alleged to have taken place at the heart of government during periods of Covid restrictions that should have forbidden them, and here are seven occasions when Boris Johnson denied that No 10 broke Covid rules. I draw your attention particularly to 8 December 2021, when in the House of Commons, the prime minister said he was “sickened myself and furious” about staff joking about a Christmas party, and told parliament “I repeat that I have been repeatedly assured since these allegations emerged that there was no party and that no Covid rules were broken.” On 13 December the prime minister told Sky News “I can tell you once again that I certainly broke no rules.” I will bring you what emerges from the UK morning media round – transport secretary Grant Shapps has drawn the short straw to represent the government on the airwaves today – and all the latest coronavirus developments from around the world. The Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics Organising Committee has said that 15 new positive cases of Covid-19 were detected among games-related personnel on Monday. Twelve of the confirmed positive cases were among new arrivals, the committee said. The other three were found among those already in the closed loop, and of those three, one was an athlete or team official, a notice on the Beijing 2022 official website reads. Germany has reported another daily rise of 126,955 coronavirus cases and 214 deaths, according to recently released figures from the Robert Koch Institute. The numbers take the nationwide tally of confirmed coronavirus cases to 8,871,795 and 116,960 deaths. The Czech Republic recorded 30,350 new Covid-19 cases on Monday, the European country’s highest daily count since the pandemic began, health ministry data showed on Tuesday. The country is bracing for a surge in cases from the new Omicron variant which could peak this month, the health minister said. A New York judge has struck down the state’s mask mandate, ruling that it was unconstitutional and a violation of state law, according to the court decision. Judge Thomas Rademaker, of New York State Supreme Court on Long Island, wrote in his decision, which reportedly takes effect immediately, that the state legislature last year curbed any governor’s ability to issue decrees, such as a mask mandate, amid a declared state of emergency. Rademaker argued that because New York was no longer under a state of emergency at the time the mask mandate was announced, the governor and health commissioner did not have the additional authority to order such a mandate, adding the mandate is now unenforceable. The legislature’s action “prevents the type of mandates and directives that former Governor Cuomo included in his various Covid-19 related Executive Orders,” the judge wrote. New York Governor Kathy Hochul said in a statement: My responsibility as governor is to protect New Yorkers throughout this public health crisis, and these measures help prevent the spread of Covid-19 and save lives. We strongly disagree with this ruling, and we are pursuing every option to reverse this immediately. Rademaker wrote in his decision that he had no doubt there was good intention behind the mask mandate and said his ruling is not intended “in any way to question or otherwise opine on the efficacy, need, or requirement of masks as a means or tool in dealing with the Covid-19 virus.” While we are in the Asia region, South Korea’s daily count of new coronavirus cases surpassed 8,000 for the first time on Tuesday, despite the recent extension of strict social-distancing rules to slow infection. A total of 8,571 new infections were reported for Monday, according to the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KDCA), exceeding the previous peak of 7,848 in mid-December. The new record came amid the spread of the Omicron variant, which became dominant across the country last week. South Korea reimposed tougher distancing curbs in December as record-breaking numbers of daily cases and critically ill patients threatened to overwhelm its medical system before the Omicron wave hit. Daily tallies had almost halved to around 4,000 this month but began rising again last week because of Omicron infections. The surge fuelled worries about a potentially bigger wave ahead of the Lunar New Year holidays, when tens of millions of Koreans usually travel across the country. Prime minister Kim Boo-kyum issued a special statement on Monday to plead for people to refrain from travel and gatherings during the break, which starts on Saturday. “It is no different to adding fuel to the raging flames if many people move around the country and meet each other,” he told a briefing. More than 95% of South Korean adults have been fully vaccinated and nearly 58% have received a booster shot, KDCA data showed. Japan is expected to expand quasi-emergency measures to more parts of the country from Thursday in an attempt to stem a surge in Omicron cases. Restrictions on opening hours and alcohol sales at bars and restaurants are already in place in 16 of the country’s 47 prefectures, but the measures will go into effect in a further 18 prefectures from Thursday until 20 February, according to the Kyodo news agency. The prime minister, Fumio Kishida, is expected to announce the new measures, covering more than 70% of the country, later today. The western prefectures of Osaka and Kyoto are among the areas covered by the measures. The advisory panel is also expected to greenlight an extension through 20 February of the so-called quasi-emergency measures prevailing in three regions. The measures have prompted complaints that Japan’s nighttime economy is being unfairly targeted as governors in those regions can request restaurants and bars to shorten business hours and stop serving alcohol. Mitsuru Saga, the manager of an izakayapub in Tokyo, said he would serve alcohol but close at 8pm, even though he will receive less compensation from the government. “We can’t do business without serving alcohol,” Saga told Nippon TV. “It seems only eateries are targeted for restraints.” Packed trains and crowded shopping districts suggest people are tiring of requests to limit their movements two years into the pandemic, although mask wearing is still the norm. Japan logged more than 44,000 new cases on Monday, a tally by public broadcaster NHK showed. Kishida is coming under increasing pressure to speed up Japan’s booster rollout. While about 80% of of the 125 million population has received two vaccine doses, less than 2% has received a booster shot. Hello it’s Samantha Lock with you on the blog as we unravel all the latest coronavirus developments. Let’s jump in with some news straight from the UK with the Downing Street crisis continuing to reach new lows. Boris Johnson is facing renewed anger from MPs and bereaved families after the disclosure that his fiancee threw him a surprise lockdown birthday party, as sources said an official inquiry had uncovered “appalling evidence of mismanagement” at the heart of Downing Street. Sue Gray, the senior civil servant leading the inquiry into Downing Street parties, is expected to make deeply critical recommendations on overhauling No 10’s operation after hearing of repeated failures of leadership, according to a Whitehall source who spoke to the inquiry. In the latest alleged breach of rules, No 10 admitted that Carrie Johnson held a party for the prime minister and up to 30 staff on 19 June 2020 despite Covid rules banning indoor social gatherings. Outdoor gatherings were limited to groups of six. Meanwhile, in Japan an advisory panel is set to approve the expansion of tougher measures against Covid-19 to 18 additional regions on Tuesday, putting more than 70% of the country under restrictions. The western prefectures of Osaka and Kyoto are among the areas covered by the measures, taken in response to a surge of infections and hospitalisation driven by the Omicron variant, Reuters reports. The curbs will be enforced from Thursday through 20 February, and governors in those regions can request restaurants and bars to shorten business hours and stop serving alcohol. Here is a comprehensive rundown of all the latest international Covid developments: Europe: Italy said that the Omicron wave had peaked in the country as case numbers begin to fall. The UK announced plans to end testing rules for all doubly vaccinated travellers from 11 February. Rules requiring a vaccine passport to enter hospitality businesses and take public transport came into force in France. The European Union’s drug regulator is set to decide whether to approve Pfizer’s Covid-19 pill at the end of this month, before doing a final review of Merck’s similar but less effective drug in February, a source with knowledge of the matter said. Fully vaccinated travellers arriving in Britain will no longer have to take a Covid-19 test, while Germany extended its current pandemic measures. Norway will end its system of mandatory quarantines for non-vaccinated travellers and close contacts of infected persons, replacing it instead with a daily test regime. Asia: Covid-related deaths surged in Australia and authorities warned numbers could rise further when schools return from holidays next week. Japan announced plans to extend coronavirus restrictions beyond the current 9pm curfew in a bid to tackle the spread of Omicron. The country is poised to double the number of regions subject to restrictions such as shortened restaurant opening hours in order to rein in a record surge in cases. Organisers of next month’s Beijing Winter Olympics slightly eased the strict Covid-19 requirements for participants. One of China’s longest lockdowns in the northern city of X’ian comes to an end after its 13 million residents were confined to their homes on December 22. Middle East: Israel’s health minister said he did not think Israel will offer a fourth Covid-19 vaccine dose to most people after the government made it available to over 60s and other high-risk groups. United States: The US advised against travel to 15 countries and territories. Medical developments: A third booster dose of a Covid-19 vaccine made by AstraZeneca, Pfizer-BioNTech or Johnson &amp; Johnson increases antibody levels significantly in those who have previously received two doses of Sinovac’s CoronaVac shot, a study has found. Omicron can survive longer than earlier versions of the coronavirus on plastic surfaces and human skin, Japanese researchers found in laboratory tests. British scientists will begin testing Merck and Ridgeback Biotherapeutics’ antiviral pill molnupiravir as a possible treatment for patients hospitalised with Covid-19. The US Food and Drug Administration is likely to restrict the use of Covid-19 antibody treatments from Regeneron and Eli Lilly as they are ineffective against Omicron, the Washington Post reported. World Health Organization director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus gave a press conference in which he warned that conditions remain ideal for more coronavirus variants to emerge and said it was dangerous to assume Omicron was the last one, but added that the acute phase of the pandemic could end this year if some key targets were met.That’s all from me for the night! Here are the latest updates to keep in mind. Nancy Pelosi is running for Congress again, but hasn’t said if she plans to remain speaker of the House. Biden plans to host auto executives at the White House on Wednesday to advance his plans of increasing environmentally friendly and electric vehicles. A New York judge has granted a stay to a ruling against the state’s mask mandate keeping it in place for now. A Michigan judge has declined to dismiss charges against five men accused of plotting to kidnap governor Gretchen Whitmer. Judge refuses to dismiss case against suspects accused of governor’s kidnapping plot A federal judge has declined to dismiss charges against five men accused of plotting to kidnap and kill Michigan governor Gretchen Whitmer. US district judge Robert Jonker said in a filing that the suspects’ claims of entrapment and government overreaching a “heavy burden to carry”. The accused would need to prove government agents induced them to commit crimes and that they were not “predisposed” to commit the crimes charged. “Defendants fail to carry their burden because the evidence on both issues is decidedly disputed as it almost inevitably is at this stage of the case,” he wrote. The five men are battling charges while a sixth pleaded guilty and is serving a six-year, federal prison sentence. New York’s mask policy back in effect after judge grants stay New York’s mask mandate will stay in place - for now- after a judge on Tuesday temporarily blocked a lower-court ruling that would overturn the policy. The judge approved a motion from state attorney Letitia James to keep the rule in effect while a decision made Monday to strike down the mask mandate is appealed. “Nearly three years into the COVID-19 pandemic, we know that wearing a mask saves lives,” James said in a statement. “This mandate and today’s decision are critical in helping to stop the spread of this virus and protect individuals young and old.” Monday’s decision sparked confusion across the state, where previously residents were required to wear masks in a number of places - including schools, public transportation, and other indoor locations. Under Tuesdays reversal, the mandate will stay in effect until the Appellate court takes further action. “We will continue to do everything in our power to prioritize the health and wellbeing of all New Yorkers,” James said. National Covid deaths are at their highest in the past year Even as new cases from the Omciron surge level out, daily Covid deaths in the US are now at highest level in almost a year, according to Johns Hopkins figures published Tuesday. The number of reported Covid-19 deaths reached a seven-day average of 2,191 per day by Monday, up about 1,000 from pre-Omicron daily death counts two months ago. A report from the Wall Street Journal puts those numbers into perspective: The U.S. saw the highest numbers of deaths in the pandemic about a year ago, before vaccines were widely available, when the daily average reached 3,400. More recently, the Delta variant triggered a peak just above 2,100 in late September. Omicron has since muscled Delta aside and now accounts for nearly every known Covid-19 case, the CDC has estimated. The seven-day death average last topped the current level in February 2021, as the U.S. recovered from last winter’s surge. Fallout from the Omicron surge has continued across the United States. In Los Angeles, for example, the county reported 102 COVID-19 deaths on Thursday - the most fatalities it has seen in one day since 10 March 2021. Biden to host chief executives of auto and tech companies at White House As part of his goal for 50% of new US vehicles to be electric or plug-in electric hybrid by 2030, Joe Biden will host auto and tech executives at the White House on Wednesday. To discuss Biden’s Build Back Better legislation, the following will take part: General Motors CEO Mary Barra, Ford Motor CEO Jim Farley, Salesforce co-CEO Marc Benioff, Microsoft President Brad Smith, Etsy CEO Josh Silverman, Siemens Corp CEO Barbara Humpton and Corning CEO Wendell Weeks. The legislation, pushed by Biden in December, includes billions of dollars to tackle climate change and boost electric vehicles along with money for universal preschool, paid family leave and other social safety net spending. A White House official said Biden “will meet with CEOs who support passing Build Back Better to discuss the ways his [BBB] agenda will make the US economy more competitive, increase worker productivity and workforce participation, lower inflation over the long-term, and strengthen business growth.” US House speaker Nancy Pelosi announced Tuesday evening she plans to seek re-election as a representative of California, continuing her 30-year run in Congress. On her Twitter account, Pelosi said that despite progress being made “much more needs to be done to improve people’s lives”. Pelosi, 81, was the first woman speaker of the House. She served first from 2007 to 2011, and her current term began in 2019. She did not indicate in her announcement whether she would again run for speaker, as Democrats brace for the possible loss of its majority in the 8 November midterm elections. In 2018 she indicated the role would be turned over to new leadership and that this term would be her last. Hello readers! Kari Paul here, the Guardian’s West Coast tech correspondent, covering the blog for the next few hours. Stay tuned for updates. A busy day in US politics continues, with a focus on international news as tension continues to rise over Russia’s threatening conduct towards Ukraine. There’s plenty of domestic news, too, and our west coast colleague Kari Paul will take you through all further developments. Here’s where things stand: Joe Biden will welcome Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani, the ruler of the small Persian Gulf state of Qatar, in Washington, DC, on Monday amid talks among allies on how to ensure energy supplies to Europe if Ukraine is invaded by Russia. There will be “enormous consequences” for Russia if Ukraine is invaded, the US president said this afternoon. White House press secretary Jen Psaki confirmed that officials from the state department and the Pentagon will hold two classified briefings with lawmakers today to provide updates on the situation in Ukraine. The US has helped prepare for the diversion of natural gas supplies from around the world to Europe in the event that the flow from Russia is cut. Biden considers US options on Ukraine as west seeks united front while Vladimir Putin considers an invasion and builds up his troop presence along the border. Joe Biden will welcome Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani, the ruler of the small Persian Gulf state of Qatar, in Washington, DC, on Monday amid talks among allies on how to ensure energy supplies to Europe if Ukraine is invaded by Russia, which then cuts of its substantial gas supplies to the west. The US president and the Qatari emir are also expected to discuss Taliban control and the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan and nuclear tensions with Iran. Reuters further reports: Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani’s visit, the first since Biden took office a year ago, comes as Washington discusses with energy-producing states and firms a potential diversion of supplies to Europe if Russia invades Ukraine. U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken discussed the matter with the foreign minister of Qatar, a top liquefied natural gas producer, in a phone call on Monday, a source told the news agency. Washington is concerned that a possible Russian military assault on Ukraine could trigger U.S. and European sanctions on Moscow, which would then halt the delivery of Russian gas to Europe. Russia denies it plans to attack Ukraine. Global gas supplies are already tight and Qatar Energy’s shipments are locked into long-term supply contracts which the company cannot easily break. Sheikh Tamim’s visit aims to build on relations with ally Washington that have strengthened since Doha hosted talks that led to the 2020 deal for U.S. troops to pull out of Afghanistan, and played a pivotal role in evacuation efforts during the U.S. withdrawal. Qatar has also become the U.S. diplomatic representative in Afghanistan, now under Islamist Taliban rule. Qatar and Turkey are in negotiations with the Taliban administration to manage operations at Kabul’s international airport, the landlocked country’s main international airlink. Sheikh Tamim and Biden are also expected to discuss efforts by global powers to salvage a 2015 nuclear pact with Iran, with which Doha has ties, as well as efforts to end the Yemen war, the sources said. Nato solidarity should be maintained and built upon in the approach to Russia’s aggressive build-up of troops on the Ukrainian border amid fears of an invasion, the Guardian writes in an editorial today. Loud signaling about solidarity actually gives further clues about division among the allies, our team writes, following Joe Biden’s recent gaffe when he suggested Nato differences over how to respond in the event of a “minor incursion” of Ukraine’s territory. But now there are signs that the allies are moving closer. Here is the article: The US president’s need to state on Monday that there is “total unanimity” over how to deal with the Ukraine crisis, like the video call with European leaders which preceded it, was itself evidence of ongoing differences among western allies. There is no dispute about the threat: more than 100,000 Russian troops are now massed near Ukraine’s borders. The US has put 8,500 troops on standby to deploy to Europe to reinforce allies there, while Nato has reinforced its eastern borders with warships and fighter jets. A senior US official briefed on Tuesday that in the event of an invasion, sanctions will “start at the top of the escalation ladder and stay there”. In addition to the clear deterrent message, talks continue: Dmitry Kozak, the Kremlin’s deputy chief of staff, will meet French, German and Ukrainian officials in Paris on Wednesday, in the “Normandy format”. Set against that, Russia paid little price for the annexation of Crimea and fomenting the separatist uprising in the Donbas region in 2014. There is a credible case that Russia is set on a major military offensive – not merely pursuing coercive diplomacy – and that it is in Moscow’s interests to act before Kyiv receives further arms shipments. Above all, there is at present no visible off-ramp for Vladimir Putin. The very thing he says Russia must counter – Nato’s presence in eastern Europe – is growing because of his own actions. He might take an exit; it’s harder to see him beating a retreat. So the risks are high and rising. But an attack on Ukraine is not inevitable. French officials have indicated that they regard recent US and UK briefing as alarmist; Kyiv itself is notably more cautious. An analysis by the Centre for Defence Strategies, a Ukrainian thinktank, says a full-scale invasion capturing most of the country in the next few months seems unlikely, given current Russian troop formations. But it also suggests that “hybrid invasion” is already being implemented, citing the recent cyber-attack. Moscow may believe that such methods, along with cross-border missile strikes, sabotage and political meddling, might be enough to effect a change of government. (The EU offer of €1.2bn in emergency financial assistance is designed to reduce pressure on Kyiv.) What price would Russia pay? Its markets have already tanked; and it appears to have amassed a cash stockpile in preparation for sanctions. It believes its control of gas supplies give it asymmetric leverage, especially given Europe’s cost of living crisis. And it may count on distraction and disunity in the west. The stepping up of US rhetoric is in part an attempt to compensate for Joe Biden’s gaffe suggesting Nato division over how to respond to a “minor incursion”. Excitable UK briefing over the weekend comes as the prime minister hopes for people to look beyond his domestic woes. Germany, from history, principle (established policy against arms sales to war zones) and pragmatism (it gets more than half of its gas from Russia), is strikingly more muted; uncertainty persists over how far it would go, especially over the NordStream 2 gas pipeline. Nonetheless, there are signs that the allies are moving closer after Monday’s call – US coordination with Qatar and other suppliers to address the energy shortfall is helpful – and are certainly more united than in 2014. The drumbeat of war is concentrating minds and encouraging solidarity. That must now be maintained and built upon. More on Representative Jim Cooper announcing his retirement today: Cooper previously decried gerrymandering efforts in Tennessee, noting that the attempts of Tennessee Republicans to divide Nashville could cost him his seat. In an interview with CNN last year about Tennessee GOP wanting to break up the Nashville district, Cooper said: “They couldn’t beat me fairly...So, now they’re trying to beat me by gerrymandering.” Cooper also noted during that interview: “It’s not about me...It’s about the political future of Nashvillians. And they deserve their own voice, regardless of who is their congressman.” Read the article and Cooper’s previous comments here. Tennessee representative Jim Cooper, who has served the House for over 30 years, has announced that he will not seek reelection after saying there is “no way” he would win his seat given new congressional maps created by state Republicans. Cooper, a democrat, has represented the 5th congressional district of Nashville since 2003, also serving in the House from 1983 to 1995 as a moderate Democrat. Cooper’s announcement came only one day after a new congressional map was approved by Tennessee’s General Assembly, which would split Nashville, a Democrat-leaning city, three ways. The map still needs final approval by Republican governor Bill Lee. “I cannot thank the people of Nashville enough,” said Cooper in a statement. “You backed me more than almost anyone in Tennessee history, making me the state’s 3rd longest-serving member of Congress.” Cooper also criticized GOP state lawmakers for creating the map that would divide Nashville despite ongoing appeals to keep the city whole. “There’s no way, at least for me in this election cycle, but there may be a path for other worthy candidates,” said Cooper. Cooper is the 29th Democrat to announce they will not be seeking reelection in what could spell disaster for congressional democrats come midterms. Biden has made additional comments concerning a potential invasion of Ukraine by Russia, clarifying that the US has no plans to send troops to Ukraine, but saying that he would oversee sanctions against Russia. When reporters asked Biden if he could see himself personally sanctioning Putin over an invasion of Ukraine, Biden said: “Yes, I would see that.” Biden has also said that he isn’t certain if Putin will actually invade Ukraine, adding that, “I don’t think even his people know for certain,” comparing the status of a potential invasion to “reading tea leaves.” US officials are considering a range of financial options that could be used as punishment if Russia invades Ukraine. Here is an explainer of some options being considered by the US, written by the Associated Press’ Ellen Knickmeyer: SWIFT RETALIATION For the U.S. and its European allies, cutting Russia out of the SWIFT financial system, which shuffles money from bank to bank around the globe, would be one of the toughest financial steps they could take, damaging Russia’s economy immediately and in the long term. The move could cut Russia off from most international financial transactions, including international profits from oil and gas production, which in all accounts for more than 40% of the country’s revenue... DOLLAR CLEARING The United States already holds one of the most powerful financial weapons to wield against Putin if he invades Ukraine — blocking Russia from access to the U.S. dollar... EXPORT CONTROLS White House press secretary Jen Psaki has confirmed that the U.S. is considering imposing export controls — potentially cutting off Russia from the high tech that helps warplanes and passenger jets fly and makes smartphones smart, along with the other software and advanced electronic gear that make the modern world run... Read the full article here. Amid ongoing discussion of the developing situation in Ukraine, Joe Biden has made comments today about the significance of a possible invasion. “It would be the largest invasion since World War II,” Biden said of a possible Ukraine invasion by Russia. “It would change the world.” Biden added that there would be “enormous consequences” for Russia if an invasion were to take place, also noting that US troops could be moving to Europe in the “near term” but won’t be in Ukraine. More details to come. In other news, Officer Eugene Goodman, one of the attending officers who faced off with rioters during the 6 January Capitol attack, has spoken publicly for the first since the failed insurrection. Speaking on an episode of “3 Brothers No Sense” podcast, Goodman spoke on his experiences that day, including navigating fame after many found out that Goodman had successfully prevented rioters from entering the Senate chambers, allowing senators and their staff to evacuate. “In any situation like that, you desperately want to de-escalate but at the same time, you want to survive first ... It could have easily been a bloodbath,” said Goodman. “So kudos to everybody there that showed a measure of restraint with regards to deadly force because it could have been bad. Really, really bad.” In addition to discussing how he has generally navigated his increased profile, Goodman also shared a funny anecdote about attempting to get merchandise that had his image on it: “I actually saw a guy with a sweatshirt and I tried to buy one and he tried to charge [me]. I said, “this dude gonna charge me for my own face?’ That’s funny.” The full podcast episode is available here. Here’s where the day stands so far: The US and its allies are preparing for potential conflict in Ukraine, as Russian President Vladimir Putin considers an invasion and builds up his troop presence along the border. Joe Biden held a virtual meeting with European leaders yesterday to discuss the situation in Ukraine and potential responses to Russian aggression. “I had a very, very, very good meeting – total unanimity with all the European leaders,” Biden told reporters. The US is finalizing plans to divert natural gas to Europe in the event that Russia cuts off its supply to neighboring countries. Russia has already started restricting the flow of natural gas through the pipeline running through Ukraine, but US officials have said they are confident in plans to compensate for any further supply reduction to European allies. The Biden administration will hold two more classified briefings with members of Congress today to provide updates on the situation in Ukraine. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said state department and Pentagon officials would brief House and Senate leadership and committee staff today, with plans to hold all-member briefings in the coming days. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. As press secretary Jen Psaki held her daily briefing to take questions about Ukraine, defense secretary Lloyd Austin and General Mark Milley, chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, were spotted leaving the White House after spending more than two hours there. A CBS News producer also saw secretary of state Antony Blinken arriving at the White House about an hour ago: Joe Biden does not have anything on his official White House schedule today, as the president likely receives briefings on the situation in Ukraine and Russia’s troop buildup along the border. Asked about Biden’s plans for the day, Psaki said the president had some policy meetings this morning and will review a speech later today, while acknowledging he may be spending some time in the Situation Room as well. White House press secretary Jen Psaki confirmed that officials from the state department and the Pentagon will hold two classified briefings with lawmakers today to provide updates on the situation in Ukraine. “Today, we are providing two additional classified bipartisan briefings for House and Senate leadership and committee staff,” Psaki said. “They’ll be providing updates on recent developments with Ukraine and Russia and the state of play. We’re also working on all-members briefings for the House and the Senate in the coming days.” Psaki noted that secretary of state Antony Blinken and deputy secretary of state Wendy Sherman have spoken to nearly 20 members of Congress in the past week, and they plan to have more conversations with lawmakers in the next few days. The White House has also had “dozens of engagements with Congress” to discuss Ukraine’s security situation since December, Psaki added. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, was asked about whether the Biden administration has any plans to unilaterally deploy US troops to Ukraine amid concerns of a potential Russian invasion. Psaki said the White House is focused on working with Nato to “plus up support” in allied eastern European countries as part of a coalition effort. “Just to be clear, there is no intention or interest or desire by the president to send troops to Ukraine,” Psaki said. “Nato is a forum to support our eastern flank partners and countries, and that’s what the focus has been on.” Psaki’s comments come one day after the Pentagon said 8,500 US troops had been placed on heightened alert to deploy to Ukraine if necessary. A reporter asked Jen Psaki about the Biden administration’s work to divert natural gas to Europe in case Russia cuts off its supply in response to escalating tensions over Ukraine. Psaki said the US is in communication with a “range of countries and partners” to discuss potential gas shortages in Europe, but she would not provide specific details on those talks. The press secretary did note that officials are discussing how best to use existing energy stockpiles in Europe while also working to identify other potential sources of natural gas to prevent shortages. The Guardian’s Julian Borger reports that US officials are now confident Europe will not suffer from a sudden loss of energy if Russia cuts off its supply to nearby countries: The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, is now holding her daily briefing with reporters, and she opened her remarks by announcing Joe Biden spoke to New York City Mayor Eric Adams last night. Psaki said Biden offered his condolences to Adams over the shooting of two New York police officers on Friday night, which resulted in the death of Officer Jason Rivera. Biden also emphasized his administration’s commitment to serving as a “strong federal partner” in the fight against gun violence in New York and other major cities, Psaki said. Speaking in his home state of Kentucky, Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell said the Biden administration is “moving in the right direction” with its response to Russia’s troop buildup along Ukraine’s border. “They’re prepared to take steps before an incursion and not afterwards,” McConnell said, per NBC News. Republican Todd Young, a member of the Senate foreign relations committee, also argued that the White House needs to be proactive in responding to Russian aggression. “I think whatever can be done to establish deterrence needs to done in short order,” Young told Punchbowl News this morning. Staff turnover in the Biden administration is nowhere near what it was under Donald Trump, when senior aides came and went as through a revolving door in a hurricane. Nonetheless, the press always likes a bit of speculation about who might be in and who might be out, and here comes the Washington Post with an exhaustive examination of how Ron Klain, Joe Biden’s chief of staff, has not had the smoothest first year in the job. The piece is based on interviews with “more than 60 White House and administration officials, Cabinet secretaries, members of Congress and other Klain associates”. In one of the kinder comments about Klain’s year in a role which Trump filled four times in four years, the Connecticut senator Richard Blumenthal told the paper: “I think that, by and large, he’s making the trains run on time – even though some of the boxcars may seem to be empty some of the time.” Blumenthal might’ve been alluding to supply chain problems, among various crises (Covid, Ukraine, the assault on US democracy, the fallout from calling a Fox News reporter a “stupid son of a bitch”) which have dogged Biden’s first year. But the Post piece focused on the damage to Biden, and thus to Klain, from protracted and mostly failed negotiations with the president’s own party on Capitol Hill, in particular over domestic spending and voting rights reform, both high-profile failures. The Post said many Democrats complained progressives had been given too much weight, one saying Klain had created “a monster” by empowering Pramila Jayapal, the leader of House progressives. (Adhering to rather endearing American newspaper norms, the Post said that source used “an expletive to underscore the point”.) Jayapal countered: “If he empowered us, it was because we were pushing the president’s agenda.” The paper also spoke to Klain. He, it reported, “appeared to acknowledge that playing an inside-Washington game had been problematic for Biden in his first year, creating an image that the president spends most of his time in political negotiations. “Klain vowed that Biden would spend more time on the road in 2022, interacting with Americans and showcasing his trademark style of backslapping empathy.” There is of course much more in the piece. If you like that sort of thing, it’s here. A bipartisan congressional delegation is leaving today for Brussels, Belgium, and Kyiv, Ukraine, to hold discussions on Russia’s troop buildup along Ukraine’s border. The delegation is led by Democrat Gregory Meeks, the chair of the House foreign relations committee, and it includes David Cicilline, Ami Bera, Colin Allred, Chrissy Houlahan, Tom Malinowski, Sara Jacobs, Mark Green, August Pfluger, Mikie Sherill and Victoria Spartz. “In Brussels, the delegation will meet with representatives from NATO, the EU, and NATO and EU member states to discuss the security situation in Eastern Europe and the buildup of Russian troops along Ukraine’s border and in Belarus,” the House foreign relations committee said in a statement. “In Kyiv, the delegation will meet with senior Ukrainian officials to discuss the security situation and reinforce U.S. support for Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity.” A bipartisan group of senators participated in a congressional delegation to Ukraine last week, and the lawmakers met with President Volodymyr Zelenskiy and other senior officials. Republican Tod Young, a member of the Senate foreign relations committee, was asked whether he believes Joe Biden should send US troops to eastern Europe. “Without delay,” Young told Punchbowl News. “I think whatever can be done to establish deterrence needs to done in short order.” Young said Vladimir Putin’s “unpredictable” leadership style made it unclear when an invasion might occur, so the US must take the opportunity to arm Ukrainian troops and properly position its own forces in neighboring allied countries. “I think that is prudent, rather than waiting until after the fact,” Young said. The US has helped prepare for the diversion of natural gas supplies from around the world to Europe in the event that the flow from Russia is cut, in a bid to blunt Vladmir Putin’s most powerful economic weapon. As fears of an invasion of Ukraine have grown, US officials said on Tuesday that they have been negotiating with global suppliers, and they are now confident that Europe would not suffer from a sudden loss of energy for heating in the middle of winter. Russia has already restricted the flow of natural gas through the pipeline running through Ukraine from about about 100 million cubic metres a day to 50 MCM, US officials said. Washington now estimates that almost all of that can be replaced quickly if the pipeline is cut deliberately or as a result of conflict. “To ensure Europe is able to make it through the winter and spring we expect to be prepared to ensure alternative supplies covering a significant majority of the potential shortfall,” a senior official said. Read the Guardian’s full report: During the White House briefing yesterday, a reporter asked press secretary Jen Psaki whether Joe Biden believes a Russian invasion of Ukraine is imminent. The reporter pointed to the Pentagon’s announcement that 8,500 US troops would be put on heightened alert to deploy if necessary as potential evidence of an escalating threat. “While we can’t get into the mind of President Putin, we are seeing the preparations that they’re making at the border,” Psaki replied. “We have been very clear and the president has been direct that military action by Russia could come at any time. He said that last week as well.” Another reporter tried to get a more concrete answer from Psaki, asking whether Biden is more or less concerned about an invasion of Ukraine after the events of this weekend. “He said last week that military action by Russia could come at any time. That remains his point of view,” Psaki replied. The manager of an exclusive New York City restaurant insisted it was focused on the safety of its guests, after the former Alaska governor and Republican vice-presidential pick Sarah Palin dined there despite not being vaccinated against Covid-19. New York City laws require proof of vaccination for indoor dining. The city government said Palin should “follow the rules just like everyone else”. Palin tested positive repeatedly on Monday, delaying the start of her defamation trial against the New York Times in Manhattan federal court. Palin, who also tested positive in March last year, has said she will not get vaccinated. In December, she told a conservative audience in Phoenix: “It’ll be over my dead body that I’ll have to get a shot. I will not do that. I won’t do it, and they better not touch my kids either.” In a statement, Luca Guaitolini, manager of Elio’s, the restaurant on the Upper East Side, responded to the news Palin was seen eating there on Saturday. “We are taking this isolated incident – and unfortunate oversight – very seriously,” Guaitolini said. “Elio’s adheres to and believes in the vaccine mandate, and all it is doing to protect our staff, regulars and the dining public.” Guaitolini said he was not working on Saturday. He told the Times first-time diners were checked but Palin dined with an unidentified “regular”. “She probably just walked in and strolled over” to the table, Guaitolini said. “We are trying to get to the bottom of this.” In case you missed it yesterday: Joe Biden got frustrated with a Fox News reporter who pressed him on how inflation may negatively impact Democrats’ midterm prospects. The president was hosting a meeting with his White House Competition Council to discuss his administration’s efforts to lower prices as US inflation increases at the highest rate seen in decades. Reporters were present for the start of the event, and as they were escorted out, a few of them shouted questions at Biden about Ukraine, which the president mostly ignored. One reporter, Peter Doocy of Fox News, said, “Will you take questions on inflation then? Do you think inflation is a political liability ahead of the midterms?” Biden, seemingly unaware that he could still be heard, then said to his advisers, “No, it’s a great asset. More inflation. What a stupid son of a bitch.” The remark certainly attracted some attention on social media, and Biden later called Doocy to apologize, per CNN: Russia’s aggressive buildup near Ukraine energised Nato into sending more forces to eastern Europe on Monday and led to a plunge on Russian markets, raising the stakes on the Kremlin’s bet that it could cajole, extort or force Ukraine into submission. For Moscow it has become more difficult to pull back from its aggressive stance after US and Nato announcements that more troops would be deployed to the military alliance’s eastern flank. A unilateral drawdown now would leave the Kremlin a clear loser in the standoff, having provoked a strengthening of the very Nato presence that it had sought to banish from eastern Europe. Moscow has blamed the west for rising tensions and the chaos on Russian financial markets. “We are observing statements published by the North Atlantic Alliance about an enlargement of the contingent and the deployment of forces and hardware to the eastern flank. All that leads to the further escalation of tensions,” claimed Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin spokesperson, on Monday. Vladimir Putin does still have the option to turn back. An about-face would be embarrassing and make the west less likely to listen to his warnings in the future. But he would face little domestic blowback from ordering a drawdown and could claim he had taken the first step to avoid a devastating conflict. Shortly after his virtual meeting with European leaders, Joe Biden told reporters that the US and its allies are on the same page when it comes to Ukraine. “I had a very, very, very good meeting – total unanimity with all the European leaders,” Biden said after the meeting, which lasted about an hour and 20 minutes. In London, British Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s office echoed that sentiment, saying “the leaders agreed on the importance of international unity in the face of growing Russian hostility.” “The leaders agreed that, should a further Russian incursion into Ukraine happen, allies must enact swift retributive responses including an unprecedented package of sanctions,” Downing Street said. Read the Guardian’s full report: Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Joe Biden is preparing for potential conflict in Ukraine as Russian President Vladimir Putin considers an invasion and builds up his troop presence along the border. The department of defense spokesperson, John Kirby, said yesterday that the US has placed 8,500 troops on heightened alert to deploy if necessary. The White House is also urging Americans in Ukraine to consider leaving the country. Meanwhile, Biden held a virtual meeting with some of his European counterparts yesterday to discuss “their continued concern about the Russian military build-up on Ukraine’s borders”. “The leaders underscored their shared desire for a diplomatic resolution to the current tensions and reviewed recent engagements with Russia in multiple formats,” the White House said in its readout of the meeting. “The leaders also discussed their joint efforts to deter further Russian aggression against Ukraine, including preparations to impose massive consequences and severe economic costs on Russia for such actions as well as to reinforce security on NATO’s eastern flank.” So all eyes are on the Ukrainian border as Putin considers whether to move forward. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.“First of all, being adored by gay people on Twitter is all I’ve ever wanted in my life. So I’ve been enjoying myself,” Liv Hewson says playfully. We’re talking about the fan response to the hit show Yellowjackets, which had its season finale air earlier this month. The survival thriller has been a huge success and has quickly created a thriving fandom online – and Van, played by the 26-year-old Australian non-binary actor, has emerged as a favourite. “I’ve never really been on a show before that was, like, week-to-week mystery based, so being able to watch audience theories in real time was new to me as well,” Hewson says. “I really enjoyed it. There was a lot of fun.” One of the most joyous and entertaining trends around Yellowjackets is the proliferation of fan theories which range from the credible to the nonsensical. The show tells two stories consecutively: one set in the 90s that follows the plight of a girl’s soccer team that have crash-landed in the wilderness, and the other exploring the trauma of the survivors decades later. The show opens with the girls in the wilderness hunting and then – presumably – eating one of their own. The identity of who gets eaten has become one of the most prevailing and hotly contested theories by fans. The theories Hewson has seen so far run “the whole gamut, from somebody who’s spot on and is going to be thrilled when proven right, to someone who has said something that I never would have thought of in a million years.” The cast have their own group chat where they share the best Yellowjackets memes and theories that they find online. “A lot of the time, I think the audience has similar questions to us,” says Hewson, “which is really funny because when the scripts were being given to us, we didn’t necessarily know what was going to happen either. “So we would constantly be asking each other things like, ‘do any of you have pink Converse in your costume? What do you guys think the symbol means?’ So it was funny watching fan theories develop.” Hewson’s character, the team goalie Van Palmer, is renowned for having a pretty terrible time; having being set on fire twice and mauled by wolves, among other things, she really goes through a lot even for a show about survival and cannibalism. Throughout even the worst of it she maintains an extremely enjoyable and sardonic sense of humour, which Hewson credits as the reason for Van’s popularity. “Van crops up a lot as a strong comedic voice in the ensemble, which I had a lot of fun with as a performer. I think people respond to that – not just about Van, but the show generally. Yellowjackets is this bleak tragedy and it’s all going to end in tears, but there’s sharp comedy in it, which I think people respond to? I respond to it. It’s my favourite thing about it.” Hewson began acting as a teenager and has appeared in hit shows including Top of the Lake and Santa Clarita Diet. They auditioned for Yellowjackets, but not for Van; when they were offered the part, Hewson liked her immediately. “She’s funny, she’s grounded, she functions as the glue sometimes. I thought she was really interesting.” “I did a lot on this show I’ve never done before,” they add. “They set fire to me! They put a massive contact lens in my eye. It was new. It was challenging. But I was really game and really grateful to the makeup team, who were wonderful to me throughout the whole process. “And it was fun. Honestly, it was. It was physically very demanding, but it taught me a lot about patience and resilience. It taught me to be quite mindful ... it was good for me in a lot of ways, I think.” Another reason Hewson’s character is beloved, especially among queer fans, is the surprisingly sweet and sexy relationship Van has with her teammate Taissa – a situation which even ends with them “coming out” during the apocalyptic homecoming dance the girls throw in the wild, called “Doomcoming”. Among the horror and grimness, this moment – and the lack of homophobia in a show set in the nineties – is notable. “First of all, they’re a women’s soccer team,” Hewson scoffs. “These girls know what lesbians are. And by the time the homecoming rolls around, they’ve been in the woods for four or five months … I think there is an element of, why would this be a problem to us here? Why would this be a problem to us when we have all of this going on? Van and Taissa’s relationship is a source of joy, safety and love among this terrible situation.” Hewson is enjoying the response to Van and Taissa’s relationship, but also believes that fan investment in it - such as fanfiction - is really “none of my business”. “As a teenager, I came up reading fanfic and being on online fan spaces, and I just think that’s private, that’s a sandpit that the actors have no business playing in,” they say. “That stuff’s for you guys! You go have fun. Enjoy. The stuff that I have seen is people being really lovely, but I try to keep a bit of a distance – not for any bad reason, just out of respect.” Yellowjackets season one is currently streaming on Amazon Prime and Paramount Plus in Australia. A second season has been confirmed.When I was younger, the Australian Open lit up my family’s lounge room. The blue court light reflected off the walls each time a racquet greeted a tennis ball – thwack. It was normal to address players by their last name: Federer, Williams, Nadal, Clijsters, Tsonga. And like many others, tennis was my alarm clock for summer. But in 2015 another name joined our vocabulary: Alcott. It’s a name that needs little introduction and is rarely met with a question mark. Dylan Alcott: the first man in tennis history to win a golden slam. Alcott: the guy who crowd-surfed at a music festival in his wheelchair. Alcott: who quoted Wu-Tang Clan lyrics on ABC’s Q+A. And most recently, Alcott: the first person with a visible disability to be named Australian of the Year in the award’s 62-year history. In November, Alcott announced this Australian Open would be his final – and he’s currently on track to take his eighth consecutive title at the tournament. Over the span of his career, wheelchair tennis has been shot into the spotlight. But Alcott’s legacy isn’t centred on winning. It’s on changing perceptions of people with disability like him, like me, like so many others. In his acceptance speech for Australian of the Year, Alcott said: “I love my disability, it’s the best thing to happen to me … I love the person I am.” Alcott openly speaks about his struggles and his personal life, all with self-deprecating humour. You can’t turn away, because this man wears his life and heart on his sleeve. With thousands of social media followers, Alcott’s appeal is far-reaching. People look to Alcott, the whole person. They see his disability and its wonderful complexity as part of the human condition. He has normalised disability and made us feel seen – that we can be represented and seen as real, everyday people. Alcott has spoken previously about having no disabled people in the media for him to look up to when he was growing up. “When I turned on the TV or the radio and flicked to the newspaper, I never saw anyone like me. That’s what I struggled with the most,” he said. Disability advocate and writer Hannah Diviney tweeted after Alcott’s first-round match: “If you had told Younger Hannah that one day she’d spend a Sunday night with her family watching people who looked like her play tennis on mainstream TV, she’d never have believed you.” Growing up, I felt much the same as Alcott and Diviney. Not seeing anyone like you in the media can leave you feeling as though there is no one like you and that you can’t be successful. During high school I didn’t believe in myself. I was afraid of life and didn’t know if there was a space for me in it. Alcott once said that for “every one thing you can’t do there’s 10,000 others that you can”. And he’s made society believe this about people with disability too. He has taken us on a journey to recognise individuals for their humour, their passion, their ability. He – as well as many disability advocates – have moved the dial towards inclusion. I know this is just the beginning of change, that there’s still work to be done to have people with disability included in education settings and the workplace, true representation in the media and in leadership across Australia. We need to get to a place where people look around and ask if people with disabilities are truly represented in their community, their friendship circles, who they date and the media they consume. Now when I watch tennis, I see myself reflected on the court. I’m seen on Rod Laver Arena, on the banner at Melbourne Park, in the commentator’s box. And now in his role as Australian of the Year, people with disability are reflected in that role too. Win or lose, Alcott has helped change the narrative for people with disability, and I want to thank him for this. Enjoy those guilt-free beers, Dylan. • Kate Thomas is a copywriter and freelance writer based in regional New South Wales. You can find her on TwitterAs Boris Johnson prepares to face possibly the most difficult days of his premiership, the front pages are awash with questions over whether he can survive. As well as a police investigation into allegations of law-breaking at the heart of government, the prime minister is also facing the imminent release of the Gray report. Many Tory MPs are awaiting Gray’s findings before deciding whether to add their names to those calling for a vote of no confidence. The Mirror headlines with “Number’s up, PM” and reports that “Sue Gray has pics of Johnson with wine bottles at No 10 parties as police launch criminal probe.” The paper says the PM’s political future is “hanging in the balance” and claims the Gray report may be published as soon as Wednesday. The Guardian takes a similar line, describing the unfolding chaos as “PM’s peril: report looms as police step in over parties”. The paper says Johnson is “braced for the most perilous 48 hours of his premiership” ahead of the inquiry’s findings. The focus of the Telegraph’s front page is also the Gray report, this time noting the “mounting pressure” faced by Johnson to publish the report in full after the Metropolitan Police cleared the way for its release. The Daily Express takes a slightly different tack, reporting the Scotland Yard probe into “partygate” allegations has been welcomed by Johnson as a way to “draw a line” under the fiasco. “Yes PM, we all want ‘line drawn under’ partygate’, the headline reads. The Sun also focuses on Scotland Yard’s investigation into Downing Street parties under the headline “cops probe partygate”. “Ten Downing Street is now a crime scene after cops yesterday launched a probe into the Partygate scandal,” the paper continues. “PM Boris Johnson faces a police interview over boozy parties during lockdown after Whitehall investigator Sue Gray handed a dossier of rule-breaking allegations to the Met.” The i newspaper leads with the Metropolitan Police investigation above a photo of an anxious-looking PM. Veering in a different direction, the Daily Mail calls for a “sense of proportion” over the scandal. “Senior Tories have called for a ‘sense of perspective’ over the ‘partygate’ row as police launched a formal probe,” the paper adds while contrasting the story against dramatic photos of Russian military operations. “As Putin taunts West with terrifying military displays, Westminister’s convulsed over whether PM birthday cake broke Covid rules.” The Times plays it straight: “Johnson faces police interview over parties”. The Independent follows suits with: “Now police investigate Downing Street parties.” The Financial Times has “Johnson gears up for survival fight,” quoting one Tory MP as saying: “He believes he’ll get out of this. His optimism is more than skin deep.”Prospective Australian citizens are routinely waiting more than a year for their applications to be processed, with one in 10 experiencing delays of at least two years, latest figures show. As more than 16,000 people prepared to become citizens with hundreds of citizenship ceremonies being held around Australia on Wednesday, the federal government faced fresh criticism about the backlog in processing applications. “Today, thousands of people will become Australian citizens, an occurrence of great joy to them and of great benefit to our nation,” the opposition’s spokesperson for multicultural affairs, Andrew Giles, said. “But it is unacceptable that too many people are waiting too long for their journey to Australian citizenship to be finalised.” The average processing time for citizenship by conferral was 13 months from date of application to the decision, a spokesperson for the Department of Home Affairs said. The latest departmental figures show some of these applications take two or more years, with 90% of applications processed within 24 months. The department had on its books 144,847 applications for Australian citizenship by conferral as of last month, down from a peak of 163,000 in September 2020. Giles, who is also the shadow minister assisting for immigration and citizenship, said the long processing times showed “an ongoing lack of interest by the Morrison government in who we are as a multicultural nation”. He said citizenship gave people the right to be heard at the ballot box and it was “appalling” that nearly 150,000 people were “being denied their chance to have their say” at the looming federal election. “Through the pandemic there has been a great opportunity to clear the unacceptable backlog yet the numbers remain unacceptably high even now,” Giles said. “This is hurting individuals and damaging our social fabric as people are denied belonging and denied their say. It’s not good enough.” The Department of Home Affairs said Covid-19 risks and restrictions continued to disrupt face-to-face services, such as citizenship test appointments, “to varying extents in different locations over time”. “The impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on face-to-face client services means processing times are highly variable across the country,” a spokesperson for the department said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning They said applicants who lived in places that faced longer periods of disruption due to the pandemic were “now waiting significantly longer for a citizenship test appointment than others”. “The department continues to work on increasing citizenship test availability, to decrease the on hand caseload and reduce processing times, while ensuring Covid-safe requirements are met,” the spokesperson said. “Citizenship test appointments continue to be available in every state and territory through January 2022, with appointment numbers being reviewed regularly.” As of 31 December 2021, two-thirds of approved applicants had, at that time, been waiting less than six months to attend a citizenship ceremony. More than 314,000 people across Australia have acquired Australian citizenship through online or in-person ceremonies between January 2020 and December 2021. That figure includes 133,416 people who have become citizens via online ceremonies since the virtual option was introduced in March 2020. More than 16,000 people from about 150 nations were invited to join one of more than 400 citizenship ceremonies on Wednesday. The government has encouraged councils to conduct online citizenship ceremonies if Covid-19 restrictions prevent in-person ones. Wednesday’s figure of 16,000 compares with 25,422 people who were conferred with citizenship at ceremonies on Australia Day 2020 – a month before the Morrison government declared a pandemic. There were 12,561 conferees on Australia Day 2021, including 826 in online ceremonies. The minister for immigration and citizenship, Alex Hawke, said citizenship ceremonies were “an opportunity to welcome new citizens and celebrate the democratic values that make us proud to be Australians”. Hawke, who presided over a citizenship ceremony at the City of Parramatta Council, said Australia Day “holds special significance for hundreds of thousands of people who previously made the Australian citizenship pledge on this day”. “Choosing to become an Australian citizen means embracing the privileges, rights, and responsibilities that come with Australian citizenship, and committing to our national values that are based on respect, freedom, democracy and equality.” Processing times have jumped around throughout the course of the pandemic. In August 2020, 90% of applications for Australian citizenship by conferral were decided within 28 months – an increase from 21 months at the beginning of 2020. The processing times were beginning to improve at the start of 2021, when figures showed 90% of applications were being decided within 17 months. But that figure has now increased again to 24 months as of December 2021. Apart from Covid-19 disruptions to citizenship tests, the Department of Home Affairs argues factors that can affect processing times include how promptly the applicant responds to requests for more information. The department also cites the time it takes for other agencies to assist with character and national security-related checks.More than 700 aged care homes across Australia reported fresh Covid outbreaks in the fortnight to 21 January, the majority in New South Wales, with a number of large homes going from zero to more than 100 cases over that period. Public health researcher Dr Sarah Russell, who is director of Aged Care Matters, said some homes are managing to control the number of cases while others are seeing drastic spikes. In the fortnight from 7 January, 703 care homes recorded new outbreaks and 105 saw a surge in numbers. “Is this due to the failure of the vaccination team to provide residents with a booster shot? Or poor infection control training, including teaching staff how to don and doff [personal protective equipment]?” Russell asked. “I also note that many of the most significant surges in case numbers of residents infected with Covid have occurred in large aged care homes, with more than 100 residents infected. Many of these large aged care homes are not designed to cope with an airborne virus. “For example, in many homes, it is not possible to open windows in residents’ rooms. Without good ventilation, Covid has spread like wildfire in aged care homes.” Russell’s analysis identified the 10 homes with the highest surge in numbers in the fortnight to 21 January, eight of which are in NSW. Estia Health Kilbride in Gilead had the highest number of cases and jump in infections, going from zero cases on 7 January to 119 cases on 21 January, and four resident deaths. This was followed by St Sergius Aged Care in Cabramatta, which went from six cases to 113 cases in the same period, and by 21 January had reported eight deaths. Cardinal Stepinac Village was third, going from 16 resident infections to 103 and 10 deaths in a fortnight. All three homes are in NSW. Since 21 January, six more deaths have occurred in Cardinal Stepinac Village, a spokesman for the home told Guardian Australia. There are 136 residents at the home, which means the majority have been infected. “There is just no denying this is a serious outbreak,” the spokesperson said. “The home had their first positive test on Christmas Day, and it seems there has been multiple points of exposure over that Christmas period with people visiting the home, or visiting family and coming back,” he said. “The other big challenge has been a lot of usual staff have been on annual leave. And because there was so much virus in the community, they’ve been coming back from leave with the virus. There’s been multiple points of exposure, both in terms of residents in the facility and staff.” There were 73 staff members of Cardinal Stepinac Village with infections as of 21 January. The spokesman did not answer questions about the proportion of residents who had received their booster shot but said vaccination rates were “high”. The Cardinal Stepinac Village CEO, Emil Perosh, said: “Everyone is deeply affected by the tragedy. First and foremost, our thoughts are with the family and loved ones of our residents who have passed.” Staff had gone to “extreme lengths, worked around the clock on extended shifts and dealt with a great deal of uncertainty about the scale and nature of the broader community outbreak,” he said. “I am proud of their dedication to give the best-quality physical and emotional care during what is the most difficult time in our 30-plus-year history. This tragedy highlights the need for additional workforce support from the government in line with the requests of the Australian Aged Care Collaboration.” He said of the residents who died, “most had serious underlying health conditions and Covid-19 is not considered to be the primary cause of death”. Aged care homes have had differing policies about visitors and outings during the pandemic. Bans on seeing family have taken a significant toll on resident wellbeing, especially for residents in palliative care, and homes have tried to manage a balance between allowing residents to see loved ones while also trying to prevent outbreaks. A spokeswoman for Estia Health said there were 154 residents at the Kilbride home, and that a further three residents had died since 21 January. “After several staff tested positive on our asymptomatic rapid antigen testing program in early January, we initiated our outbreak management plan and notified relevant state and federal authorities,” she said. “Surveillance testing of residents was conducted on 9 January and identified an outbreak at our Kilbride home. The outbreak has now stabilised with the majority of Covid-positive residents now cleared.” All staff were fully vaccinated, she said, while more than 95% of residents were also double vaccinated. Booster clinics have been conducted in the home, but the spokeswoman did not respond to a question about how many residents had received the third shot. St Sergius Aged Care did not respond to a request for comment. Throughout the pandemic, Russell has been compiling cumulative data about each home with an outbreak, including the number of residents and staff who have tested positive, and resident deaths. Russell said she has done this for families, who have found it difficult to find accurate and consistent information from the federal government. While the federal government publishes a weekly aged care update, Russell said the report often contained errors and did not provide an overall picture of outbreaks and infections over time. Guardian Australia has also contacted the office of the federal aged care minister, Richard Colbeck, for comment but did not receive a response. “There has been poor communication between aged care homes with outbreaks and families,” Russell said. “Staff are so busy, they simply don’t have the time to keep families updated. Families tell me they are grateful that I share the data about the aged care home in which their loved one lives.” She said of the 163 aged care deaths reported in 2022, 50% has occurred in NSW, 20% in Queensland, 14% in South Australia and 14% in Victoria. The outbreaks and deaths were having a significant toll on staff, Russell said. “With families locked out, and many colleagues on furlough, staff’s workload has significantly increased,” Russell said. “Yet they turn up day after day – with some only getting paid $22 per hour. If nothing else, this pandemic has taught us that staff working in an aged care home deserve a significant pay rise.”A SpaceX rocket is on a collision course with the moon after spending almost seven years hurtling through space, experts say. The booster was originally launched from Florida in February 2015 as part of an interplanetary mission to send a space weather satellite on a million-mile journey. But after completing a long burn of its engines and sending the NOAA’s Deep Space Climate Observatory on its way to the Lagrange point – a gravity-neutral position four times farther than the moon and in direct line with the sun – the rocket’s second stage became derelict. At this stage it was high enough that it did not have enough fuel to return to Earth’s atmosphere but also “lacked the energy to escape the gravity of the Earth-Moon system”, meteorologist Eric Berger explained in a recent post on Ars Technica. “So it has been following a somewhat chaotic orbit since February 2015,” Berger added. Space observers believe the rocket – about four metric tonnes of “space junk” – is on course to intersect with the moon at a velocity of about 2.58km/s in a matter of weeks. Bill Gray, who writes software to track near-Earth objects, asteroids, minor planets, and comets, has said the Falcon 9’s upper stage will very likely hit the far side of the moon, near the equator, on 4 March. The data analyst said in a recent blog post that the object “made a close lunar flyby on January 5” but will make “a certain impact at March 4”. “This is the first unintentional case [of space junk hitting the moon] of which I am aware,” Gray added. The exact spot the rocket will hit remains unclear due to the unpredictable effect of sunlight “pushing” on the rocket and “ambiguity in measuring rotation periods” which may slightly alter its orbit. “These unpredictable effects are very small. But they will accumulate between now and March 4,” Gray wrote, adding that further observations were needed to refine the precise time and location of the impact. As for whether the collision could be viewed from Earth, Gray says it will probably go unobserved. “The bulk of the moon is in the way, and even if it were on the near side, the impact occurs a couple of days after New Moon.” Jonathan McDowell, an astrophysicist at Harvard University, wrote that the impact was due on 4 March but was “not a big deal”. Nevertheless, space enthusiasts believe the impact could provide valuable data. Berger believes the event will allow for observation of subsurface material ejected by the rocket’s strike, while Gray says he is “rooting for a lunar impact”. “We already know what happens when junk hits the Earth; there’s not much to learn from that,” he said. • Footnote added 15 February 2022: Since this article was published, Bill Gray has announced that he misidentified the rocket heading towards the moon; he says evidence indicates that it comes from China, not the private SpaceX programme as this article reports.Roberto Saviano has said he felt compelled to speak up against anti-migration policies as he faces a defamation trial over remarks accusing Italy’s far-right leaders of a lack of compassion towards people dying at sea. Saviano, the author of Gomorrah, for which he infiltrated the mafia – he has been in hiding from them since 2006 – will stand trial later this year for calling the Brothers of Italy leader, Giorgia Meloni, a “bastard” after she said NGO boats that had attempted to rescue refugees should be sunk. Her action came after the author was asked on the political TV chat show Piazzapulita for a comment on the death of a six-month-old baby from Guinea following a tragic shipwreck in the central Mediterranean. Including in his remarks the leader of the far-right Northern League, Matteo Salvini, who as interior minister introduced a decree imposing fines of up to €50,000 on NGO rescue boats bringing people to Italy, Saviano said: “I just want to say to Meloni, and Salvini, you bastards! How could you have?” Meloni – who had said: “We have to repatriate the migrants back to their countries and then sink the boats who rescued them” – sued Saviano for criminal defamation and a judge in Rome ruled that the writer should be tried. “I’m sick of witnessing this disgusting profiteering by Saviano,” she said after his TV appearance. “Is it normal that this serial hater is allowed to defame, without the right to reply, people who are not present on the talk show? I have already asked my lawyers to proceed with a legal action against him.” Saviano, 42, gave his version of events to the Guardian: “During the broadcast I was asked to comment on a video, showing a mother who had just lost her newborn son in the waves. Next to the desperate woman, just rescued, there was another six-year-old boy, vomiting seawater. He is sitting almost in a trance.” The writer says his “discomfort surrounding the way in which migrants are treated by politicians has lasted for years”. “Everything has got worse since 2017 when the current foreign minister, Luigi Di Maio, in a post on Facebook, defined the NGO rescue boats as ‘sea taxis’,” he said. “I could not believe my eyes. It did not seem possible that a politician could have defined those ships, which are real ambulances of the sea, as taxis. They began to say that NGOs were on the payroll of powerful people who wanted to destabilise Europe, by using Italy as a gateway. “Credit and space began to be given to raving theories. Prosecutors began to investigate NGOs and impound their ships. To me, this all seemed absurd.” Saviano argues that very few intellectuals and writers stood up then against what was described as the criminalisation of NGOs. “I deluded myself that fellow writers and newspapers would become indignant regarding this injustice,” Saviano said. “But, instead, no. Very few dared and still dare to oppose the lie of the invasion, from Africa, of foreigners who come to steal work from Italians. And this guilty silence led, in the years in which Matteo Salvini was at the ministry of the interior, to a marked worsening, both in the management of shipwrecks at sea and in the lives of foreigners who have resided in Italy for years, working and paying taxes. “Just listen to the Italian children of parents of foreign origin who have attended schools here, but who, due to an absurd law, must wait until they turn 18 before being considered Italian citizens. If you talk to them, they will tell you about a worsening of their lives, a more or less latent racism that makes the lives of many very difficult … If those in charge of the institutions do not show respect for foreigners, how can the people be expected to do so?” He added: “That’s why my anger is without calculation. Most likely, fewer people will look for my books, because they will consider me divisive, yet I can’t help myself: anyone who doesn’t believe that rescue boats are saving lives doesn’t deserve respect. Words are important.” Few people know more than Saviano how important words are, given that, because of Gomorrah, the writer’s devastating denunciation of the Neapolitan mafia and a world bestseller, he is forced to live under guard due to threats received from mobsters, emerging only under police escort. For 15 years, the writer has not spent more than a few nights in the same place, and often sleeps in police barracks. He cannot go out alone, take a stroll in busy places or go to the sea. Saviano said: “I have no power except that of the words I pronounce, words that are not guaranteed to convince those who listen to me. If I am sentenced, I will respond to my words, but I will never regret having lost my peace of mind and perhaps even many readers for defending the voiceless.”Can the western alliance against Russia over its buildup of troops on the Ukrainian border hold together? It is a question that politicians and diplomats are increasingly grappling with amid fears that Germany and, to a lesser extent, France are in danger of dividing from the US and the UK, not only over how to respond to any future Russian act of aggression in Ukraine, but also in their assessment of the imminence of the threat. Every effort is being made to minimise the differences within the Nato alliance, including through regular calls such as the one led by Joe Biden on Monday, but they may be impossible to avoid since they reflect not just different short-term assessments on intelligence, but a deep fissure going back decades about what Germany and France, as opposed to the Anglosphere, regard as the best way to handle Russia. France, looking at the same intelligence provided by the CIA, does not see an imminent invasion, or a gathering of forces equipped to invade in the next three weeks – an assessment shared by the best Ukrainian defence analysts. In Britain, the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has been openly critical of Germany for leaving itself so dependent on Russia for energy, and Berlin’s recent refusal to allow Estonia to send German-manufactured arms to Ukraine. The idea of Germany providing weapons to be used against Russia for the first time since the second world war is anathema. Speaking in Berlin on Tuesday, the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, defended the decision, saying it was rooted “in the whole development of the past years and decades”. In Poland, the prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, said in a Facebook post that he remained concerned by the block on Estonia. In the US, the German question is increasingly riling Republicans, leading to commentary in the Wall Street Journal with the headline “Is Germany a Reliable American Ally? Nein.” The tensions reflect two different interpretations of how, even now, Russia can be prevented from becoming a force hostile to the west, interpretations that have dominated politics after the cold war. The differing assessments in Berlin, Washington, Paris and London of how to construct something stable out of the rubble of post-Soviet Russia have always been in flux, with different capitals taking different views at different points. The US under Bill Clinton was as reluctant as anyone to let the four Visegrád countries – the Czech Republic, Poland, Hungary and Slovakia – into Nato and made his belief about the risks absolutely clear at the organisation’s summit in January 1994, saying the Atlantic Alliance could not “afford to draw a new line between east and west that would create a self-fulfilling prophecy of future confrontation”. Tony Blair also had to be disabused that Britain could lure Putin into the western camp, and was an enthusiastic supporter of Russia joining the G8. Boris Johnson visited Moscow as foreign secretary in 2017 and, despite the Salisbury poisoning, has been extraordinarily lax about Russian money in London. France too has blown hot and cold in the wake of Russia’s occupation of Crimea in March 2014. It was only after sustained American pressure that François Hollande cancelled a £1bn contract signed by his predecessor as French president to sell to Russia mistral-class helicopter gunships bound for the annexed Black Sea ports in Crimea. Emmanuel Macron invited Putin to Versailles alongside an exhibition about Peter the Great in May 2017. Faced by Trump’s isolationism, Macron, in a major speech in 2019, called for an end to the “frozen conflicts” with Russia. In June last year, in conjunction with Angela Merkel, he blindsided other EU leaders by offering Putin a summit. In Berlin on Tuesday, the French president said he was still planning to talk to the Russian leader this week, but only about de-escalation. However, the central player in Europe’s relations with Russia is Germany, as it has been since unification. Quite why Germany takes such a stubbornly forgiving, or optimistic approach to Putin fills libraries, and the most recent offering titled Germany’s Russia Problem, written by John Lough, details the full extent of the networks – commercial, political, cultural and intellectual – between German and Russian elites. It also explains how Putin plays on German war guilt and refuses to repay German forgiveness. The examples Lough raises include how in the wake of Russia’s intervention in Georgia in the summer of 2008, the then German Social Democrat (SPD) foreign minister, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, warned Europe against sanctions that he said would shut doors to rooms it wanted to enter later. Although Merkel’s response to the invasion of Ukraine in 2014 was firm, Steinmeier, sure that the SPD understood Russia better than Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union party, went to Moscow and proposed an economic partnership with Russia. At the same time, three former chancellors of Germany – Helmut Schmidt, Gerhard Schröder and Helmut Kohl – all warned Merkel not to isolate Moscow. Within a week of the invasion, the chief executive of Siemens was in Moscow. As the diplomatic situation worsened, a group of senior German former officials and politicians sent an emotional letter calling for a return to the policy of detente. This German-Russian relationship, a recent Chatham House paper argues, has been shaped by two factors. First, Ospolitik, which refers to the “change through rapprochement” foreign policy strategy towards the Soviet Union and its satellite states that was pursued in the 1970s by the Social Democrat chancellor Willy Brandt, and that tried to overcome hard lines by focusing on joint interests. The policy is still considered by many to be the way forward. Second, the mutual dependence deal between the two countries that dates from the 1970s, when the Soviet Union and Germany agreed to exchange natural gas from the USSR for German pipes and steel. It is premised on the belief expressed by Schmidt that “those who trade with each other do not shoot each other”. By 2018 Germany accounted for 37% of Gazprom sales, and the Nord Stream 2 pipeline had been agreed. German exports to Russia rose fivefold between 2000 and 2011. That remains the dominant thinking inside parts of the SPD. The current economics minister, Robert Habeck, whose ministry is responsible for sanctions, is opposed to cutting off Russian access to the Swift payments system. He told Der Spiegel: “We should think about new areas of business that can help lead both sides out of the confrontational role.” However, in recent weeks the compromises inherent in Ostpolitik have come under challenge from a younger generation. Michael Roth, the SPD chair of the foreign affairs committee, argued his party had to escape the shadow of Brandt, adding “we cannot dream the world to be better than it is”. Other ministers have insisted that energy, including the future of Nord Stream 2, cannot be removed from the list of potential sanctions, as it was in 2014. All this leaves Scholz in a different position with his US interlocutors, none of it made easier by his alliance with a Green foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, who wishes to inject values into German foreign policy. The SPD, to avoid a public split, is now going to have a formal party debate about its approach to Russia. One diplomat pointed to the relevance of a remark by Alexander Solzhenitsyn just as the Soviet Union disintegrated, who warned about how perilous it might prove to manage the breakup of the empire. “The clock of communism has stopped striking. But its concrete building has not yet come crashing down,” he wrote. For that reason, the task ahead was not yet about “freeing ourselves”, but instead “to try to save ourselves from being crushed by its rubble”.The mobile phones of a senior Human Rights Watch staff member are alleged to have been repeatedly hacked by a client of NSO Group at a time when she was investigating the catastrophic August 2020 explosion that killed more than 200 people in Beirut. The alleged hacking of Lama Fakih, a US-Lebanese citizen and director of crisis and conflict at HRW, marks the latest example of how NSO’s powerful surveillance tool, Pegasus, has been used by the company’s clients to target campaigners and journalists. HRW said that Fakih had been alerted by Apple on 24 November 2021 that her personal iPhone could be under state-sponsored attack. An investigation by HRW’s security team, which was reviewed by Amnesty International’s Security Lab, found that Fakih’s iPhones had apparently been infected with Pegasus through a so-called “zero-click” exploit that allows operators of the spyware to infect a phone without the mobile user doing anything, such as clicking on a link. The news comes as NSO has faced a raft of bad news at home and abroad. In November, the company was placed on a US blacklist by the Biden administration, which said it had evidence that the Israeli company was enabling foreign governments to conduct “transnational repression”. NSO has also been engulfed in a domestic crisis in Israel after it was alleged in a report by Calcalist that the Israeli police had used Pegasus to gather intelligence for investigative purposes without legal oversight. The report prompted Israel’s attorney general Avichai Mendelblit to announce a probe into police use of the spyware against Israelis. NSO said in a statement in response to the report that it had no control over how its clients used the spyware. On Tuesday, NSO’s chairman, Asher Levy, said he was stepping down as chairman of the company but denied that the move had any connection to the recent developments. Levy said he had been appointed to the role by NSO’s previous private equity owners, but that management of the fund that owns the company had been transferred to a new company. “Any attempts to present this move as a present-day resignation as a result of any publication related to NSO are completely false,” Levy said. “I am full of appreciation to NSO, the life-saving technology it develops, the company’s management and employees, and the unprecedented ethical policies that the company has adopted.” In a statement on Tuesday, NSO said it was a “profitable company” and that it believed an international regulatory structure ought to be put in place to ensure the responsible use of cyber intelligence tools. “However, any call to suspend these life-saving technologies until such a structure exists is naive and would only benefit the terrorists, pedophiles and hardened criminals who will evade surveillance and apprehension,” the spokesperson said. NSO declined to respond to the Guardian’s questions about Fakih’s case but the company told HRW that it was “not aware of any active customer using [its] technology against a Human Rights Watch staff member” and that it would open an initial assessment into allegations that Fakih had been hacked. When it is successfully deployed, a user of Pegasus spyware can intercept phone calls, see a target’s photographs, read their messages, and turn the phone into a remote listening device. NSO has said that its clients are only meant to use the spyware to target serious suspected criminals. HRW alleged that its analysis found that Fakih’s two devices had been hacked between 6 April 2021 and 23 August 2021. The human rights group could not identify the client who may have been responsible for the alleged hacking but said Fakih oversees crisis response from countries including Israel/Palestine, Kazakhstan, Ethiopia, Syria, Myanmar, Lebanon, Afghanistan and the US. In an interview with the Guardian, Fakih said the issue she was most intently working on an investigation of the “Beirut blast” at the time when she was allegedly hacked. She was also involved in projects involving Gaza and Ethiopia in that time. “I was working around the clock,” she said, adding that she’d created a “Beirut blast” folder on her shared drive on 5 April, a day before the alleged attacks began. “I have always been very cautious about my physical security … but I never had anything happen that led me to believe that I was compromised in some way, that my data was being hacked or that things were being leaked,” she said. “So when I did receive this notification from Apple there was a certain amount of disbelief that this had happened to me,” she added. Fakih, a native of Michigan, said she had always taken pains to keep her personal life private and protect the privacy of people she communicated with in her work. “And then suddenly, I have my phone infected. So I have thousands of photos of my young kids or photos of my wedding and all these deeply personal and meaningful memories that suddenly were not mine. And that made me feel very insecure,” she said. “My entire career has been about trying to protect people’s rights. And suddenly they were trying to use that work to undermine them.”Joe Biden has said he will consider personal sanctions against Vladimir Putin if Russia invades Ukraine, as western leaders step up military preparations and make plans to shield Europe from Russian gas being cut off. The rare sanctions threat came as Nato placed forces on standby and reinforced eastern Europe with more ships and fighter jets in response to Russia’s troop buildup near its border with Ukraine. If Russia attacked, Biden said, it would be the “largest invasion since world war two” and would “change the world”. The president said he would consider adding direct sanctions on Putin to a raft of measures being drawn up. “Yes. I would see that,” Biden said when asked by reporters in Washington about targeting Putin, whom opponents have long accused of holding gigantic secret wealth. A senior US official laid out economic sanctions “with massive consequences” going far beyond previous measures implemented in 2014 after Russia invaded Ukraine’s Crimea region. Russia denies planning an attack and says the crisis is being driven by Nato and US actions. It is demanding security guarantees from the west including a promise by Nato never to admit Ukraine as a member. Moscow sees the former Soviet republic as a buffer between Russia and Nato countries. Efforts to resolve the tensions diplomatically have continued, with officials from France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine expected to meet in Paris on Wednesday. The threat of sanctions on Putin came as the US helped prepare for the diversion of natural gas supplies from around the world to Europe in the event that the flow from Russia is cut, in an effort to blunt Putin’s most powerful economic weapon. US officials said on Tuesday that they had been negotiating with global suppliers and were confident that Europe would not suffer from a sudden loss of energy for heating in the middle of winter. “To ensure Europe is able to make it through the winter and spring we expect to be prepared to ensure alternative supplies covering a significant majority of the potential shortfall,” a senior official said. The preparation for bulk gas deliveries is part of a campaign by the US and its European allies to show a united and coherent front to Putin. Boris Johnson hinted that Germany was concerned about the imposition of sanctions against Russia because of its dependence on Russian gas and told MPs diplomatic efforts were being made to persuade Berlin and others to go further. The British prime minister said that “European friends” had concerns about imposing the toughest possible sanctions on Moscow because of their “heavy dependence” on Russian gas – and also declared the UK would be willing to deploy more troops to eastern Europe if Ukraine was attacked. His comments came as the French president, Emmanuel Macron, and Olaf Scholz, the new German chancellor, met in Berlin on Tuesday to coordinate their stances after reports of rifts among the allies. Macron said he was due to speak by phone with Putin on Friday to “clarify” the Russian position. He said France and Germany would never abandon dialogue with Russia, but added: “If there is aggression, there will be retaliation and the cost will be very high.” The Russian military announced it would carry out a new set of military exercises involving 6,000 troops near the Ukrainian border, and within Crimea, the Ukrainian peninsula that Moscow annexed in 2014. The drills would include exercises with live ammunition and feature fighter jets, bombers, anti-aircraft systems and vessels from Russia’s Black Sea and Caspian fleets, the defence ministry said. Ukrainian leaders called for calm, with the defence minister, Oleksii Reznikov, telling parliament that an invasion was not imminent. He said the Russians had yet to form a combat battle group of the sort it would need, and “as of today, there are no grounds to believe” Russia would invade imminently. “Don’t worry, sleep well,” he said. “No need to have your bags packed.” Russia has already restricted the flow of natural gas through the pipeline running through Ukraine from about 100m cubic metres a day to 50m, US officials have said. Washington estimates that almost all of that can be replaced quickly if the pipeline is cut deliberately or as a result of conflict. If gas were to be diverted to Europe it would largely have to be in the form of liquified natural gas (LNG), but at present the entire global market in LNG would not be sufficient to make up the shortfall. The US also said it was preparing restrictions on exports to Russia of hi-tech software and hardware made by the US and its allies. Officials said the measures would affect Russian ambitions in the fields of aerospace, defence, lasers and sensitive maritime technology, artificial intelligence and quantum computers. “When we pick these sectors, it’s quite deliberate,” an official said. “These are sectors that Putin himself has championed, as the way forward for Russia to diversify its economy beyond oil and gas. And so that would lead to an atrophying of Russia’s productive capacity over time.” Meanwhile the flow of arms to Ukraine accelerated. US officials confirmed that a plane carrying hundreds of anti-tank Javelin missiles had arrived in Kyiv and a shipment of more was ready to go from Estonia. “On the Javelins, this is decided and we have the endorsement from the US, so it’s just a matter of time when we’re going to send them out,” an Estonian official said, adding they would be sent “as soon as possible”. The Estonian government also intended to sent howitzer guns to Ukraine but was waiting on approval from Germany, where the guns originated, and from Finland, which supplied some of the guns to Estonia. Latvia and Lithuania are supplying Stinger anti-aircraft missiles to Ukraine. The UK has sent 2,000 anti-tank missiles and Saxon armoured cars, and Turkey has supplied Bayraktar drones. Reuters and Agence France-Presse contributed to this reportA cast of hundreds has descended on the farm fields in midwinter. Out in the winter wheat, a rowdy assortment of crows behave like gatecrashers at a party where the booze has already run out. Trampling their restlessness over the first leaves of grass, cawing and wing-flapping, they claw at chilled soil where frost-averse invertebrates are dead, dormant or deep below. The crows don’t stay long. The hedge alongside is bare of berries and bursting with birds. Bush to bush, twig to twig, a flock of chaffinches is whipped along by “pink pink” exclamations, and their speed-foraging seems too fast for them to glean anything worthwhile out of split-second pauses. Some spill out over the ground beside, and pick over earth that has been picked over by innumerable beaks before. Within seconds, the whole band – maybe 50-strong – has abandoned cover and struck out across the fields. An even bigger group of linnets drop into the hedge top, using the barrier only as a staging and perhaps regrouping post. They, too, move on into open country, searching seed banks that haven’t been replenished in months. Watching these itinerant flocks come and go is another traveller, a mute local whose horizons have shrunk to the end of a stick. Most birdwatchers know it as a voice of the uplands, its persistent flint-knapping call giving rise to its name. The stonechat has left its rocks on the moors and cliffs to endure the colder months here in silence. But like most of the stonechats that migrate to Bedfordshire, it has brought company. The roaming pair occupy a small niche – in three or four months, I’ve never seen them more than a half mile from here. An endearing “there’s one, where’s the other?” constant along the hedges and drainage ditches, they are always a short distance apart, always poised at the tip of a dead stem. I know this big-headed bird on the hedge by its relentless fidgeting, twisting this way and that, flicking its tail. The tiny in search of the minute, it ekes out an existence here by being alert to grab at any little scrap of life. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryIt speaks to the scale of the challenge that, in the month that I set out to have more fun, my Christmas and new year plans are derailed by Covid; I am relieved of half my savings by a phone scammer; and a man I’m meeting for a first date suggests that maybe I am depressed. I get my money back, and my date is a supply chain consultant, not a doctor – but fun certainly seems like a faraway prospect. I have been tasked with testing out the advice in The Power of Fun, a new book by the science journalist Catherine Price. Fun, she argues, is not something that’s nice to have, but actually essential to a happy, healthy life – and it’s possible to have more of it, even during a pandemic. I will admit that when Price and I first speak, the week before Christmas, I am sceptical. Omicron cases are surging, the official advice is to “deprioritise” socialising – and the sun goes down by 4pm. Meanwhile the back cover of Price’s book invites me to reflect: “When did you last feel exhilarated and lighthearted? When is the last time you felt fully alive?” I cast my mind back, and back, and back, to what feels like a different period in history. Maybe I am depressed – or maybe it’s just the pandemic. Simply living through the last two years is, for most of us, reason enough for an urgent “funtervention”, suggests Price. I had been steeling myself for our interview, anticipating the A-grade Pollyanna who would have the gall to exhort “the power of fun” through a deadly pandemic – but she’s delightful company: warm, knowledgable and reassuringly down to earth. She has been only too conscious of how her pitch might land, Price tells me over Skype. “The idea that ‘you should just have fun!’ – people are going to want to punch me in the face, you know?” She laughs. “The message I am really trying to get across is that if we think more seriously about what fun is … it can help us through this. This is what we need to focus on, if we want to make it through this next phase of the pandemic with our sanity intact.” Price points to the “broaden-and-build” theory of positive psychology that suggests positive emotions don’t just reflect resilience, wellbeing and health – they build it, helping us to endure future stress. Other research has suggested that, while some of our happiness is determined by our genes and circumstances – for example, living through a pandemic – as much as 40% may be in our control. That’s not to say that it is easy to influence: if fun is hard to summon or define at the best of times, it is surely more elusive than ever now. But to Price, that is all the more reason to prioritise it. There is an assumption that fun is effortless – “that your leisure time will just fill itself,” she says. “But unless you put effort into figuring out how you want to fill it, you risk having the feeling that Viktor Frankl described as ‘Sunday neurosis’ – when the void within yourself becomes manifest.” Frankl, a psychiatrist and Holocaust survivor, wrote in 1946 about the existential despair that descends at the end of the busy week. I am very familiar with that void, I tell Price, though I know it as “the abyss”. Sometimes friends and I describe our state of mind in relation to it, as: “inching closer to” or “on the very edge of”. I realise I am sounding depressed again but Price is sympathetic. “I’ve felt that through my life, but I’m happy to say that I don’t feel that so much now, and I really do think that’s a result of this project.” The goal, she says, is not nonstop fun, or even outstanding fun: “We’re just trying to add lightness, to take some steps to feel energised and alive.” Let’s see, she adds, how far away from the abyss she can take me. Finding your fun I hit a hurdle more or less immediately. I struggle to articulate what, exactly, “fun” is. It’s not necessarily watching Netflix, as anyone who has been caught out by their slack-jawed reflection in the “Are you still watching?” screen knows. Nor is it board games, if you can’t stand competition; or musical instruments, if you’re contentedly tin-eared. Everyone’s experience of fun – every experience of fun, even – is different, says Price. Many things that we ostensibly do “for fun” we may not even enjoy. She began her investigation into fun with her own experiences and those of her “Fun Squad”, a self-selecting global group of 1,500 people, recruited from Price’s mailing list. Between her own “life-affirming” experience of group guitar lessons and her correspondents’ recollections – of pastimes as varied as playing fetch with their dog, squishing through mud and sleepovers in school – Price identified three factors of real, restorative fun: playfulness, connection and flow. The confluence of the three she termed “true fun”: when we feel lighthearted, engaged with another person and absorbed by the activity. It’s possible to have fun if only one or two of the criteria are met, Price says – but highly unlikely if none are. By evaluating our time through those filters, we can crystallise our personal definition of fun and make space for more of it in our lives. We might need to lower our expectations, Price suggests. “People tend to think: ‘Go on a vacation! Have a big party!’ – but these things have been out of reach.” Aiming for the “true fun” trifecta presents “a way to think about the things that nourish us, and to figure out achievable things we can do, to make ourselves feel just a little bit more alive”. Seeking delights On Price’s advice I start small, noticing how and when I experience playfulness, connection and flow in a day. What doesn’t feel fun that should? And when am I taken by surprise? As I attune to my internal fun-meter, I find that I enjoy an hour of television, but see steeply reduced returns from there onwards – and the same goes for one to one-and-a-half glasses of wine. First dates can be fun, but wildly unpredictable. Twitter is hardly ever any fun at all. I score the trifecta by video-calling my sister in New Zealand, a perfect example of what Price calls a “microdose” of fun, which can be easily slotted into busy schedules. I’m struck by the fun I have making cannelloni: the minor challenge of a new recipe, the meditative act of stuffing the pasta. Eating all six portions by myself, over a week? Not so much. It quickly becomes clear that my most reliable “fun magnet” is connecting with other people, a challenge when I live alone and my friends have gone to ground over Christmas. But knowing that battery will be running down, I make more of an effort to be present and engaged as I go about shops and cafes. Those exchanges do make me feel lighter, and the world seem friendlier (apart from the phone scammer). Inspired by poet Ross Gay’s The Book of Delights – which included pecans and people calling him “sweetie” – Price started exchanging her own daily delights in a group chat with faraway friends. “And it really makes a difference.” I rope one of my reliable fun-magnet friends into doing the same, and his messages are a treat to receive. Mine describe some perfect cobwebs and a woman waving at me in my flat from the bus stop across the road. They are barely worth mentioning, but I am glad I did. Creating the conditions It’s not just the pandemic working against us having more fun – it’s much of modern life. Playfulness, connection and flow are all notably active states – meaning that passive consumption, though enjoyable or relaxing, is unlikely to ever transport or restore us the way the best kind of fun can. “true fun” requires us to be present and at ease, not distracted, self-critical, stressed or sleep-deprived. For many of us, that’s a tall order. We may slump in front of screens every evening because we are too exhausted to consider anything else. (Price titles this chapter: “Why you feel dead inside”.) My first breakthrough in my “funtervention” is that I am simply not rested enough to be open to the idea. I had not grasped that, by getting less than eight hours’ sleep a night, I was eroding my capacity to enjoy my days. It is the prompt I need to introduce a proper bedtime routine and to charge my phone in another room overnight. By identifying rest as a prerequisite for pleasure, I prioritise it. (And I soon start zipping through novels like I used to do pre-smartphone.) For caregivers, of course, the challenge is much greater. Resentment is a “universal fun killer”, says Price. She suggests that the first step in creating the conditions for more fun might be ensuring that childcare and household chores are equally divided. Revisit old interests I have already failed spectacularly at one of Price’s rules: “Don’t turn fun into work” – but so has she. As freelance writers, we both have form in “turning personal issues into professional projects”, as she puts it, with the end result being that it is hard to separate our lives from our jobs. I feel this acutely, having ditched all my hobbies – learning French, singing in a choir, playing guitar and darkroom photography (not to mention writing “for fun”) – at 17, when I started pursuing journalism in earnest. Now the closest I come is running and weightlifting: sources of flow and connection, but too close to “self-optimising” (to paraphrase writer Jia Tolentino) to be optimal fun. “We are all so out of practice, raised in this cult of productivity,” says Price. She suggests that I revisit some of those interests that I chucked for my career. As it turns out, I am cat-sitting over new year at a house that has an electric piano, and I spend a happy half-hour haltingly working out a Taylor Swift song. I’m so pleasingly ineffectual, it could only be for my own enjoyment. Continuing the testing – and the commitment Even after a few weeks of small-scale experiments with fun, I am struck by how soon it starts to feel more natural and easy, to flow more freely. And I am perturbed to realise how much of the resistance was within me all along. Without being conscious of it, I had for a long time been orienting my days around what I couldn’t do because of the pandemic, or what I had to do for work. Levity, or even leisure, couldn’t get a look-in. The epigraph of Price’s book, from author Michael Lewis, proved to be perspicacious: “If you get into the habit of life not being fun, you start to not even notice.” For me, responsible for keeping only myself afloat, it is a relatively straightforward matter of creating space in my schedule and shifting my mindset so that daily delights can register. If they are thin on the ground, I will try to engineer one myself by calling a friend, going on a walk somewhere new or seeking out a stranger’s dog (fail-safe). For many other people, the challenge will be much harder to overcome, if not impossible. As Price acknowledges, food, shelter, adequate rest and physical safety are prerequisites for fun: in the case of poverty, job insecurity, sickness and abuse, it may be irrelevant. But still, I think, she is right to urge us to try, in whatever way we can. Compared with other approaches to self-care and protecting your mental health, seeking to have more fun is accessible and instantly rewarding. That is what Price appreciates about fun, she says. “It turns this thing you ‘should’ do for some future pay-off into something that you want to do, because it’s enjoyable right then, in the moment.” And it is true that – after only a few weeks of looking to have more fun, without even trying very hard – I do notice the difference. The abyss is there. But I’m more at ease with it. • The Power of Fun is published by Bantam Press, price £14.99. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. In February, Catherine Price will be running a global #Funtervention challenge. See howtohavefun.com to sign up.Before your child is born, you have their genome tweaked to boost their stature, build and intelligence. When they head to school, the teacher streams them according to their genetic makeup. And when working life begins, an employer checks their DNA to ensure they are healthy, agreeable and sufficiently extrovert for the role. It may sound like the worst science fiction. But a new government report warns that genomics is advancing so fast that such scenarios are plausibly on the horizon, with often few laws and regulations to prevent them. To avoid genomic technologies causing harm to the public, pre-emptive action should be taken now, it says. “We are still in the infancy of understanding the complexity of genomic data but this is changing very rapidly,” said Sir Patrick Vallance, the government’s chief scientific adviser. “Now is the time to consider what might be possible, and what actions government and the public could take.” The Government Office for Science consulted 30 experts on science, technology and policy before writing the Genomics Beyond Health report, a 198-page digest of where we are with genomic science and where the technology may take us. The report paints a rich picture of a genetics revolution driven by disease-resistant crops, net zero biofuels and hens that don’t peck one other to pieces. But the authors highlight a raft of ethical and practical issues, including how genomic technologies are already running ahead of scientific evidence and veering into dubious territory. A handful of firms offer genetic tests for IQ, for example, a trait that may be influenced by more than 1,000 genes and their interactions with the environment the person lives in. Other companies offer music playlists that claim to be inspired by customers’ “origins”. One controversial field of research aims to create “polygenic scores” that draw on multiple genes to predict how well a child will perform in education. If the predictions become reliable enough, they could help schools tailor their teaching for students with learning disabilities, the report states. But the authors go on to note that, today at least, parental education is a more accurate predictor of how well a child will perform. There are no regulations in the UK around the use of genomics in education and little to stop genomic testing firms from marketing the tests to parents, they add. A similar lack of legislation means UK employers are not prohibited from using genomic analysis when hiring. The situation leaves the door open for companies to select workers for optimal health, personality traits and even their likelihood of becoming injured in the workplace. “Unlike in the US, there is nothing explicit in UK legislation barring the use of genetic testing in job or candidate selection,” the authors write. More areas are due to be shaken up by genomics, the report explains. The criminal justice system may have to decide whether jurors should take into account a person’s genetic propensity for violence when deciding their fate. Meanwhile a shift from genetic fingerprinting to whole genome sequencing at crime scenes might allow police to issue a “predictive photofit” of the individual they want to find. Rather than screening sports stars for performance enhancing drugs, they may need to be checked for genetic upgrades. “There is a risk that future scientific and technological advances could further outpace existing regulation structures, raising the possibility of genomic technologies being misused and causing harm to UK citizens,” the report warns. “Proactive regulation that preempts the potential risks of future technologies would help to minimise risks and ensure that UK citizens are protected by law in terms of their genomic data privacy, anonymity, and data security.”A documentary film about Alexei Navalny, who narrowly survived an apparent poisoning attempt with novichok, has premiered at the Sundance film festival. The 90-minute film, simply titled Navalny, features fly-on-the-wall footage of the Russian opposition leader, filmed during the several months he spent in Germany in late 2020 as he recovered from the poisoning. There are interviews with Navalny, his wife, Yulia, and his closest team. The most extraordinary sequence of the film is when, from Navalny’s Black Forest recuperation hideout, he made a prank call to one of the hit squad he believes carried out the poisoning, and got him to reveal details about the hit by pretending to be an angry security services boss. “I remember just being like, ‘OK, make sure we’re rolling, keep it in focus. This is the most important thing you’ll ever film in your entire life,’” said director Daniel Roher in an interview with Hollywood Reporter about the moment of the telephone confession. “Afterward everyone was freaking out. We were running around like chickens with their heads cut off. I was like, ‘Let’s offload the footage right now. Should we call the police? Do we need protection at the house?’” Roher was initially planning to make a film on a different topic with Christo Grozev, a Bulgarian investigator working for Bellingcat, the team of online sleuths and investigative journalists. However, after Navalny’s poisoning, Grozev began looking for clues about who might have been behind the hit. Having bought telephone and flight records on the Russian dark web, he found a group of eight men from the FSB security services who appeared to have been following Navalny on trips across Russia for several years. Grozev contacted Navalny and journeyed to Germany to meet with him and share the information he had found. Roher came with him and kept filming. It turned out Navalny and his team had already been thinking about making a film, and a collaboration began. “When Alexei woke up from his coma in Berlin, he had two visions. One was of doing this gigantic investigative video about Vladimir Putin’s palace and his illicit wealth. And the other was to do this big, in his mind, Hollywood documentary movie,” said Roher. Navalny fell ill in August 2020 while taking a plane from Tomsk in Siberia to Moscow. Thanks to the quick actions of the pilot, who made an emergency landing in Omsk, he did not die, and he was later transported to Berlin, where he made a long and slow recovery. The Kremlin has denied involvement in the poisoning and President Vladimir Putin has refused to say Navalny’s name in public, referring to him obliquely as “that gentlemen”, “a certain character” or “the Berlin patient”. The film closes with Navalny’s return to Russia in January 2021. He was detained on arrival at the airport and later sentenced to two years and eight months in prison, for supposedly violating the terms of his sentencing over a previous conviction for fraud that was widely seen as politically motivated. He is serving his sentence in a penal colony 60 miles east of Moscow. Since Navalny’s poisoning, his Anti-Corruption Foundation has been declared an extremist organisation and many of its leaders and regional coordinators have been forced to flee the country. The making of the film had been kept under wraps until earlier this month, and its presence on the Sundance programme was only publicised at the last minute. The premiere took place online on Tuesday evening, as this year’s Sundance is virtual due to Covid. Maria Pevchikh, a close associate of Navalny who was with him in Tomsk when he was poisoned, was the film’s executive producer. At the end of the film, Navalny answers a request from the director to record a message for the eventuality that he were killed on his return. “I’ve got something very obvious to tell you: don’t give up, you’re not allowed. If they decided to kill me, it means we are incredibly strong, and we need to use this power,” he said. In an Instagram post announcing the film, Navalny complained in his usual irreverent tone that the prison library where he is serving time does not have a subscription to HBO Max, so he will not be able to watch it.In the wake of Britney Spears’ emancipation from her long-term conservatorship, some of Britney’s fans have turned their attention to the Star Trek actor Nichelle Nichols. Last week a dozen protesters, a mixture of Free Britney activists and fans of Nichols, demonstrated outside the Stanley Mosk courthouse in Los Angeles, chanting “Free Nichelle!” Nichols has been living under a conservatorship since 2018. Her son Kyle Johnson successfully petitioned to be his mother’s conservator after her former manager, Gilbert Bell, was accused of abusing Nichols financially. Protesters believe that Nichols is of sound mind and wants to be released from the arrangement. Nichols is best known for playing Lieutenant Nyota Uhura on the original Star Trek television series. As the first Black woman to play a leading role on 1960s TV, her character was inspirational to many, including Dr Martin Luther King Jr, who persuaded Nichols to stay on the show when she was considering leaving to pursue roles on Broadway. Black female actors of the time were usually relegated to playing the part of maids or other racist tropes like Sapphire or Jezebel caricatures. Nichols was also the first female African American actor to place her handprints in front of Hollywood’s Grauman’s Chinese Theatre. A civil rights advocate, her influence was felt on and off screen. After criticizing Nasa’s lack of diversity in a speech, Nichols volunteered to work with the space agency making recruitment and training films, and advocating for people such as astronaut Mae Jemison to reapply after rejection. Jemison, a longtime fan and friend of Nichols, was the first Black woman in space. “We’re going to do whatever we can make sure that there’s lasting change for not just Britney, not just Nichelle but everyone who is trapped in this corrupt system,” the Free Britney activist Kevin Wu told BuzzFeed News. The Free Nichelle campaigners are largely following the lead of 26-year-old Angelique Fawcette, a producer and actor who first met Nichols in 2012. Fawcette has several pictures and videos with Nichelle Nichols on her social media as proof of their close relationship and claims that she is carrying out Nichols’ wishes. Fawcette believes that Nichols does not need a conservatorship and is being abused by her son’s control of her finances. Fawcette has filed several petitions with the court seeking to end Nichols’ conservatorship, though the court has so far declined to intervene and recently ruled that Fawcette does not have standing to lodge her complaints. There is no question that Nichols suffers from dementia. Her diagnosis predates the conservatorship and as early as 2013, when Nichols was hospitalized for pancreatitis, there were indications that former manager Bell may have exercised an undue amount of influence to get Nichols to sign paperwork giving him power of attorney. In a GoFundMe established by her sister, Marian Nichols Smothers, her family alleges that after getting Nichols to grant him power of attorney, Bell transferred the deed on her home to himself in 2018, and that triggered the petition for conservatorship. (Bell, who allegedly first met Nichols in 2010, disputes these allegations and insists he was helping the star get back on her feet financially.) So, if Nichols has already been rescued from an abusive situation, why are fans protesting against her son acting as her conservator? Fawcette has filed suit claiming that Nichols doesn’t need a conservator, merely support in managing her affairs. She also alleges that Nichols’ son Kyle Johnson has isolated Nichols and acted against his mother’s wishes by selling her Woodland Hills home and moving her to New Mexico. Protesters are also concerned that Johnsonmay not be an adequate caregiver for his mother, which highlights a problem not only with the system of conservatorships, but also with the lack of other options for people who may not be capable of caring for themselves. Nichols, who suffered from a mild stroke in 2015, may not have retained the cognitive facilities that Fawcette remembers her having. When the Guardian’s Simon Hattenstone interviewed Nichols in 2016, one year after the stroke, she seemed to have largely bounced back, needing only some assistance from a live-in assistant/therapist. But there is no way to know if her good days still outweigh the bad ones or whether she meets the conservatorship’s requirement that a person “cannot care for himself or herself” and is unable to “meet their basic needs of food, clothing, and shelter”. However, given reports that Gilbert Bell attempted not only to take her house in 2018 but contemplated marrying her to prevent her son from having access, brief public appearances may not be the best indicators of Nichols’ capacity to care for herself. Elder care in America is very expensive in general, but memory care is exceptionally expensive, costing an average of $6,935 a month for a facility that specializes in structured care. In-home care, although cheaper, is still expensive, costing an average of $54,000 a year for a trained caregiver. It is unclear if Nichols had the funds for either option available, especially after the alleged financial abuses by Bell. Though he claims to have helped her make money, her family believes he stole hundreds of thousands from her under the guise of being her manager. Financial exploitation is one of the most common forms of elder abuse, and a common consequence is elders who are unable to age in place. Although Fawcette and Bell allege that the sale of the house was unnecessary, her son Kyle Johnson states that the proceeds of the sale are in an account to fund his mother’s care. Fawcette says she will continue to fight the case in New Mexico, where Nichols now lives. About 1.3m guardianship or conservatorship cases are active in the US, with assets of more than $50bn controlled by conservators. Laws vary from state to state but under many systems those living under conservatorship have almost no rights, with all decisions about their life made by the conservator. Laws around conservatorship are being reviewed in California, after the Spears case. Brian Maienschein, a Democratic assemblyman, is proposing a bill that will require that conservatorships are used only as a last resort and make conservatorships easier to end.From the very beginning of the pandemic, disabled people have been treated as an add-on. See, for example, how deaf people were ignored in Downing Street’s vital public health messaging, with no British Sign Language interpreter used in daily briefings. Those with intellectual and development disabilities were initially not on the priority list for vaccines, despite being five times more at risk of hospitalisation and eight times more likely to die from Covid. I am a survivor of polio, a crippling disease that is preventable by a vaccine – which was one reason that my Covid jab felt like an early Christmas present. As a Paralympian and a campaigner for access and inclusion, it has been incredibly frustrating to see a clinically vulnerable group being treated as an afterthought, or even as apparently undeserving of medical treatment. In early 2021, the charity Mencap warned that some disabled people were receiving letters saying they would not be resuscitated if they became ill with Covid-19, after “do not resuscitate” orders were illegally placed on some disabled patients during the first wave. This horrified me. In this and so many other ways, the Covid-19 pandemic has widened and deepened the exclusion of people with disabilities, and given the world a taste of how quickly a marginalised group can fall off a country’s agenda and become almost invisible. I have felt the same pain this week, as preparations were made to end all plan B measures on Wednesday – including wearing masks on public transport and guidance to work from home. I watched the prime minister announce this last week as he tried to save his own career after apparently flouting the lockdown restrictions he put in place to keep the most vulnerable safe. His announcement was met with cheers in the House of Commons; on my television at home, it was met with horror. My first thought was of my clinically vulnerable friends, many of whom have barely left their homes in two years. Catching Covid could still be very dangerous even after being vaccinated, and those who are immunocompromised may not respond to vaccines at all. Yet again, they have been sacrificed at the altar of political expediency. On the day the prime minister made his announcement, there were more than 100,000 confirmed Covid cases in England and nearly 19,000 people in hospital with Covid. This is an illness that has already claimed the lives of tens of thousands of disabled people like me; six out of 10 Covid deaths in England have been those of us with disabilities. Promised antiviral drugs that could help vulnerable people fight the virus have been slow to appear. Yet despite the enormous risk, we have now been told that we should return to work in person. Our children must now go to school, and may well be expected to do so without masks, knowing that alongside their homework, they could bring back a virus that could devastate our health. If we want to use public transport or go to the shops, we cannot now expect others to wear masks to help protect us. I went into a supermarket before restrictions lifted and was appalled that there were so many people not wearing their mask. It makes me very sad to see just how quickly we have forgotten what we’ve been through. My friend and fellow disability campaigner, the GP Dr Hannah Barham-Brown, spoke to me after the announcement, rightly describing this government as one that has prioritised “vino over vulnerability”. This latest escapade “laughs in the faces of the disabled community, and the health and social care staff who care for them”. Imagine how it feels to be stuck in the house for two years with little or no social contact because of your disability or vulnerability. The only human you have interacted with was your carer, the person delivering post or food, and an occasional wave through the window to family members. Disabled and clinically vulnerable people may now remain prisoners in their own homes. A caring society would have made this group a priority and considered their needs when planning to lift the restrictions. We all want to return to normal. It’s why so many of us have followed the guidelines around mask-wearing, social distancing, self-isolating and shielding. It’s because we want to get through the pandemic and return to freely hugging our loved ones, travelling without fear of getting infected in transit, and also throwing and attending parties. We are told we need to live with Covid in the long term. But living with this virus should not mean putting the lives of our most vulnerable at significant risk, especially at a time when the Omicron variant has led to such high rates of infection. If this hasty lifting of all plan B restrictions is a political decision to save one politician’s career rather than a decision based on science, data and evidence, it must be reconsidered. Lives are at stake if it is not. Anne Wafula Strike MBE is a British Paralympian, disability and inclusion campaigner, and sporting ambassadorAt least 100,000 “ghost flights” could be flown across Europe this winter because of EU airport slot usage rules, according to analysis by Greenpeace. The deserted, unnecessary or unprofitable flights are intended to allow airlines to keep their takeoff and landing runway rights in major airports, but they could also generate up to 2.1 million tons of greenhouse gas emissions – or as much as 1.4 million average petrol or diesel cars emit in a year – Greenpeace says. “The EU Commission requiring airlines to fly empty planes to meet an arbitrary quota is not only polluting, but extremely hypocritical given their climate rhetoric,” said Herwig Schuster, a spokesperson for Greenpeace’s European Mobility for All campaign. “Transport emissions are skyrocketing,” he said. “It would be irresponsible of the EU to not take the low-hanging fruit of ending ghost flights and banning short-haul flights where there’s a reasonable train connection.” When the Covid pandemic began, the European commission suspended a benchmark requiring airlines to maintain 80% of their flight operations to keep their slots open. In October, Brussels upped the benchmark to 50%, and it will rise again to 64% in March. Lufthansa CEO, Carsten Spohr, said that his airline may have to fly 18,000 “extra, unnecessary flights” to fulfil the adjusted rules, and called for the sort of “climate-friendly exemptions” used in other parts of the world. A Lufthansa spokesperson said that between January and March 2021, just 45% of its flights were full. The other 5%, or 18,000 flights, “we define as unnecessary”, the spokesperson added. “If we wouldn’t risk the loss of slots in certain airports in Europe, we probably would have cancelled them and put them together with other existing flights.” Greenpeace applied Lufthansa’s proportion of ghost flights to other European airlines based on the German carrier’s 17% market share, using a conservative estimate of 20 tons of greenhouse gas emissions a flight. The research assumed an average flight time of 90 minutes by a 200-seater plane, over a distance of 800-1,000km. Tim Johnson, director of the Aviation Environment Federation, said that the Greenpeace assumptions were “spot on”. “It looks like an example of wastage in the industry and I think people will be surprised by the scale of it,” he said. “It hints at a real problem of airlines being forced to operate either empty or very low-occupancy flights in order to maintain their slots.” Socialist MEPs in the European parliament have demanded answers on the problem, and Greta Thunberg, the climate strike leader, sardonically tweeted that “the EU surely is in a climate emergency mode”. The European Commission denies that air carriers are operating ghost flights, or that its “use it or lose it” slot rules have created problems. A commission spokesperson said: “Empty flights are bad for the economy and the environment which is exactly why we took several measures allowing companies to not have such empty flights. If airline companies decide to keep empty flights, this is a company decision, which is not the result of EU rules.” Brussels argues that it has already cut slot requirements and that airlines can request that even those be stood down if flights are disrupted by “severe sanitary measures” such as new government travel restrictions. Earlier this month the Ryanair CEO, Michael O’Leary, complained that big airlines benefited from generous EU breaks, “and now Lufthansa’s still not happy. They don’t want to operate ghost flights because: ‘Ohhh, the environment’,” he told Politico. The cut-price Irish airline wants Lufthansa to sell unsold tickets at cheap prices and for the commission to force it to release unused slots. Air France says that it wants greater slot rule flexibility, but a spokesperson said that it would not give data on how many under-capacity and unnecessary flights it was currently flying. Johnson said that it was right to focus on climate impacts when huge amounts of CO2 were being emitted unnecessarily but that there was a “wider industry battle” which pointed to the need for slot reform. “We need something that genuinely rewards efficiency,” he said. “Some sort of efficiency metric as the basis for allocating slots that would allow an operator with a modern full plane to be preferred over rival carriers, who are operating with much lower load factors or older technologies.” • This article was amended on 27 January 2022. At the beginning of the pandemic the European Commission suspended the flight benchmark altogether, it did not cut it to 25% as stated previously. Also, the 50% benchmark was introduced in October, not December.The mole (Talpa europaea) advertises its presence by leaving lines of small hills as it excavates its way across grassy areas, often leading to its persecution. Moles used to be trapped for their velvety pelts but now, despite the fact they are good for draining soil and eating harmful insect larvae, they are killed mostly because they wreck golf greens and lawns. Despite these attacks, moles seem remarkably resilient. They live in semi-permanent burrows, sometimes hundreds of metres long, at various depths to allow for droughts and, in the winter, low temperatures. They are powerful diggers with spade-like front legs, a pink pointed snout, tiny eyes and a short tail. They weigh 80g and need to eat 50g of worms a day to survive. To ensure a regular supply, they bite worms in the head to immobilise them, then store them in chambers, dozens at a time. Adult moles are most at risk in spring when the males enlarge their territories, tunnelling through ever-larger areas in search of females. Nests lined with a ball of dry plant material are used for sleeping and raising litters of three to four. At a month old the young disperse above ground to find their own homes, their time of greatest danger.Anton Corbijn, speaking from his home in Kenya, holds a fried sardine between his fingers and positions it tantalisingly in front of his Zoom camera. “I’m sorry,” he says, “but somebody put these next to me and they smelled so good I had to take a bite.” Fried fish notwithstanding, Corbijn lives a “healthy life” in Africa and the distance to Europe hasn’t interfered with his work. His latest exhibition – which can be seen at his studio in the Hague and online at de-pury.com – positions him as a portrait photographer across a wide range of stars and subjects. Is this because the man behind some of music’s most famous images, from Joy Division to U2, is frustrated at being pigeonholed? “No,” he says. “I’m very proud of what I did in that genre. I just don’t feel that music photography is all I do. I’m a portrait photographer. It’s just that up until 1989, I only photographed musicians. Then I moved to LA, changed camera formats and added more subjects – actors, painters, models, directors – always people who are in the public eye and creative.” Before I let him return to his sardines, we discuss five iconic images from the new show. ‘I blew my cooker money on the flight out to Chicago’ David Bowie, Chicago, 1980 I was working as the main photographer at the NME and had just moved into a squat in east London. The NME’s Angus MacKinnon was going to interview David in Chicago but they wouldn’t allow a photographer. Thankfully, my parents had given me money to buy a cooker so I spent it on a flight and just turned up at the interview. It cost £800, a lot of money for me at the time, but these things pay off if you make life an adventure. Bowie’s assistant said: “What are you doing here? We had a deal – no photography.” Luckily, when David had visited Holland once, I had left my portfolio at his hotel. The next day, I was given it back with a note saying “thank you”. I thought it was just a “piss off” really. But when I told the assistant, she looked in her notebook and realised she’d scribbled down: “Best photographer in Holland – Anton Corbijn.” So I was in with a chance. She told David and he gave me permission. It was very kind, as he wasn’t actually allowed to be photographed in stage costume. The shoot was brief, but the next day we met in a bar to do more. He was an amazing guy, a gentleman, funny, all that stuff, but also extremely good looking and aesthetically aware. I remember there was a jukebox and he put on Frank Sinatra’s That’s What God Looks Like To Me. This is one of my favourite photographs. It’s not just a shot of Bowie, it’s a Christ-like thing. That’s what you hope for when you take photographs: that it transcends all the usual stuff. A lot of the credit has to go to him. It’s a beautiful gaze. What was he thinking? I don’t know. Maybe: “I’d like a beer.” ‘I didn’t know he was ill’ Virgil Abloh, Chicago, 2019 Virgil was preparing for a show of his fashion designs at Chicago’s Museum of Contemporary Art. This was taken just outside, for Vogue. The museum had windows with coloured material on them and I thought it would be interesting to shoot through that. It’s a playful image. I am a lot more playful than people think, though perhaps that comes out more in my videos. This was taken in the same year Virgil found out about his health [he was diagnosed with a rare cancer in 2019 and died in 2021]. Of course, I did not know anything about that. This image looks like he is in daylight with night encroaching. Sometimes, pictures can take on different meanings afterwards. I did a picture of Joy Division when I moved to England in 1979: Ian Curtis is looking towards the camera and the others look away. It’s as if I knew something but of course I did not. It did affect me when I found out Virgil had died because he was an incredible talent. He wasn’t your normal kind of designer. He was very smart. Far too young to leave. ‘I changed the number to 33 as that’s the age Jesus died’ Damien Hirst, Stroud, 2011 This is more of a concept photograph. The theme, obviously, is death. The eyes and nose were done with makeup as Damien stood in front of the camera. Behind him is one of his works, one that consists of dead insects. His jacket, from the G-star label, had a 3301 logo on it. I took the “01” off in post-production because 33 is the age Jesus died. This image references For the Love of God, the work Damien made of a skull encrusted with 8,601 diamonds. It wasn’t a collaboration: I just asked him if I could do a picture like that and he was OK with it. And it looks like a $50m picture to me! Damien is quite a normal-looking guy but with photography there is always a way to make the image work. I am a fan of his audaciousness. Some of his ideas are beautiful, some challenging, others not. But that’s not so important. He’s an innovator. ‘You’d never ask musicians to take their clothes off’ Naomi Campbell, London, 1994 When I was younger, I had real problems with outer beauty. I focused on what was beautiful on the inside and how to make people look interesting rather than beautiful. With models, I never knew what I could add to the apparent beauty already there. But then I met a few and they became people to me, rather than models. Although I took this in the 1990s, it wasn’t published until 2020 in my book MOØDe. I had been going through my archives and found all these pictures I had forgotten about. That’s what tends to happen: your selection becomes your memory of the entire shoot. You forget what else you have. This was one of the images I rediscovered. I liked it, with the shoe. It was taken in a hotel near Hyde Park. It felt natural to shoot Naomi nude because she was incredibly beautiful and natural looking. She has always been great to me. She knows how to give you something. Yes, I am aware of her fierce reputation but I never had a run in with her. Shooting musicians was nothing like this. Back in the 1970s, music was a very male-dominated field. You wouldn’t ask any of them to take their clothes off! ‘And what’s your name again?’ Miles Davis, Montreal, 1985 Miles was doing an interview with Richard Cook and I was allowed to sit in but not take pictures. He wasn’t particularly nice to Richard. Whenever he answered a question, he would say: “And what’s your name again?” I had a shoot with him the next day, five or six minutes in a hotel room. He gave me a drawing he’d done which was really nice. I still have it. Miles was a beautiful man. His stare here is very intense. I guess that’s how he lived. This was taken later in his life, when he was in a lot of pain. He took injections of goat serum that affected his pupils. That’s what is striking in this picture. His pupils are as large as you’ll ever see. There’s a famous story of Miles having dinner with Ronald Reagan at the White House. Nancy says: “And what did you do to be invited here?” Miles replies: “I changed the course of music five times. What did you do apart from fuck the president?” I don’t know if it’s true but I like it. We shot near the window because I always use available light. I can’t recall why Miles took this pose but he liked it and wanted to use it for the album Tutu. Sadly, Warner Brothers said it had to be done by a famous photographer and I obviously didn’t qualify at the time. So they asked Irving Penn. I love the image Penn took but you can see where the inspiration comes from. Miles has such a strong, intense face. It’s so beautiful. A lot of photographers who photograph me ask me to do the same pose. I never look half as good. • The headline of this article was amended on 26 January 2022 to correct the spelling of Anton Corbijn’s surname. • de PURY presents: Anton Corbijn is at de-pury.com, 24 January to 28 February, and on show at the photographer’s studio in the Hague by appointment.While thousands of people marched around the country in protest on Invasion Day and gathered in Canberra in commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Aboriginal Tent Embassy, a day of mourning was held in Melbourne in the way most events in the Victorian capital have been held over the past two years: over a livestream. Organisers of the Melbourne, Hobart and Darwin Invasion Day events cancelled large in-person events this year due to high numbers of Omicron Covid cases within the Aboriginal community. The dawn service, a ritual that began with a few hundred people at the Kings Domain Resting Place in 2019, was held online from 5.30am. More than 3,000 people watched via the Victorian Naidoc Facebook page. The ceremony featured words from past services from Wurundjeri elder Aunty Joy Murphy and the Victorian Greens senator Lidia Thorpe, a Gunnai, Gunditjmara and Djab Wurrung woman, who also held a small mourning ceremony for First Nations women on the steps of Victorian state parliament on Monday night. Then Uncle Jack Charles read through a list of massacres that occurred in Victoria from 1834 to 1850. The massacre sites are all over Victoria: Murdering Flats, Chimney Pots, Murdering Gully, Fighting Hills, Aire River, Snowy River, Mount Eccles, Mount Napier, and many more. The total death toll, from recorded massacres in Victoria, is 1,186. Research by the University of Newcastle has identified 311 massacre sites in Australia, dating from 1788 to 1930. The full death toll from frontier violence is unknown. Thorpe said the need to protect vulnerable community members from Covid meant people were “grieving in their homes”. “This is a day where we come together and mourn together … as a community, as families and allies,” she told Guardian Australia. “The strength that you feel when you’re surrounded by people who are standing in solidarity on this day is a feeling of hope … not having that presence and that activism out there on this day is hard. It is very hard. I just want to acknowledge all of those Blak families at home today who are feeling the pain, the loss and the trauma of what happened on this day.” As Charles was reading down the list, television crews began converging on a statue of Captain James Cook in St Kilda, which was doused in red paint overnight. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A short time later, in Sydney, Wiradjuri woman and Sydney City councillor Yvonne Weldon addressed the WugulOra Morning Ceremony at Barangaroo. “What took place was genocide, irreversible trauma,” she said. “Poisons, not just in our waterholes but others had in their hands, that later became placed in ours. The trauma and the introductions of new ways of living hasn’t been healthy for all ... as the world’s oldest living culture ... despite these traumas and shifts in our way of living, we are still here, still practising, still inclusive.” Weldon said it was important to remember and acknowledge the massacres and the “cruelty and inhumane treatment to my people”. “Not out of a guilt, but to right the wrongs of the past, not to continue to be in our present,” she said. “If we don’t, we will never truly create an all-embracing future.” Later in Sydney, thousands of people marched down George Street towards Victoria Park carrying signs calling for justice for Aboriginal people killed in custody. “We feel proud today, yet sad in knowing why we have to stand here. Why do we have to promote our invasion to make sure Australia sees us?” Elizabeth Jarrett, a Dunghutti Bundjalung activist, told the crowd. More than 500 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have died in custody in Australia in the 30 years since the royal commission. “We want to make sure our murders stop, the raping of our women, the stealing of our children ... and the desecration of our culture,” Jarrett said. Gamilaraay woman Helen Russell attended the march wearing a shirt showing the pictures of her sons Stanley and Edward Russell, who both died in custody. Edward died in Long Bay Prison in 1999 when he was 25 years old, and Stanley was shot dead by police at his Seven Hills home in Sydney last year. An inquest is yet to be held. “My two sons were killed by the system,” she told AAP. “I just cry and cry and keep on crying because we have never gotten justice. I don’t think we ever will.” In Canberra, Aboriginal people from around Australia converged on the Aboriginal Tent Embassy to mark its 50th anniversary. Gomeroi man Duglus McGrady travelled nine hours from Moree to attend. The 79-year-old, who was recently discharged from hospital after suffering three strokes, has been attending protests at the tent embassy since its inception. He was carrying an Aboriginal flag that belonged to his best friend, who has since died. “We are still fighting, we still have a long way to go,” he said. “I’m still here, that’s the main thing.” Thousands more marched through the streets of Brisbane and rallied in Perth and Adelaide. The Melbourne march was cancelled, with organisers Warriors of the Aboriginal Resistance announcing last week that it would be “careless to hold an event in the height of a pandemic and a virus that has taken a hold of so many in our community”. In Hobart the rally was moved online, with the Tasmanian Aboriginal Centre manager Nala Mansell telling the Mercury an in-person event carried too much risk for Aboriginal people, who are particularly vulnerable to Covid-19. The organisers of Darwin’s rally said there would be no rally on Larrakia land this year, saying “rest is resistance”.The New Zealand doubles player Michael Venus has hit out at Australian Open spectators and Nick Kyrgios, labelling the Australian an immature “absolute knob” after losing in the quarter-finals to the “Special Ks”. Venus and the German Tim Pütz went down in three sets to Kyrgios and Thanasi Kokkinakis on Tuesday at Kia Arena, where a raucous crowd supported the all-Australian partnership who had hammed it up for the vocal fans. Venus, 34, on Wednesday said the sledging from the crowd was at times intolerable and some spectators made comments about him and his family as he prepared to serve. “It felt like a circus out there and not really a tennis match,” Venus told the New Zealand television channel 1News. “Between serves [they were] geeing the crowd up and getting them to cheer at times like that. I don’t think that’s really on. “You know if it’s on the other foot, old mate [Kyrgios] would have flipped his lid. He already did get mad there by himself. It’s amazing, he can smash a ball out that hits a kid and just ’cause he gives them a racket afterwards people can say he’s such a good guy.” The on-court tension between Venus and Kyrgios, in particular, was noticeable and both had words with each other and the umpire over perceived injustices. Kyrgios also mocked Venus’s at-times wayward ball toss. Venus said on Wednesday that Kyrgios’s supporters messaged him on social media “an extreme amount” but there were also “a lot of messages from other people saying how embarrassed they were with the crowd’s behaviour and they’re sorry, it shouldn’t have been like that”. “They’ll always be his supporters and he’ll always spin it in a way that helps him but at the end of the day, he’s just an absolute knob,” Venus said. “On the maturity side, you see why he’s never fulfilled his potential and probably never will. His maturity level, it’s probably being generous to a 10-year-old, to say it’s at about that level.” The New Zealander acknowledged Kyrigos was an “unbelievable tennis player” who had “amazing” on-court intelligence. Kyrgios, who is ranked No 115 in the world, has not yet responded to the criticism. Kyrgios and Kokkinakis will play Thursday’s semi-final against Marcel Granollers of Spain and Horacio Zeballos of Argentina on Rod Laver Arena after the tournament director, Craig Tiley, announced they had been moved to centre court due to their popularity. Tiley also said any spectator holding a ground pass would be able to access Rod Laver Arena to watch the pair and stay to see the newly named Australian of the Year Dylan Alcott play his men’s quad singles final against Sam Schröder of the Netherlands. It will be the final match of Alcott’s career. “We want to make Dylan’s match the most-watched wheelchair tennis match in the history of the game tomorrow afternoon,” Tiley said. Crowd capacity, currently capped at 50% for the tournament, will be raised to 65% for the finals, the Victorian sport minister, Martin Pakula, tweeted on Wednesday. “Breaking my self imposed Twitter hiatus (which I will return to – it’s blissful) to advise that the chief health officer has agreed to increase the ticketed capacity of the Australian Open to 65% for the remainder of the tournament,” he wrote. • This article was amended on 27 January 2022 because an earlier version misnamed Michael Venus as “Mark Venus” in the picture caption.Jay Blades: Learning to Read at 51 9pm, BBC One One in 10 adults in the UK have dyslexia, and this includes the hugely affable Jay Blades, furniture restorer and host of The Repair Shop. This one-off programme follows Blades from not being able to read the letter awarding him his MBE to vowing to be able to read to his daughter by the time she turns 16. We then follow him as he takes literacy lessons – all the while showing the reality of dyslexia with heart, candour and that East End charm. Hollie Richardson We Are England 7.30pm, BBC One Another of the series of short documentaries telling overlooked stories of modern life. In this episode, ex-soldier Darren delves into the problems of veterans struggling on civvy street. Darren experienced addiction and prison after leaving the military. What can be done to prevent others suffering similar fates? Might HGV driving be a productive avenue to follow? Phil Harrison The Bay 9pm, ITV In a very procedural mid-season episode of the coastal crime show, secrets about the deceased slowly leak out. Fortunately, the story has other concerns – racial tensions in a small town, and the stresses of building a blended family – to offset the blandness of the sleuthing. Jack Seale Katie Price’s Mucky Mansion 9pm, Channel 4 Here’s Katie Price doing up her “mucky mansion” (so-called by the tabloids). But there’s more to this than meets the eye – it’s no coincidence the house crumbled at the same time that Price’s personal life did. Whatever your thoughts are on her, she has a knack for hard-to-switch-over telly. HR The Mind of Herbert Clunkerdunk 10pm, BBC Two If you’re unsure of what to make of this surreal comedy series, you are not alone. In this second season of 15-minute shorts, Spencer Jones (Upstart Crow) continues to share the unfiltered imagination of his alter ego Herbert Clunkerdunk. Expect silly songs, mobile phones with eyes and dreamlike sequences in tonight’s double bill. HR Storyville: Final Account 10pm, BBC Four Ahead of Wednesday’s Holocaust Memorial Day, Luke Holland’s documentary about the last living generation of German citizens of Adolf Hitler’s Third Reich is aired on the small screen. Holland – who died of cancer while it was in post-production – worked on it over the course of 10 years and talked to more than 150 people, asking how their past affects their present. HR Film choice Little Joe (Jessica Hausner, 2019), 11.15pm, BBC Two An unsettling Invasion of the Body Snatchers-style horror built in bold blocks of colour, Jessica Hausner’s film is set at a laboratory that is developing a mood-enhancing plant. When scientist Alice (Emily Beecham) brings one of the pretty red flowers home for her son Joe (Kit Connor), and names it Little Joe, bad things are bound to happen. There’s good support from Ben Whishaw and Kerry Fox playing Alice’s concerned colleagues, as both mother and child find their behaviours changing in response to the possibly malevolent flora. Simon Wardell Live sport International Women’s Cricket – Australia v England 10.30pm, BT Sport 2 Heather Knight leads the visitors on day one of the sole Ashes Test at Manuka Oval.Top story: Culpable or just ‘ambushed with a cake’? Hello, I’m Warren Murray. Make up your own mind, but hear me out first. Boris Johnson is braced for the most perilous 48 hours of his premiership, with Conservative MPs due to see Sue Gray’s report into Downing Street lockdown parties. The Metropolitan police commissioner, Cressida Dick, has meanwhile announced that her officers are investigating the parties and “I don’t anticipate any difficulty in obtaining the evidence that it is … necessary, proportionate and appropriate for us to obtain in order to get to the right conclusions”. Those found to have breached regulations could be fined. Arch-critics of the prime minister are hopeful that Gray’s findings will be damaging enough to trigger what they believe will be the final trickle of letters needed to get to 54 and force a no confidence vote. A Conservative MP has caused mirth by claiming Johnson was “ambushed with a cake” at his birthday gathering in Downing Street during lockdown. Conor Burns told Channel 4 News on Tuesday evening that the gathering was “not a premeditated, organised party … He was, in a sense, ambushed with a cake.” * * * Backup plan if Russia cuts gas – Natural gas supplies from around the world could be diverted to Europe if Vladimir Putin cuts the flow from Russia as part of an invasion of Ukraine. US officials said on Tuesday that they had been negotiating with global suppliers and were confident that Europe would not suffer from a sudden loss of energy for heating in the middle of winter. Joe Biden said on Tuesday if Russia attacked, it would be the “largest invasion since world war two” and would “change the world”. The US president said he would consider imposing personal sanctions on his Russian counterpart. * * * Midweek catch-up &gt; Users of truly self-driving cars should have immunity from a wide range of offences including dangerous driving, speeding and jumping red lights, Britain’s law commissions have jointly recommended. &gt; Almost 300,000 people in the UK have aortic valve stenosis, a potentially deadly condition where the main outflow valve of the heart stiffens and narrows, according to the first major study of its prevalence. &gt; Fans are trying to have the Star Trek actor Nichelle Nichols freed from a conservatorship that was put in place in 2018 because she has dementia. Nichols played Lieutenant Nyota Uhura in the original TV series and movies. Her supporters, including some “Free Britney” activists, claim she does not need a conservatorship, but merely help to manage her affairs. &gt; A man has been charged with the murder of his 19-year-old daughter after a woman was hit by a car in Norfolk and died of her injuries. Nigel Malt, 44, is due to appear at King’s Lynn magistrates court today accused of the murder of Lauren Malt. &gt; The Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) has banned a campaign by Swedish alt-milk brand Oatly for misleading consumers. The ASA said Oatly claimed without proper evidence to have less environmental impact than dairy and meat products. * * * More Pegasus revelations – The mobile phones of a senior Human Rights Watch staff member are alleged to have been repeatedly hacked by a client of NSO Group at a time when she was investigating the August 2020 explosion that killed more than 200 people in Beirut. The alleged hacking of Lama Fakih, a US-Lebanese citizen and director of crisis and conflict at HRW, marks the latest example of how NSO’s powerful surveillance tool, Pegasus, has been used to target campaigners and journalists. On Tuesday, NSO’s chairman, Asher Levy, said he was stepping down but denied it had any connection to recent developments. * * * ‘Ghost flights’ spew carbon – At least 100,000 “ghost flights” could happen across Europe this winter just so airlines can keep their EU take-off and landing rights, according to Greenpeace. It says the deserted, unnecessary or unprofitable flights could also generate up to 2.1 million tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions. The Lufthansa CEO, Carsten Spohr, said his airline may have to fly 18,000 such flights to meet the rules, and called for exemptions. The European Commission denies causing the problem: “If airline companies decide to keep empty flights, this is a company decision, which is not the result of EU rules.” The Ryanair CEO, Michael O’Leary, said airlines like Lufthansa should sell unfilled seats at cheap prices and be forced to release unused airport slots. * * * Mekong reveals more species – A monkey with ghostly white circles around its eyes is among 224 species newly listed in the World Wildlife Fund’s latest update on the greater Mekong region. The monkey, a new species of Popa langur found on the extinct Mt Popa volcano in Myanmar, was the only new mammal. There are also dozens of newly identified reptiles, frogs and newts, fish and 155 plant species, including the only known succulent bamboo species, found in Laos. The Mekong region is a biodiversity hotspot, home to tigers, Asian elephants, saola – an extremely rare animal also called the Asian unicorn or spindlehorn – and thousands of other species. Today in Focus podcast: Met finally comes to the party After weeks of damaging allegations of parties and rule-breaking gatherings in Downing Street, the Metropolitan police have now opened an investigation. Could this spell the end for Boris Johnson? Lunchtime read: If this is fun I’ve had it The author of a new book says having more fun builds resilience and will help get us through the next stage of the pandemic. Can the advice get Elle Hunt out of her funk? Sport England’s preparations for the Six Nations were hit with yet more upheaval on Tuesday when Joe Marler tested positive for Covid-19 and Eddie Jones’s squad was later forced to evacuate the team hotel because of a fire. Fifa should tighten its proposed rules on intermediaries to limit the money made by super-agents, the influential Council of Europe will be told on Wednesday. Supporters and survivors have spoken of the chaotic scenes that left eight dead after a crush outside the Olembe Stadium in Yaoundé, the capital city of Cameroon, at the host nation’s Africa Cup of Nations tie against Comoros. Roy Hodgson oversaw training at Watford for the first time on Tuesday and has signed a contract initially until the end of the season as the club look to him to preserve their Premier League status. Ash Barty’s rapid march through the draw continued at the Australian Open as she faced her highest ranked opponent so far, the in-form 21st seed, Jessica Pegula, and treated her with the same disdain as all others who have crossed her path here this year. Business Shares have been mixed in Asia during muted trading as investors await indications from a US Federal Reserve meeting on how aggressive it will be in fighting inflation. Japan’s benchmark Nikkei 225 slipped 0.7% in morning trading while South Korea’s Kospi, the Hang Seng and the Shanghai Composite rose. Trading is closed in Sydney for Australia Day. The FTSE is about 60 points higher in futures trading ahead of the open. You can have $1.350 or €1.195 for your pound at time of writing. The papers It’s another “continuing furore” edition of our front page roundup today. Here is the full version, whittled down follows. The Mirror’s headline is “Number’s up, PM” and it reports that “Sue Gray has pics of Johnson with wine bottles at No 10 parties as police launch criminal probe”. Our Guardian front page describes the “PM’s peril: report looms as police step in over parties”. The focus of the Telegraph’s front page is also the Gray report and the “mounting pressure” for Johnson to publish it in full. The Daily Express wants us to think the Scotland Yard probe has actually been welcomed by Johnson and says “Yes PM, we all want ‘line drawn under’ partygate’”. The Sun has “Cops probe partygate” and says “Ten Downing Street is now a crime scene”. The i newspaper leads with the Metropolitan police investigation and a photo of an anxious-looking PM. The Daily Mail rather incredibly argues we are “A nation that’s lost all sense of proportion”, suggesting partygate should be brushed aside because there are other bad things going on in the world. The Times plays it straight: “Johnson faces police interview over parties”. The Independent follows suits with: “Now police investigate Downing Street parties”. The Financial Times has “Johnson gears up for survival fight”, quoting one Tory MP as saying: “He believes he’ll get out of this. His optimism is more than skin deep.” Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendThe lives of LGBTQ+ people in Afghanistan have “dramatically worsened” under Taliban rule, according to a new survey, which highlights cases of violence, gang-rape and death threats since the group seized power last year. The report, by Human Rights Watch (HRW), recorded nearly 60 cases of targeted violence against LGBTQ+ people since August 2021, many of whom described how Taliban rule has destroyed their lives. “Things were always rough,” said Heather Barr, associate director of the women’s rights division at HRW. “But people had found ways to survive and build community and support each other, and they had hope that things were gradually improving. On 15 August, all of that ended.” Homosexuality was banned under Ashraf Ghani, the ousted president of Afghanistan, and punishable with prison. However, the HRW report said that the Taliban “vowed to take a hard line against the rights of LGBT people” and cited sharia law. “We spoke with LGBT Afghans who have survived gang-rape, mob attacks, or have been hunted by their own family members who joined the Taliban, and they have no hope that state institutions will protect them,” said J Lester Feder, senior fellow for emergency research at OutRight Action International, who contributed to the report. “For those LGBT people who want to flee the country, there are few good options; most of Afghanistan’s neighbours also criminalise same-sex relations. It is difficult to overstate how devastating – and terrifying – the return of Taliban rule has been for LGBT Afghans.” Zeba Gul*, 16, described to the Guardian how her life had worsened in the last few months. “I like to wear makeup, I like dresses, and I love to dance. But my family didn’t allow all that,” the teenager told the Guardian. “They would lock me up with chains and beat me. They would shave my head, tear my clothes and swear at me, calling me ezaak [a derogatory term for homosexuals].” Gul described the horrors of growing up as a transperson in a deeply conservative country like Afghanistan. Before the Taliban came to her town in western Afghanistan, she was tormented as an object of shame by her family, but after 15 August, the risk to her life became grave. “After the Taliban came to power, my family threw me out of the house. It is the peak of winter and I sleep in the parks. I have been attacked. I have been raped. The Taliban held me for three days and beat me,” she said. “I have no one [to care for me].” Faraydoon Fakoori, at Paiwand 34, an organisation working to help gender minorities in Afghanistan, said: “Afghanistan has always been a conservative society, but after the arrival of the Taliban, the situation has worsened. We are seeing many cases of violence, harassment and even rape.” Gul said: “The return of the Taliban empowered vigilantes, homophobes, and a lot of people nurturing long-term feuds. On 14 August, your ex-wife’s angry brothers, your spurned ex, your prejudiced neighbour or uncle might have felt like they wished they could harm you, but it wasn’t worth going to prison for. On 16 August, it was open season, with no fear of punishment.” In 2021, a Taliban spokesperson told Germany’s Bild newspaper: “For homosexuals, there can only be two punishments: either stoning, or he must stand behind a wall that will fall down on him.” *Name has been changed • Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999 in England and Wales, 0808 801 0302 in Scotland, or 0800 0246 991 in Northern Ireland. Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlWithin the brutal machinations of US politics, Joe Manchin has been elevated to a status of supreme decision-maker, the man who could make or break Joe Biden’s presidency. Internationally, however, the Democratic senator’s new fame has been received with puzzlement and growing bitterness, as countries already ravaged by the climate crisis brace themselves for the US – history’s largest ever emitter of planet-heating gases – again failing to pass major climate legislation. For six months, Manchin has refused to support a sweeping bill to lower emissions, stymieing its progress in an evenly split US Senate where Republicans uniformly oppose climate action. Failure to pass the Build Back Better Act risks wounding Biden politically but the ramifications reverberate far beyond Washington, particularly in developing countries increasingly at the mercy of disastrous climate change. “He’s a villain, he’s a threat to the globe,” said Saleemul Huq, director of the International Centre for Climate Change and Development, based in Bangladesh. “If you talk to the average citizen in Dhaka, they will know who Joe Manchin is. The level of knowledge of American politics here is absolutely amazing, we know about the filibuster and the Senate and so on. “What the Americans do or don’t do on climate will impact the world and it’s incredible that this one coal lobbyist is holding things up. It will cause very bad consequences for us in Bangladesh, unfortunately.” The often tortuous negotiations between Manchin, the White House and Democratic leaders appeared doomed on 19 December when the West Virginia senator said he could not support the $1.75tn bill, citing concerns over inflation and the national debt. The latest twist caused anguish to those who see their futures being decided by a previously obscure politician located thousands of miles away. “I’ve been following the situation closely,” said Tina Stege, climate envoy for the Marshall Islands, a low-lying Pacific nation that risks being wiped out by rising sea levels. “We have to halve emissions in this decade and can’t do it without strong, immediate action by the US.” Stege said the Marshall Islands was already suffering the impacts of the climate crisis and if the US doesn’t slash its emissions “the outcomes for countries like mine are unthinkable.” Even America’s closest allies have looked on in dismay as a single lawmaker from Biden’s own party has stalled what would be the biggest – and arguably first – piece of climate legislation in the US’s plodding, and often rancorous, history of dealing with escalating global heating. “Biden has done a fair bit in very challenging circumstances [but] in Canada we look on with bewilderment because it’s such a different political context. It’s very bizarre,” said Catherine McKenna, who was environment minister in Justin Trudeau’s government that introduced carbon pricing in 2019. “Politics is hard but I don’t think anyone has given up. We just really hope they are able to get a deal.” McKenna said she was vilified by some Canadian provincial premiers who “fought to the death” against carbon pricing but that there was now broader support for climate action across the country, including within industry, than in the US. “It’s unfortunate that it’s just one person that is holding up something that’s so critically important,” she said of Manchin. “Joe Manchin is a problem, and I think he needs to be called out,” said Ed Davey, a British MP who was previously the UK’s secretary of state for energy and climate change. “It’s in the US interest, in the interest of West Virginia and elsewhere, to take advantage of green zero-carbon technology, which is the future.” Davey, who is now leader of the Liberal Democrats, warned that the US risks ceding leadership in clean energy to China if it doesn’t act. “People will end up paying higher prices, jobs will go and not be created, the security of America will be reduced, Beijing will be laughing,” he said, adding that Manchin was in effect “working on behalf of the Chinese government” by not supporting the transition away from fossil fuels. China used last year’s Cop26 climate talks in Scotland to “insidiously point out to every country that US just can’t implement”, said Rachel Kyte, dean of The Fletcher School at Tufts University and a climate adviser to the UN secretary general. Kyte said many governments believe Biden is well-meaning but cannot follow through on his commitments, a frustration compounded by a lack of American action on related areas, such as climate finance for poorer countries. “There’s almost a resentment that the US just can’t deliver,” she added. “There’s this sinking feeling about the politics of America. You can’t turn your back on the US because it’s still the biggest economy, but what are countries supposed to do?” Much of this angst is now being channeled towards Manchin. After more than a decade in national politics, the 74-year-old senator has suddenly garnered a level of infamy far beyond his fiefdom of West Virginia, where the centrist Democrat has served as governor and senator while reaping millions of dollars through his personal investments and campaign contributions from a coal industry that continues to loom large in his state. It’s a situation that has caused bafflement overseas. “Who is Manchin, the Dem senator from West Virginia who betrayed Biden?” La Repubblica in Italy has demanded. Clarín, a newspaper in Argentina, has called Manchin a “rebelde” and a “tycoon with ties to the mining structure of West Virginia, the other Virginia of the USA”. Helsingin Sanomat, a Finnish newspaper, also noted Manchin’s links to the fossil fuel industry and lamented that he has “disagreed with the most ambitious climate action” put forward by the US. The negotiations with Manchin involve stakes far greater than any normal political maneuvering in Washington. The world is already being strafed by wildfires, heatwaves, floods and societal instability wrought by the climate crisis and rising temperatures are on track to breach limits set by governments in the Paris climate accords, a situation that would push some parts of the world beyond human livability. Salvaging this situation will be virtually impossible without swift action by the US, the world’s second largest carbon polluter and a major oil and gas exporter. Analysts say the half a trillion dollars of support for renewable energy and electric cars in the Build Back Better bill would give the US a decent chance of cutting its emissions in half this decade, which Biden and scientists say is imperative to avoid climate breakdown. But Manchin’s opposition has already ensured the removal of a key element of the bill, a plan to force utilities to phase in clean energy over time, and the prospect of him joining Republicans to block the overall package has seen him come under intense criticism within the US. Climate activists have confronted Manchin in Washington and kayaked to his yacht to remonstrate with him. Some fellow Democrats say he has “failed the American people”. Even the Sunday Gazette, the local paper of Charleston, West Virginia, has run a headline of ‘We need this so bad’, in reference to the bill. All this has been to little effect, although Manchin did say earlier this month there could still be agreement on “the climate thing”, offering some vague hope to activists while not quite quelling their anger. “Senator Manchin is a fossil-fueled sociopath on a Maserati joyride while he lets the world burn,” said Janet Redman, climate campaign director at Greenpeace USA. “At the end of the day, Manchin cares less about his constituents than he does about the fossil fuel industry.” The current, floundering attempt to pass climate legislation is a grimly familiar episode in a lengthy record of American inadequacy. Donald Trump donned a coal miner’s helmet on the campaign trail and removed the US from the Paris climate deal. Barack Obama failed to get cap-and-trade legislation past a recalcitrant Congress. George W Bush rejected the Kyoto climate accords. In 1993, a previous Democratic senator from West Virginia, Robert Byrd, blocked a Bill Clinton plan to tax carbon emissions. Manchin is, in some respects, a “fall guy” for a deeper American political dysfunction over the climate crisis, Kyte said. “If Republicans weren’t in the lock-grip of certain vested interests, if they had a policy on climate adaptation or green jobs for the future, Joe Manchin wouldn’t have the influence he has,” she said. “Joe Manchin has become the personification of a problem and removing him doesn’t solve it,” Kyte added. “It doesn’t give us a bipartisan agreement of the danger we are in. A political culture that allows you to enrich yourself and your family from industries you regulate and not declare a conflict of interest lies beyond Joe Manchin, it’s bigger than just him.” Even if American political inertia hasn’t changed, the world certainly has – the last seven years were the planet’s hottest on record, cataclysmic wildfires are now year-round events in the US west and deadly flooding swamps basements in New York, picturesque towns in Germany and subways in China. There is mounting fear that the world, including the US, does not have the time for yet another futile American effort to address the unraveling climate crisis. “Unfortunately, politicians getting fossil fuel money are standing in the way and sacrificing the rest of us once again,” said Vanessa Nakate, a climate justice activist from Uganda. Nakate pointed out that Africa was suffering from climate change even though it is responsible for just a small fraction of global emissions. “We are so reliant on the choices others make,” she said. “Our lives are literally in their hands.” This article was amended on 26 January 2022 to correct Rachel Kyte’s title.“Buy now, pay later” giant Klarna is putting further pressure on banks and credit card firms by launching its first physical card in the UK. The card will allow customers to delay payments for up to 30 days when used at high street shops, having previously only offered buy-now-pay-later (BNPL) products online for UK customers. The Swedish company said it intends to add more of its payment options, including splitting purchases into three monthly payments, to the card over time. Klarna confirmed it had built up a waitlist of 400,000 consumers in the UK, which it claimed showed “strong demand for a new approach to credit,” following a successful launch in Germany and Sweden. Klarna Card is part of the payment giant’s latest efforts to rival major credit card firms and banks that offer consumer loans, by giving customers the chance to delay payments at physical shops without incurring interest charges or late fees. “Consumers are rejecting credit products which charge double-digit interest rates while allowing repayments to be put off indefinitely,” Alex Marsh,head of Klarna’s UK operations, said. “For online purchases where credit makes sense, buy-now-pay-later has become the sustainable alternative with no interest and clear payment schedules. The launch of Klarna Card in the UK brings those benefits to the offline world, giving consumers the control and transparency of BNPL for all of their in-store purchases.” The firm – whose BNPL products are unregulated – has enjoyed explosive growth during the pandemic, particularly among the under-30s and those with tight finances. But BNPL products have also drawn criticism, with consumer body Which? warning earlier this month that stronger safeguards are needed to protect the millions of UK shoppers who do not realise they are taking on debt by delaying their payments. Klarna said customers will receive a personalised cap on their spending if they qualify for the card, which will be adjusted automatically after every purchase based on their financial track record. It is understood that for most customers, the cap will likely be worth hundreds, rather than thousands, of pounds. Borrowers will also have to go through credit checks to be eligible for the card.Moreton-in-Marsh, Honeybourne, Evesham, Pershore … The names of the stations along the Cotswold Line railway are familiar as a nursery rhyme from childhood journeys. I grew up near Oxford, but it’s years since I last travelled west on this line and the distant hills have a blue, remembered air. The little River Evenlode meanders through sheep-dotted fields outside the train window before the wider Avon winds through plum and cherry trees. We cross the Severn among the spires and towers of Worcester and race under the Malverns to emerge near gnarled orchards, overgrown with mistletoe. Herefordshire is a county for all seasons: once the leaves have fallen, there are glowing church windows, local jams and chutneys, original museums. There are wintry walks to enjoy, before the orchards blossom again, and mulled cider by log fires in half-timbered pubs. All Herefordshire buses are free for everyone at weekends until (it’s hoped) August 2022, with extra services on Sundays. It’s a scheme aimed at encouraging sustainable trips to local towns. I hop on a bus into Ledbury from the railway station, passing cobbled alleys and striking timber-framed houses. “A little town of ancient grace,” the Ledbury-born poet laureate John Masefield called his home town. In the 12th-century parish church there’s a stained-glass Good Shepherd, designed by Edward Burne-Jones and made in William Morris’s workshop. More unusually, an old painting of The Last Supper, now restored and hanging behind the altar, was discovered this spring to be from the school of Titian. I follow the Geopark Way up towards Frith Wood for views across misty hills. A path back down towards the station, past hedges of rosehips and crab apples, runs through an orchard with dozens of different varieties of apple. Each tree stands in a pool of green or crimson windfalls, soon to become Wilces’ craft cider. The farm also rents out bikes (from £12/half day). Back in town, the setting sun spills through old coaching inn archways along the western side of the High Street. Ledbury was a staging post on the road from Hereford to London. The newly refurbished Feathers Hotel, where I’m staying, is one of the oldest inns, kicking off the town’s fashion for black and white buildings (doubles from around £80, B&amp;B, winter offer). I’m sleeping in a two-storey brick cottage off the courtyard, with a tall cherry tree outside and Masefield poems on the walls. Supper, in the Feathers’ restaurant, is a seasonal salad with spice-roasted chickpeas and smoked feta falafel (£15), followed by a citrus-y sugar-crisped lemon and pistachio cake (£7). Soon after breakfast next morning (full veggie with fresh spinach, field mushrooms and tomatoes), I’m heading for a vineyard three miles north of Ledbury. I had planned to catch bus 675 from Ledbury to Loxter and walk the last mile, but the landscape and weather are so inviting that I set off on foot again through boot-soaking dew. I step off a lane and over a footbridge, a couple of hours later, into a sloping field of vines near a timber-framed brick farmhouse. The Geopark Way runs right through Coddington Vineyard and Visit Herefordshire have recently published a five-mile Wine Walk which includes it. There is wine for sale here on Fridays and Saturdays from March and you can stay year-round in a brick cottage or a wood-walled lodge surrounded by vines. The harvest is over, and owner Peter Maiden tells me the volume of grapes in 2021 was astounding, making up for 2020’s frosted crop. The 10-mile walk from Ledbury to Great Malvern overflows with interesting sights. Round the corner, there’s more William Morris stained-glass in Coddington church. Next, I head for Luggs Mill orchard; the Colwall Orchard Group (COG) planted cherry trees here in 2017. I’m following the group’s heritage trail (£2) and soon reach the orchard-ringed allotments of the village garden, where COG have their HQ in an old apple-pressing hut. People are busy digging and harvesting among plots of pumpkins and raspberries, curly kale and marigolds. I buy a bottle of apple juice and chat to trustee Andy Ball about the visiting school parties who help with juicing and the group’s annual events: an Apple Day, a Mistletoe Fair, a January Wassail. A mile further on, I reach Old Court Nurseries with its National Collection of Michaelmas daisies: 430 different varieties are blooming in shades of lilac, violet or magenta across the densely-packed acre-and-a-half of the Picton Garden. The garden reopens on 3 February, entry £4, for snowdrop season, with heritage narcissi budding not far behind. Then it’s time for butternut soup and bread at Café H2O in the GeoCentre, another mile on foot (or five minutes on bus 675), with a side order of hilly panoramas from the picnic tables. From here, it’s a relatively easy mile to the top of Worcestershire Beacon. Swigging apple juice from the bottle, I spin to survey the 360-degree views, feeling like Maria von Trapp crossed with Edward Elgar. The Malvern hills were an inspiration to the composer, who wrote the Enigma Variations. The path down into Great Malvern is much steeper, and the 40-minute bus ride back to Ledbury, past views over the sunset hills, feels gratifyingly long. Olive trees and salvaged statues surround an inviting jumble of chairs and tables near a laden orchard as I hop off bus 476, on route to Hereford next morning, at the Nest farm shop and café. It’s a popular base for wintry walks, full of local crafts and produce: wine from nearby Sixteen Ridges vineyard, handmade Scotch eggs, and books of local hikes. The weather has turned colder and greyer so I relax inside on a re-upholstered cinema seat near the log burner with a big pot of tea; there are Herefordshire rarebits made with cider and deep slabs of quiche, with homemade coleslaw and apple chutney from the trees outside the window. The bus rolls on again, through fields of hops and blackcurrants, into Hereford. My first stop is the Cider Museum (£3 for kids, £5.50 for adults). It’s a 15-minute stroll from the centre or frequent buses 71 and 72 run to nearby Ryelands Street. If you arrive in Hereford by train, you can add a PlusBus ticket for £3.60, which is valid on buses around the city for the whole day. The all-year museum, in Bulmer’s creeper-covered former factory, is full of stone mills and beam presses, bowl goblets and lead crystal flutes. My favourite room is a gallery of watercolour paintings of apples with evocative names: Redstreak, Siberian crab, Strawberry Norman, golden russet. There’s a cider tasting at the end and the shop has bottles of cider brandy from the museum’s own King Offa distillery. Hereford cathedral glows, even on a dull day, with candles, up-lit Norman arches and chandeliers hung from gothic fan vaulting (free). Centuries of stained glass range from medieval fragments and slender lancets to Thomas Denny’s 2007 windows, celebrating the work of 17th-century Herefordshire poet and theologian, Thomas Traherne. “The world shall be a grand jewel of delight unto you,” wrote Traherne and these deeply-coloured windows gleam ruby, emerald and turquoise to conjure his visions of sun-gilded woods and streets whose stones are “precious as gold”. Nearby, the cathedral’s 13th-century calf-skin Mappa Mundi (map of the world) features fantastical satyrs and salamanders and there’s an ancient chained library (£6). The Mappa Mundi museum reopens on 24 January with an exhibition called All Things Bright, showcasing a shiny millennium of religious metalwork. I end up at The Barrels, with half an hour before the last bus, drinking Wye Valley Bitter in an outdoor area hung with dried hops. In my bag is a picnic for the train tomorrow: a local ribstone pippin apple, a small spelt-and-honey sourdough (baked by Peter Cooks) from Fodder delicatessen, and a wedge of tangy oak-smoked Little Hereford (made at nearby Monkland Dairy) from the Mousetrap cheese shop. Walking through the misty streets to Ledbury station next morning, there’s a spirit-raising smell of ripe fruit and wet grass. Masefield wrote in his poem The West Wind: “It’s a fine land, the west land, for hearts as tired as mine, Apple orchards blossom there, and the air’s like wine.” • Train travel was provided by GWR (advance tickets from London Paddington to Ledbury from £18.20). Accommodation was provided by The Feathers Hotel and Visit HerefordshireI was a toddler when I entered the care system. By the time I left, at 18, I had been shunted between four foster homes and a residential care home, all across south-east London. I met my biological mum for the first time since entering care when I was about 10. I never met my dad. To the knowledge of my various social workers and foster parents, I had no siblings. But, in my mid-20s, I received a message on social media that changed my life. A stranger about a decade older than me got in touch to tell me that he was my brother. Jeez. Eventually, we spoke on the phone and established that he was my half-brother – we had the same father. He had occasionally babysat me before I was fostered. He also told me that I had at least three other siblings. Perhaps most astounding was the fact that he lived in south Bermondsey – the same part of London as me. Did we ever pass each other in the street? Were we ever on the same bus, or in the same shop? While the revelation of the existence of a brother was mostly welcome, I can still remember the palpable shock and confusion I felt when I read his initial message. An unexpected note from a stranger on Facebook had collided with my already fractured identity, raising a wave of questions about who I was and where I came from. When he got in touch, I was making strides in rebuilding my life after care. I was a graduate and had recently started a career as a journalist at the BBC. I lived on my own terms. I had good friends and a sense of direction, but this message disrupted all of that. Still, I tried to hold it all inside. Despite the magnitude of him getting in touch, we never met in person. We messaged each other a bit for a few weeks and initially I scoured his Facebook profile, but we didn’t pursue a relationship. Years passed without any contact – until the first Covid lockdown. In April 2020, my partner gave birth to our first child. I was finally starting a family of my own. A month or so later, we went back to the hospital for a check-up. To our relief, all was well. As we left, I spotted a man outside the building. We locked eyes. Weirdly, perhaps, I recognised him instantly. He was the brother who had got in touch all those years ago. He looked exactly the same in person as he did in his profile picture. I called his name and, to my relief, he also recognised me. We stood there, outside the hospital, chatting. Time stood still. In that moment, it felt as if we had known each other our whole lives. There was a deep knowing. Nothing was awkward about it. If anything, it felt too normal. He said he was at the hospital visiting his sick mother. I introduced him to my baby, we took a photo together and even made plans to catch up properly in the near future. Since that encounter, though, we haven’t met. For ages after that meeting, I was consumed with questions about my past. Why did social workers and foster carers tell me I was an only child? How did no one with authority in my care experience know about my siblings? Do children’s services even care about, or prioritise learning about, the family histories of looked-after children? That encounter, and the revelation that I had other siblings, touched me deeply. To know that I had siblings as a looked-after child means I am able to take comfort in knowing that there are others who were affected by the decisions of my absent father. Although I don’t know, and may never know, these siblings on a personal level, they serve as a touch point to understanding my past and my sense of identity. Knowing they exist reassures me that I am a part of something bigger than myself. I now have a photo of my brother. A photo of my baby daughter’s uncle. At this stage of my life, knowing they are alive and well is more than enough for me. • BBC Three’s Split Up in Care: Life Without Siblings is on BBC iPlayer from 26 January.Bereaved families in England and Wales face increased costs from Wednesday as probate fees rise by up to 76%. Applications for probate, which grants permission to deal with the estate of someone who has died, will now cost a flat rate of £273. Previously the fee was £155 if a solicitor applied on behalf of a family and £215 for those who applied direct. Lawyers have condemned the price rise, which comes at a time when processing delays have left some families in legal limbo. Michael Culver, the chair of Solicitors for the Elderly, said: “Our members are still reporting an average wait time of six to nine weeks and many agree that the service is still in need of significant improvements.” The government claims that the time to process online applications fell to less than four weeks last spring, but the wait time for all applications averaged at 9.3 weeks in October according to figures from HM Courts and Tribunals Service. The fallout from the pandemic and the closure of regional register offices has meant that some applications have taken months to be granted, leaving families unable to sell their late relative’s home or pay off debts. One family contacted Guardian Money after waiting for 10 months. According to the Ministry of Justice, which governs the probate service, the fee increase will fund a new centralised online system which is replacing paper applications. It had proposed to increased the charge to up to £20,000 for the wealthiest estates, then reduced it to £6,000 before abandoning it in 2019 after an outcry. It will continue to waive fees for estates worth £5,000 or less. According to the Law Society, technical issues with the new system, administrative errors and poor communication have contributied to a backlog. It is calling for families to be offered reimbursements if their application is delayed. It also wants assurances that the fee increase will be used to improve the service. “We support the MoJ’s aim to make a simpler, more streamlined process for users of the probate service, and we understand funds are needed to help this change and development,’ said the Law Society president, I Stephanie Boyce. “We query why the UK government has decided to increase fees at this time, particularly as the probate service is still facing delays.” A Ministry of Justice spokesperson said: “These fees will fully fund our investment in a first-class digital probate service to ensure shorter waiting times, fewer user and administrative errors, and a better experience for families. “Every penny will go towards the cost of processing probate applications – something that is currently subsidised by taxpayers.”No doubt I speak for every woman on Earth when I say this: thank you, Mars! When I was a little girl I felt as if I could never be my authentic self because of the way the green M&amp;M mascot used to dress. Every time I saw her tottering around in advertisements wearing white go-go boots and fluttering her long eyelashes, a little part of me would die inside. Although young, I recognised something profound: women would only be free when multinationals allowed anthropomorphised chocolate to wear sensible shoes. At long last, that time has come. Last week, Mars Wrigley, the international purveyor of sugary goods, announced that it was revamping (or, rather, de-vamping) its six M&amp;M characters to promote inclusivity. Most notably: the green one is switching out boots for trainers and the brown one is swapping stilettos for kitten heels. It is kind of questionable that they are still forcing the brown one into heels of any kind if you ask me. Nevertheless, it is still a massive step forward for feminism. Alas, Fox News is not quite so enthusiastic about the fact that chocolate characters that nobody with more than one brain cell gives a damn about are updating their footwear. “M&amp;Ms will not be satisfied until every last cartoon character is deeply unappealing and totally androgynous,” Fox host Tucker Carlson recently railed. “Until the moment you wouldn’t want to have a drink with any one of them. That’s the goal. When you’re totally turned off, we’ve achieved equity.” Yikes, ladies! We were supposed to keep that part of the 2022 feminist agenda secret. Who let Carlson in on the strategy? Still, since we are showing our hand here, let me warn conservatives that fem&amp;minism is just the beginning of the corporate inclusivity revolution. We are not going to rest until Tony the Tiger comes out as non-binary. They’re brrrrrrrave! Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistSue Gray’s report will be closely scrutinised by Conservative MPs awaiting the full facts before deciding whether to act against their beleaguered leader. Here are five things to look out for when it is published: 1. What was the prime minister’s direct involvement in lockdown breaches? Boris Johnson has already admitted attending the 20 May 2020 garden drinks, but insisted he believed it was a “work event”. That explanation has been widely ridiculed by opposition MPs, who have pointed out the event was organised by a senior Johnson aide, who encouraged guests to “bring their own booze”, and held in the Downing Street garden. Will Gray lay out fresh evidence that makes Johnson’s claim seem even more implausible? In all of Johnson’s public statement on this, he said he believed “implicitly that this was a work event” – a careful use of words. What will Gray make of this? And will she confirm that there were other occasions on which he went to social gatherings that appear not to have complied with the rules at the time – including the birthday singsong revealed by ITV this week? MPs will be weighing up how starkly her findings conflict with Johnson’s assertion in the House of Commons that “all guidance was followed”. Several cabinet ministers have stressed the seriousness of breaking the ministerial code by misleading parliament – traditionally a resigning matter. 2. What does Gray say about the culture in No 10 and who is responsible? Gray is expected to lay out details of a boozy work culture in Downing Street – which even included the purchase of a dedicated wine fridge. There is also focus on two parties held the night before Prince Philip’s funeral, reportedly involving a late-night trip to a local supermarket to fill a suitcase with wine bottles. In the weeks since the first stories emerged of a party in Downing Street, a steady stream of other “gatherings” have emerged, many of them in apparent contravention of the lockdown restrictions at the times. Gray may well have uncovered even more. So exactly how many parties were there? The Conservative chair, Oliver Dowden, suggested recently that the prime minister is the person to overhaul what he called, “the kind of culture that has allowed [the partying] to happen in the first place”. But will the facts laid out by Gray suggest that Johnson himself was an integral part of that culture, and must take some of the blame? 3. Which senior civil servants and advisers are named – and shamed? The only person who has so far resigned over “partygate” is Allegra Stratton, the prime minister’s former press secretary, who did not attend the Christmas bash she was caught on camera joking about. Martin Reynolds, Johnson’s principal private secretary, who invited more than 100 Downing Street staff to a garden party on 20 May 2020, seems unlikely to escape censure. It was his excruciating email, leaked to ITV News, that led to some Tory MPs deciding to call for Johnson to quit. He wrote: “Hi all, after what has been an incredibly busy period we thought it would be nice to make the most of the lovely weather and have some socially distanced drinks in the No 10 garden this evening. Please join us from 6pm and bring your own booze!” Johnson’s director of communications, Jack Doyle, is also widely expected to be singled out – but it is unclear how much wider Gray has cast her net. 4. Are any other ministers, aside from Johnson, implicated? Rishi Sunak appears to have attended the birthday gathering for Johnson, though aides have said he was awaiting a meeting, but other ministers have so far largely escaped being implicated. Gray is looking into individual parties at the Department for Education and the Department for Work and Pensions; to what extent will she conclude that the problematic culture spread beyond No 10? 5. Has Gray found evidence of carousing upstairs in the flat Johnson shares with his wife, Carrie? Several sources, including Dominic Cummings, have suggested there have been social gatherings in the lavishly redecorated Downing Street flat during the pandemic – on the night of Cummings’ departure from government, for example, when witnesses report music blaring from upstairs. Any evidence Gray has uncovered of these get-togethers, would further undermine the idea that Downing Street’s party culture did not ultimately emanate from Johnson himself.I am being chased by a debt collection company, BW Legal, for an unpaid energy bill from E.ON despite never having been a customer and having no connection with the property in question. BW Legal required me to prove I had left the address, which was impossible as I never lived there. I sent an energy bill for my actual address, and a screenshot of my electoral roll address history, but have had no reply. AD, Brighton You wrote in response to an Observer report on the same issue. BW Legal represents PRAC Financial, which bought customer debts in the name of “The Occupier” from E.ON. It suggested that malice may be behind my follow-up investigation, and said it appreciated my interest in the matter, but didn’t see any basis for my inquiries. Although it only removed you from its records after my intervention, it justified linking you to the address by pointing out that the evidence you provided showed you lived in the same square – albeit in a different part with a different postcode. BW then congratulated itself on its handling of your case, claiming the closure of the account within two weeks shows “how expediently matters were resolved – simply by communicating”. In fact, you received confirmation that your name had been delinked four days after my “communication” and 34 days after you first told BW Legal it had contacted you in error. Debt collectors have no right to require an individual to prove they are not liable for an unpaid bill, according to solicitor Gary Rycroft of Joseph A Jones &amp; Co LLP. “The burden of proof lies with the debt company,” he says. The Information Commissioner’s Office, and the Solicitors Regulation Authority, say they are investigating complaints about BW Legal. The Financial Ombudsman Service at www.financial-ombudsman.org.uk, can consider unresolved complaints about debt collection agencies. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditions • This article was amended on 28 January 2022. We regret that, due to an editing error, an earlier version said BW Legal confirmed it had issued “further payment demands” after the customer disputed the bill. In fact, the company had said it did not contact the customer about the balance after that time, other than to request evidence that they were not liable for the bill.Republican lawmakers in Tennessee gave final approval on Monday to an aggressive plan to split Nashville, a Democratic bastion, in a deeply Republican state, into several congressional districts as part of an effort to tilt the state’s congressional map in their favor. The plan is now waiting for approval from Governor Bill Lee, who is likely to sign it. Nashville currently sits in the state’s fifth congressional district, represented by Jim Cooper, a Democrat who has held the seat for nearly 20 years. It’s a solid Democratic district – Joe Biden carried it by nearly 24 points in 2020 – but on Tuesday, Cooper announced he was retiring from Congress. “Despite my strength at the polls, I could not stop the general assembly from dismembering Nashville. No one tried harder to keep our city whole,” he said in a statement. “I explored every possible way, including lawsuits, to stop the gerrymandering and to win one of the three new congressional districts that now divide Nashville. There’s no way, at least for me in this election cycle, but there may be a path for other worthy candidates.” The new districts crack the concentration of Democratic voters in Nashville and cram them into three districts that stretch across the state and are filled with reliable Republican voters. Donald Trump would have easily carried all three of the proposed districts in 2020. The plan is one of the clearest, and most brazen, efforts to dismantle a Democratic district to benefit Republicans. Cooper, who has served in Congress for more than three decades in total, told the Guardian the plan was “an outrage”. “It’s just raw politics,” he said. “They’re trying to fix something that isn’t broken.” Republican leaders in the state legislature have defended the plan by saying it would be good to have multiple people represent Nashville in Congress. “I’ve never bought into the approach that having multiple people represent a big city is bad thing,” Cameron Sexton, the Republican speaker of the Tennessee house of representatives, told the Associated Press. Odessa Kelly, a progressive Nashville activist who has already launched a campaign for the seat Cooper holds, said the Republican-drawn proposal made her “livid”. “To have someone just disregard your humanity, disregard democracy and just stomp on everything that this country is supposed to stand for, just because they have a personal interest to have a power grab, is one of the most racist and egregious acts that I’ve ever experienced,” she said. “This is the type of thing that you sound the alarm about.” The proposed plan would clearly diminish the influence of Black voters and other voters of color concentrated in Nashville, inserting them into districts that are overwhelmingly white and Republican. About a quarter of the eligible voting population in the fifth congressional district is Black. Under the new lines, Black voters would make up about 14% of the new fifth district and about 17% and 10% of the other two new districts in the city. Cooper agreed that the maps would significantly reduce the influence of minority voters. “At most it will be tokenism,” he said. Tequila Johnson, a co-founder and vice-president of the Equity Alliance, said: “We see that as racism, as an intentional effort to dilute the voting power and the voting voice of Black people in Nashville. It was a lack of representation that would have a “ripple effect”, added Johnson, whose organization is focused on mobilizing Black voters. “We’re less likely to have a relationship with our congressperson. The people who are going to be representing Nashville don’t live in Nashville, don’t understand what the needs are in Nashville,” she said. Regardless of which lines end up in place, Johnson said her group would continue to mobilize voters and reach out to voters outside of Nashville. “We are using this as an inroad to build relationships with our rural neighbors,” she said. “We’re going to make sure that the area that you’re lumping us into where they have hospitals closing, where they aren’t able to afford certain amenities for children, buses and enough teachers, things like that, we’re going to go out there and organize and have conversations with them and make sure that they know the reason they don’t have those things.” This article is part of the Guardian’s series The Fight to VoteWhen word reached W Kamau Bell that Bill Cosby was home from prison, the United Shades of America host could have torn at his trademark salt-and-pepper afro. Bell was in Philadelphia, Cosby’s home town, wrapping up interviews for a documentary project on the legendary comedian when Pennsylvania’s highest court tossed out the 84-year-old’s 2018 aggravated indecent assault conviction. The surprise ruling, which came just two years into a decade-long sentence, didn’t just have Bell reconsidering the premise of his film; it left him wondering whether he even had a film at all. “It felt like we could have this conversation because the arc of Bill Cosby’s life is concluded,” Bell said to the Guardian. “So when he got out, it’s like if the premise is ‘now that Bill Cosby’s in prison, we can have this conversation,’ what does it mean now that he’s out of prison? Can we still have the conversation?” This twist ending is the jumping-off point for We Need to Talk About Cosby – a four-part Showtime documentary series that premiered at the Sundance Film Festival last week. Cosby supporters are bracing for the worst. Music supervisor Vitaly Shenderovsky, leaning on the neat bass licks of the Living Colour frontman Vernon Reid, certainly does his part to strike an anxious tone. Even though uncomfortable conversations are stock-in-trade for Bell, who directs and narrates each hourlong episode, this project was particularly upsetting for him, too. “I consider myself to be a child of Cosby,” says the 48-year-old. “I cannot remember a time in my life when Bill Cosby wasn’t a part of the wallpaper of Black America. So then to find out what we find out, and what I believe about the assaults … I don’t know. Trying to reconcile that or learn something from that was very important to me.” Cosby was more than America’s Dad™. Until more than 60 women came forward and accused him of sexual impropriety, Cosby was a paragon of Black male virtue: athletic in his heyday, intellectually curious at his core and hilarious throughout – a singular voice in the zeitgeist before an unpolished Hannibal Buress rant struck him down from Olympus. Barry Jenkins, in his underrated indie drama Medicine for Melancholy, theorized that every Black man has a Cosby impersonation; a worn-out cassette tape of Bill Cosby: Himself, the comic’s peerless 1983 special, bespeaks my own feeble attempts. But they’re nowhere near as good as the much more effortless ones by Godfrey, the master impressionist and former studio audience warm-up act for Cosby’s shows. While his perspective provides We Need to Talk About Cosby with timely levity, sex therapist Sonalee Rashatwar girds it with emotional intelligence. The New Yorker’s Jelani Cobb, University of North Carolina sociologist Tressie McMillan Cottom, Cosby alum Doug E Doug, Gloria Allred and others fill in the remaining expert witness slots; tellingly, each begins with a deep sigh before grudgingly going about the task of weighing Cosby’s disparate halves. We Need to Talk About Cosby does well to remind viewers of the man’s resonant impacts as a game-changing standup comedian, blockbuster TV star and pro-Black philanthropist. A large chunk of the first episode is devoted to the story of Calvin Brown, the stuntman who opened a barricaded lane in Hollywood for Black performers when Cosby hired him as his double on the seminal 1965 TV drama I Spy. (Before that, white stuntmen would literally paint themselves black to mirror African American actors.) But then ex-Playmate Victoria Valentino pulls the rug out with another story alleging Cosby emotionally leveraged the death of her six-year-old son to drug and rape her in 1969. What the Showtime docuseries does more effectively than any newspaper or magazine article is sync up the accusations against Cosby with his career arc, making the case for his alleged sexual behavior as a disturbing entitlement that was in many ways typical of Hollywood playboys of his generation. In one Larry King Show clip, the host, a renowned playboy himself, can be seen laughing along to a protracted Cosby aside about Spanish fly; if that doesn’t grab you, consider: it was part of a promotional interview for Cosby’s 1991 autobiography, Childhood. As We Need to Talk About Cosby’s slates for release on Sunday the A&amp;E network has already begun unfurling a 10-part docuseries called Secrets of Playboy that paints Hugh Hefner as the host with the most … drug-aided sexual assault parties in Hollywood. “I think it was bigger than Cosby,” Bell says. “Because if it was just him doing this without any sort of industry scaffolding, he can’t pull this off. When they built Hollywood back in the early days, they didn’t start with the human resources department. It’s a dream factory. And the result of making those dreams is living a hedonistic lifestyle. That’s how you get to hide in plain sight.” At one point in We Need to Talk About Cosby the comedian Chris Spencer speaks for all Cosby sympathizers when he recalls how easy it was for him to dismiss the consistency in the Cosby accusers’ stories because each could just watch the last’s big interview and adjust accordingly. But the docuseries hits back by showing the eerie parallels in the way Cosby’s accusers say they were groomed. Apparently, Cosby’s seductions weren’t limited to lavish trips, promises of showbiz breaks or opportunities to pal around with fellow A-listers; in some instances, he ingratiated himself with family members, making it that much more difficult for accusers’ loved ones to believe America’s Dad had been anything less than a gentleman Huxtable. In others, accusers say Cosby had a knack for blaming his roofie-ing on them and tarrying in their lives until they no longer believed the lie or could felt the urgency to go public with allegations. “We couldn’t even really tell some of these stories,” Bell says. “There’s times when [accusers] don’t hear from him for months or longer, and then suddenly he pops back up. So for someone like yourself or someone like me who’s not studying all these cases and just sort of reading the headlines – even if you think it’s wrong and you believe all the women, you can sort of file it as 60 one-night stands that turned into rape. And that’s bad. But it’s different than when you talk to these women and you find out that this went on over the course of years.” Still: there are some things in We Need to Talk About Cosby that, well, aren’t talked about. It glosses over the funnyman’s upbringing, which was a good deal rougher than his comedy made it seem (as Michael Eric Dyson keenly observed in his thorough Cosby biography). And at points the docuseries strains to capture the demon in his art, as if a room full of guild members didn’t write a massive chunk of his material. Worse, the doc skips quickly past the fact that Cosby was never found criminally responsible for any allegation – an uncomfortable conversation well worth having. Cosby only ended up in prison because of his testimony in a civil case was unsealed. That’s why Pennsylvania’s supreme court ultimately chose to vacate his conviction. Bell cites Ezra Edelman’s Oscar-winning OJ: Made in America and dream hampton’s influential Surviving R Kelly docuseries as inspirations. His film slots somewhere in the middle. It isn’t critical race theory or advocacy journalism, but one lifelong fan’s futile attempt to reckon with the unreckonable – how a childhood hero comes to be remembered as a monster. By the end of We Need to Talk About Cosby, you’re left sighing even more heavily than the experts were at the beginning – as much for what Cosby supposedly did as for the cultural legacy that’s definitely done and dusted. We Need to Talk About Cosby starts on Showtime on 30 January with a UK date to be announcedWith that, we will wrap up the blog today. Here were today’s major developments. Congratulations to the Australians who celebrated their citizenship today. Invasion Day protestors gathered in the thousands across the nation on the 50th year of advocacy at the Aboriginal Tent Embassy. A Guardian Essential poll found more Australians are in support of changing the date of Australia Day. Renewed calls have been made for the implementation of the Uluru Statement of the Heart and a voice to parliament to provide greater representation and self determination of First Nations peoples. Scott Morrison used his speech at an Australia Day ceremony in Canberra to honour Australia’s freedoms and diversity as a nation. It came as Dylan Alcott spent his first day as Australian of the Year, a platform he has so far used to campaign for greater prioritisation of the NDIS and free rapid antigen tests for the disabled community. The body of a missing Launceston swimmer was discovered by police this afternoon. The woman in her 20s disappeared while swimming in a gorge yesterday. In pandemic news, Victoria recorded 35 Covid deaths and 13,507 new cases as the Australian Open capacity limit was increased to 65%, while NSW surpassed 1 million Covid cases since the pandemic began as well as reporting 29 deaths. Queensland recorded another nine deaths since reopening borders, while Tasmania recorded another Covid death and 712 new cases. The ACT recorded 896 new Covid cases and no deaths, and SA recorded 13 deaths and 2,401 cases. A Northern Territory council has called for an urgent lockdown of remote Indigenous communities to save lives amid the “out-of-control” spread of Covid-19. And WA recorded 24 new Covid cases including a mystery case. Before we wrap up the blog for the evening, it is worth watching former journalist Kerry O’Brien’s speech at this year’s Sunrise Ceremony. Minister for foreign affairs, Marise Payne, minister for defence, Peter Dutton, and minister for international development and the Pacific, Zed Seselja, have issued a joint media release on further humanitarian support for Tonga. The HMAS Adelaide arrived in Tonga today with humanitarian and medical supplies, engineering equipment and helicopters following the volcano and tsunami on 15 January. Before its arrival, it was confirmed more than 20 people on the ship had tested positive to Covid-19. The commonwealth will provide an additional $2m in humanitarian funding for the “next phase” of Tonga’s recovery, bringing the humanitarian commitment to $3m. New Zealand has also committed to $3m in funding. We appreciate the decision of the Government of Tonga to enable HMAS Adelaide to dock and offload the humanitarian and medical supplies, and the high priority it has placed on Covid safety throughout the recovery process. Australia continues to take every precaution and are delivering our assistance to our partners in accordance with the Covid-safe practices that we have put in place with the government of Tonga. The ship is undertaking an entirely contactless delivery of humanitarian assistance and disaster relief supplies. Labor is demanding disclosure of Covid-19 vaccination data for young Indigenous children as the overall First Nations jab rate lags by nearly 20%, AAP reports. About 75% of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders aged 16 and older are double-dosed, compared with more than 93% of Australia’s overall 16-plus population. Labor’s Indigenous Australians spokeswoman Linda Burney will use the resumption of federal parliament in February to demand transparency about first doses for under-12s as well as a breakdown of adult booster rates: The government should be reporting Indigeneity in the five-to-11 group, it doesn’t make any sense that they’re not. We need to know what the vaccination rates are for our very young people. And it’s just remarkable to me and to many Aboriginal people that those those rates are not being reported. Federal data shows about 33% of all Australian children between the ages of five and 11 have received a first dose. Nearly 76% of the overall 12-to-15 age cohort is double-dosed. In comparison, about 64% of Indigenous children aged between 12 and 15 have received at least one dose. More than 7 million adults have received a third dose, but the federal government’s daily vaccination tally does not show a breakdown for Indigenous people. Sad news coming out of Tasmania. The body of a female in her 20s who went missing while swimming at Cataract Gorge yesterday has been recovered by police divers. Momentum continues to build for the date of Australia Day to change, with numerous clubs from around the country sending out strong statements about the pain and hurt that is caused by celebrating 26 January, AAP reports. January 26 marks the 1788 landing of the First Fleet at Sydney Cove and the raising of the Union Flag by Arthur Phillip. For many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders peoples, it represents Invasion Day. Almost every single AFL club took to Twitter to acknowledge the pain and distress that 26 January represents, and the need for unity. The AFL Players Association Tweeted a moving graphic that summed up the sentiment: For many First Nations Peoples, this day represents the beginning of colonial violence, dispossession of land, destruction of culture, separation of families and brutal massacres across the country. This day is referred to by many as Invasion Day, Survival Day, and Day of Mourning. Brisbane utility Callum Ah Chee hopes Australia Day will find a new date: All Indigenous people want to celebrate this great country, but we want to do it together. If we could celebrate on another day, we want to be part of that. Cricket Australia caused a stir last year when they dropped the term “Australia Day” for matches played on 26 January. They have gone one step further this year by allowing staff to work on 26 January and then take a day off on a different date. The NBL sent out a statement acknowledging the pain that January 26 brings about for many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples: In order to move forward in this country, we must acknowledge and understand our past. On today, and all days, we stand with those communities who have been affected by the wrongs of Australia’s past. NRL outfit South Sydney Rabbitohs took to social media to acknowledge the pain and suffering that January 26 represents. Today, the Rabbitohs join in acknowledging the many and varied cultures that make up our modern Australian nation. At the same time, we pay special tribute to our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander brothers and sisters and honour them as custodians of the oldest living culture on the planet. In the NT, wild weather did not dim Survival Day gatherings: It is also India’s 73rd Republic Day today, marking the date on which the nation’s constitution came into effect on 26 January 1950. Which reminds me of one of my favourite Tweets of all time: Amid raging storms, an extreme heat warning has been issued for Melbourne and other parts of central Victoria tomorrow. Temperatures are tipped to reach up to 37C in the city, as the Victorian health department advises residents to stay hydrated, keep cool and, if travelling outdoors, to wear a hat and sunscreen and take a fitted face mask and bottle of water. Speaking of wild weather in the state, a severe thunderstorm warning for heavy rainfall that may lead to flash flooding and damaging winds has been extended to the Alpine area. And, in South Australia, thunder is on the way, if it hasn’t arrived already: Check out this picture of regional Victoria’s Ararat: The WugulOra morning ceremony was first held in Sydney’s Royal Botanic Garden in 2003, when it was known as Woggan-ma-gule. It was renamed WugulOra, meaning “one mob”, and moved to the Sydney Opera House northern boardwalk in 2013. Since 2016 it has been held at Barangaroo Reserve. For those who missed it, here’s a look at this year’s ceremony. NSW has surpassed 1 million coronavirus cases as a leading health expert warns Covid-19 infections could spread widely during Australia Day events, AAP reports. The state recorded another 21,030 new Covid-19 infections today, marking the seven-digit figure two years after the first case was recorded in Australia. While thousands gathered across the nation for Invasion Day marches, a top health expert advised people to wear masks and maintain social distancing. Chair of the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness and former health department head Jane Halton encouraged people to remain vigilant at events to avoid another spike in cases. We know it’s highly infectious and the closer everyone gets together, the more the likelihood you’ll be close to someone whose got Covid and therefore the greater the likelihood you’ll contract it. People should be careful. What we don’t want to see is a big increase in cases. Halton said case numbers were coming down and it appeared as if Australia had come off the peak of the outbreak, but this could be jeopardised by large gatherings on the public holiday. She stopped short of suggesting events should be cancelled, instead encouraging people to wear masks, maintain social distance and remain cautious. Here is a good breakdown of the vaccination status of hospitalisations and deaths due to Covid-19 in Victoria. People who had received a third vaccination make up just 6% of hospitalisations and ICU numbers in the state, while unvaccinated patients are vastly over-represented. The Northern Territory has reported another 492 Covid-19 infections as health minister Natasha Fyles resists calls for a seven-day lockdown in vulnerable parts of Central Australia. Lockdowns are currently in place for a handful of remote communities, while lockouts are in place in some others including Alice Springs. There are 84 people being treated in hospital. Fyles: We’ve got a strong testing regime. We certainly have got a really good supply of those all-important rapid antigen tests. They’re available to the community. We need people to come forward. It is difficult – a number of people will be asymptomatic, they won’t feel unwell, and their Covid is potentially picked up when other people test positive. So we just need Territorians to be really conscious of their health and even the slightest headache or sore throat or any of those symptoms – just isolate and get yourself a test, please. But we’re confident in the public health measures that we’ve got in place. We do have the lockout in place. And we believe that they’re proportionate and they’re following the health advice from our officials. A fire in Mount Gambier has been contained: Here is an excerpt from NSW premier Dominic Perrottet’s speech at WugulOra: WugulOra, as we know, means “One Mob”. And that captures the heart and the spirit of what Australia must be about in 2022. As we rise to the challenges and the opportunities that face our nation in the short term and in the future. “One Mob”, one people, unity...now, this may not yet be a reality, but it must be our goal. And I do believe that the tide is turning. And for a new generation, unity is within reach. But that begins by acknowledging the truth of our past. Acknowledging that this day represents enormous loss and hurt for many First Nations people, and honouring a culture which continues unbroken today, rich and...precious and proud. A living culture which can be at the heart of our culture, now and into the future. So let’s do it. Let’s make it happen, not just with words but with action. Not just the next generation but for ours. Over the past two years, the difficult times of the pandemic, we have seen what our country can do when we all work together. And on this Australia Day we need to be more determined than ever to create change that makes a real difference, that closes the gap and honours the dignity of every Indigenous Australian, past, present and future. We can do it. We must do it. And we will do it if we work together as one mob. WugulOra. Back to 26 January coverage, and councillor Yvonne Weldon, deputy chairperson of the Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Lands Council, made a moving speech earlier today at the NSW WugulOra Morning Ceremony: On this day, 234 years ago, my people continued to live on this land as they had for thousands of generations. On these same waterways that Barangaroo fished, there were changes that came to my people, not peaceful changes, not settled, and not invited. What took place was genocide, irreversible trauma. Poisons, not just in our waterholes but others had in their hands, that later became placed in ours. The trauma and the introductions of new ways of living hasn’t been healthy for all ... despite these traumas and shifts in our way of living, we are still here, still practising, still inclusive. Our traditions are varied in our diversity, across our lands. Our dance, our ceremony, and our welcomes, that continuous link of life, lessons, purpose, and nurturing supplies. Honouring our ancestors’ footsteps, we are all walking in, and those prints we are making to become our own ancestors in time. Continuing the practice of the many generations before us, to many generations to come. The landscapes of this country tell our stories, through our culture, our history, and our boundaries ... my people are the oldest living culture of the world. It is important to remember and acknowledge the massacres that took place, all those people that aren’t remembered by name but are mourned in our souls. The injustices that continue and the unsung heroes, our warriors, that has taken place and what needs to be owned. We all need to change the way we treat each other. Don’t judge on what you think you know, but get to know what you don’t. The cruelty and inhumane treatment to my people needs to be acknowledged. Not out of a guilt, but to right the wrongs of the past, not to continue to be in our present. If we don’t, we will never truly create an all embracing future. We have more details coming in on the 24 new Covid-19 cases detected in Western Australia overnight. It’s a jump of 14 cases detected yesterday. Nine of today’s cases were from the regional area of Bunbury, bringing the cluster to 16. The remaining 15 cases were from Perth, including a mystery case that is yet to be linked to a known outbreak. Premier Mark McGowan said as of 9am today, 90% of Western Australians aged above 12 were double-dose vaccinated: It’s a remarkable achievement – which many thought Western Australians could never achieve. I would like to thank each and every person who turned out to get vaccinated over the past year – to protect themselves and their loved ones from this dangerous virus. With Omicron continuing to spread in the WA community, it’s even more vital Western Australians roll up for their third Covid-19 vaccination dose ... already, WA has a third dose vaccination rate of more than 31% – and pleasingly that number is growing rapidly every single day. The Shire of Cunderdin posted on Facebook last night that a community member had tested positive to Covid-19, leading to the cancellation of Australia Day events: The Shire of Cunderdin has been made aware that a community member from Cunderdin has tested positive for Covid-19. The close contacts of that person have been identified and have been notified by WA Health to isolate and get tested. In the best interest of the health and safety of the community the Shire has made the very difficult decision to cancel the Australia Day Breakfast and the Australia Day Pool party which was planned at the Cunderdin Memorial Pool. South Australia’s Covid-19 case numbers are in – and there have been 2,401 detected overnight – a fair jump from yesterday’s figure of 1,869. Sadly, there have been 13 deaths including seven in the past 24 hours. It is the deadliest day of the pandemic in the state so far. There are 288 people being treated in hospital, including 26 in intensive care and four requiring ventilation. In Victoria, on the land of the Kulin nation: As Australians celebrate their newfound citizenship around the nation today, many prospective citizens remain waiting. The average processing time for citizenship by conferral was 13 months from date of application to the decision, a spokesperson for the Department of Home Affairs said. The latest departmental figures show some of these applications take two or more years, with 90% of applications processed within 24 months. Invasion Day protests are being held across Australia, with large crowds gathering in Sydney, Brisbane, Canberra and other cities. Several hundred protesters gathered on the lawns outside Parliament House in Canberra, met by a large police contingent. Stalls and speech tents were also set up at the nearby Aboriginal Tent Embassy, which marks 50 years of activism today. Helicopters displaying the Australian flag and a low military flyover contrasted with a seas of shirts displaying the Aboriginal flag and statements of Indigenous sovereignty. In Sydney, thousands of Invasion Day protesters marched through the city, while a large number braved the rain in Brisbane with signs bearing “Change the date” and “Always ways, always will be”. In Melbourne, statues of Captain James Cook were smeared with red paint. A group claiming empathy for the protest action said Captain Cook had begun an era of “racism and misogynist violence”: We are among the many thousands of voices calling for truth telling about the Frontier Wars so that the work of healing can begin. We cannot change the past but we can change which parts of our shared history we celebrate. We can and will change our future. – with AAP The parent company of the firm that runs Australia’s offshore processing regime on Nauru has failed to lodge financial reports with the corporate regulator on time, in an apparent breach of corporations law. The Australian Securities and Investments Commission has confirmed that it has registered a “report of misconduct” against Rard No 3, the Brisbane-based company that wholly owns Canstruct International, following the Guardian’s inquiries. The potential penalty for filing a report late is a fine of more than $25,000. Canstruct International has earned $1.82bn since 2017 running Australia’s sole offshore processing operation on the Pacific island. Its contract to provide “garrison and welfare services” for a little over 100 refugees and asylum seekers held on the island was extended last week – its eighth noncompetitive extension – for another six months, for $218.5m. Severe thunderstorm warnings are now in place for parts of South Australia, Victoria and Queensland. Meanwhile, more than 16,000 new citizens will be conferred today across 400 ceremonies nationwide. Here are some new Australian citizens pictured alongside pleased politicians: We should be hearing from WA premier Mark McGowan in the next half an hour. I would like one ticket to the Enchanted Forest of Protection please. I hope to bring you more information soon, but Nine News is reporting Western Australia has recorded 24 new Covid-19 cases today, a slight jump from the past few days. Yugambeh Country: The annual Sunrise Ceremony kicked off on the Gold Coast earlier today with speeches from Professor Chelsea Watego, Thomas Mayor, Rhoda Roberts, Erfan Daliri, Kerry O’Brien, Patrick ‘Mau Power’ Mau, Nyadol Nyuon and Azmeena Hussain. Russia’s ambassador in Australia says the country’s decision to withdraw diplomatic staff from its embassy in Ukraine “would be funny if it wasn’t so sad”, AAP’s Dominic Giannini reports. Aleksey Pavlovsky has talked down fears of an invasion of Ukraine, saying there is no intention to go to war as 100,000 troops amass on the border. He told the ABC: We should use our critical thinking. Isn’t it a funny way to prepare an invasion by just gathering troops on the border and let them sit there for months. When you prepare an invasion you just do it promptly. These troops are not a threat, they are a warning to Ukraine’s rulers not to attempt any reckless military adventures. Pavlovsky said large-scale military exercises are conducted regularly because Russia has to maintain its preparedness. The Russian ambassador also criticised Australia’s decision to issue a do not travel declaration for Ukraine and for its call for citizens in the country to leave, as well as talking down the impact of sanctions – which have been threatened by western nations including Australia – saying they don’t work. Tensions in Ukraine have been increasing for months, with the west accusing the Kremlin of preparing for war to prevent Ukraine joining NATO. There are concerns Russia is conducting a cyber offensive, having been blamed earlier this month for defacing Ukrainian government websites and infecting computers with destructive malware . Home affairs minister Karen Andrews said Russia posed a risk in terms of cyber security. She told 4BC radio: What we have become aware of – as has the rest of the world – is that in recent times there’s been some activity in the Ukraine, potentially by Russia. We will be doing all that we can to look at what the source of these attacks are, how they can be remedied, how we can use that information to support potentially the Ukraine. Foreign minister Marise Payne has reiterated support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, calling for Russia to de-escalate the situation along the eastern European border. But former US representative to NATO and US special representative for Ukraine negotiations Kurt Volker said Russia’s presence at crisis talks in France was simply it “going through the motions of engaging in diplomatic activity”, with a possible invasion still imminent. Ngunnawal country – the march to the Tent Embassy in Canberra. Gadigal Country: A sense of the crowd gathered in the Sydney CBD. Still in Victoria: If you haven’t gotten to it yet, Lorena Allam and Juno Gemes’s feature on the 50th anniversary of the Aboriginal Tent Embassy is a beautiful read. It begins: In the middle of the night, four young Aboriginal men pitched a beach umbrella on the lawns opposite Parliament House and sat down. When dawn broke on 26 January 1972, a police officer came over to ask how long they intended to stay. “Until we get land rights,” one of the four, Billy Craigie, told the officer. Commissioner Gibson apparently laughed and said, “that might be a long time”. Craigie replied: “Well, we’ll be here a long time then.” Read the full story here: There is a severe thunderstorm warning in place for parts of Victoria, as well as minor flooding possible at Booligal, Collerina, Goodwins and Hay in New South Wales. More footage of the significant crowds on Gadigal land in Sydney: In Victoria, Covid-19 commander Jeroen Weimar is speaking in Frankston. He said 35 Covid deaths were recorded on Wednesday, the highest single daily figure in some time. Today I’m afraid is a significant day. We’ve now reported 35 deaths in the last 24 hours, those have been taken over a number of days in the preceding period but that’s the highest single day number that we’ve reported in the entire pandemic, and our thoughts and condolences are with all our families and friends of those 35 Victorians who have passed away with Covid in the last few days. It is again a somber milestone that we should all reflect on. Weimar did not have further details on the age or vaccination status of those who died. Victoria recorded 59 Covid fatalities on 4 September 2020, the highest number of the pandemic, although the majority of the deaths were from previous months. Many thanks as always to Matilda Boseley. I’ll be with you for the rest of the afternoon. With that, I shall hand you over to Caitlin Cassidy to take you through the rest of the day’s news. Hema Henry has been working as a registered nurse in western NSW for five years and today became an Australian citizen. “I wanted to experience life in regional Australia. I really love it, I love the quietness and the people are very welcoming, friendly and open,” Henry said. Henry participated in a cultural smoking ceremony led by Wiradjuri elder Ralph Naden, which is the first time the ceremony has been part of Australia Day celebrations in Gilgandra. Kylie Louie, a Wiradjuri woman who won a sports achievement award at the ceremony for her contribution to the local Pink Panthers club, said it was her first time ever participating in an Indigenous smoking ceremony. “It cleansed the mind and I could feel it straight away,” Louie said. “I’ll always remember who I am and where I come from and recognise my culture which I love.” In case you missed it, here are the official Covid-19 numbers for Queensland today. The Brisbane Lions AFL team has come out in support of changing the date of Australia Day, with posts across social media reading: “Jan 26: Not a day to celebrate”. People have been asked to avoid a popular swimming spot in northern Tasmania as the search for a missing woman enters a second day, AAP reports. The woman, aged in her 20s, who was swimming with friends and family at Cataract Gorge in Launceston, was reported missing around 1pm on Tuesday. Police divers, members of Surf Life Saving Australia and other community organisations continued search efforts on Wednesday morning. The woman was last seen swimming in an area of the gorge known as First Basin, which is 20 metres deep. Parts of the basin will be closed for periods of the day due to the search. “People are asked to avoid the area while the search is underway,” Tasmania Police said in a statement. More than 30 people, including SES volunteers, were involved in the search on Tuesday. The crowds are now on the move at Sydney’s Invasion Day protest, marching down Elizabeth Street. Guardian Australia’s Blake Sharp-Wiggins is there, bring us all the updates. Australians could be warming to the idea of changing the date of Australia Day to recognise Indigenous peoples, or keeping 26 January but establishing a separate day for that purpose, according to the Guardian Essential poll. The latest survey of 1,028 voters finds 57% of respondents would either support changing the day or keeping the traditional date with another day to better acknowledge and respect the continuous occupation of First Nations people – which is a four-point shift from attitudes in 2021. Australia Day is controversial because 26 January marks the day the first fleet arrived in Sydney cove in 1788 – beginning the process of Indigenous dispossession. As well as evolving community attitudes about the date, the latest Guardian Essential poll suggests a shift in mindset about the current lived reality for Indigenous Australians. You can read the full report below: The ACT has recorded 896 new Covid cases. A man who was arrested at the Australian Open has been released pending further inquiry, as police investigate assaults on staff at the event, AAP reports. Earlier on Wednesday, Victoria police alleged a woman had been sexually assaulted at Rod Laver Arena just before midnight on Tuesday. However, police have since changed their statement and no longer believe the sexual assault took place. “Our information on the incidents at the tennis has changed,” a police spokesman said. Reports of “assaults on staff members” at the venue are still being investigated. A 37-year-old man was arrested and has been released pending further enquiries and the investigation is ongoing. A Northern Territory council has called for an urgent lockdown of remote Indigenous communities to save lives amid the “out-of-control” spread of Covid-19. The Central Land Council says the NT and federal governments must collaborate on enforcing a lockdown until the situation is under control, AAP reports. “We need a circuit breaker to slow down the out-of-control spread of the virus in our communities,” chief executive Les Turner said in a statement. We all use the same hospitals and will be very much in it together when they become overwhelmed. Turner said the lockdown should include police and Australian Defence Force personnel staffing roadblocks to restrict movement between communities and into regional centres. The NT reported 517 new Covid-19 cases on Tuesday as the virus continues to spread through Indigenous communities. Turner said a number of super-spreader events had contributed to the explosion of positive cases, but that Aboriginal people were taking action. Many of our constituents are now delaying funerals to slow the spread of Covid … Our people and their organisations are doing their bit. They now need both governments to stop burying their heads in the sand, face facts and back them. Vaccination rates among Perth’s growing homeless community may be as low as 45%, according to comprehensive data collected by one service provider, raising fears the vulnerable cohort will be caught in a “perfect storm” when Western Australia does open its borders. The premier, Mark McGowan, announced last week the state would delay plans to lift the hard border on 5 February, a decision that sparked anger among some residents but was also greeted with relief by others, including some homelessness advocates. While WA avoided a crisis of Covid deaths, homelessness became a hot-button issue amid a spate of rough sleepers dying on the streets of Perth. Real-time data collected by Shelter WA says there are now about 500 people sleeping rough in Perth, and about 1,000 people experiencing homelessness overall. You can read the full report below: From the Aboriginal Tent Embassy in the capital: Here are the latest Covid-19 numbers from around Australia today, as the country records at least 74 deaths from the virus: Victoria Deaths: 35 Cases: 13,507 Hospitalisations: 1,089 (with 113 in ICU) NSW Deaths: 29 Cases: 21,030 Hospitalisations: 2,794 (with 175 in ICU) Queensland Deaths: 9 Cases: 13,551 Hospitalisations: 889 (with 47 in ICU) Tasmania Deaths: 1 Cases: 712 Hospitalisations: 28 (with 2 in ICU) ACT Deaths: 0 Cases: 896 Hospitalisations: 67 (with 5 in ICU) SA Deaths: 13 Cases: 2,401 Hospitalisations: 288 (with 26 in ICU) NT Deaths: 0 Cases: 492 Hospitalisations: 84 WA Deaths: 0 Cases: 24 Hospitalisations: 0 NT Deaths: 0 Cases: 492 Hospitalisations: 84 Many Aboriginal activists say that 26 January is not a day to celebrate, but instead a day to start “paying the rent” – by supporting and donating to the needs of First Nations people. Laura Murphy-Oates speaks to Greens senator Lidia Thorpe and First Nations author Veronica Gorrie about the history of this movement, and how to “pay the rent” this Invasion Day You can listen below: Capacity limits for the Australian Open will be increased from 50% to 65% in Melbourne, the Victorian sports minister has confirmed. We will be getting an update on the Victorian Covid-19 situation at midday AEDT. The crowd has really started to grow at the Sydney Town Hall for the city’s Invasion Day protest. The new owner of Scott Morrison’s WeChat account has expressed disbelief that it had been entrusted to an individual in China – and is now considering shutting it down amid a growing political storm. Earlier this month, subscribers to the Australian prime minister’s official WeChat profile were notified the account had been sold to the Fuzhou 985 Information Technology Co Ltd and had been renamed “Australian Chinese New Life”. The account’s new owners have not yet posted any content, despite claims by a News Corp tabloid that it had been “rebranded as a pro-Beijing propaganda outfit”. You can read the full report from Donna Lu and Daniel Hurst below: Here is the governor general David Hurley speaking at the Australia Day citizenship ceremony in Canberra: Yes, I know there are challenges, I see them every day. I know there are tough days. We’ve wept with people, we’ve comforted people, but we are at heart a good people. Not afraid of hard work, we’re creative, we’re innovative, and we can take on anything. We’re the product of our past, and the sum of each of our individual stories, and you, our newest citizens, add to that rich mix and add to our story with your own. That, I believe is worth celebrating here on Australia Day. A woman aged in her 80s has died after being diagnosed with Covid-19 in Tasmania as the state records another 712 cases. Hospitalisation numbers in the state now sit at 28, with two in the ICU. I said I was just confirming Queensland’s total case numbers for today. It is 13,551, an increase of around 4,000 from yesterday. Scott Morrison has read out a poem about Australia written by his daughter Lily. “I could not express my love for this country better than the young girl who wrote this verse. And I’d like to conclude by sharing her thoughts with you. It’s called my land Australia,” he says, before reading the poem: Land of everything, sapphire sea and dark sparkling nights. Everything is one. Everything is sun. I can feel a million rejoices, can hear a million voices. My land called Australia. My heart soiled in loving grace. My cherished home filled with love and ancient dreaming. The high mountain ranges in between my gazes with the outback on the horizon we can see new beginnings. Trying to get away from the blue bottles. Lightning is cracking and as we watch cattle and rams go rotten with drought and flood, we can always come together. We have a bronzing bond. Through fire, famine, flood and pandemics, it’s going, going, going. We will never tire out. We’ll keep our flags up and let it fly, fly, fly. Australia, my land, my country of hardship, my country of grace, my country of stars. Don’t care how much you try to persuade me, give me books, money and lovely birch trees. Nothing can take my love from this land. Nothing can take the smile off my face when we get a sunburn and lie for a bit. My friends and family can ride together down to the river, beach or bay, we can sit and reminisce about the ... sun’s rays. Yes, of course you can do that anywhere, but can you see the drop bears there? That poem was written by my daughter, Lily Morrison. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, is standing up now at the citizenship ceremony in Canberra. Let’s have a listen in. Like the country itself, Australia’s Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples are diverse, they’re unique and they connect us through time. And here in our capital, home of the Ngunnawal people, the home of a free, democratic people, the most successful multicultural and multi-faith nation on earth. We also honour the men and women past and present who secured and now protect our freedoms by serving in the Australian defence forces. And we acknowledge them, those who have pledged themselves to duty, service and sacrifice, and we say to them thank you for your service. And there are many others who are wearing uniforms, serving on the front lines of the pandemic – our health workers, those who are working in emergency services and manning Covid clinics, those indeed from the St John’s Ambulance and many other places doing what they do every day. Back in Canberra, the chair of the Australia Day council, Danielle Roche, is speaking now. Australia Day is a day to reflect, respect and celebrate. The story of Australia is a great story. It’s one that began thousands of generations ago and continues to this day. On this day, we reflect on what it means to be welcomed to country, the honour, privilege, and responsibility that comes with being invited to carry forward a legacy of 65,000 years of continuous culture, and respect for the country. We all have an important role to play in the story of Australia. Queensland chief health officer Dr John Gerrard has confirmed that another nine people with Covid-19 have died in the state. I’m just trying to confirm the total case number for the day. Hospitalisation numbers have dropped to 889 from 928, with just 47 now in the ICU in the state. Gerrard has credited much of this drop to the Gold Coast now passing the peak of the pandemic. The prime minister and governor general are now arriving at the official Australia Day ceremony in Canberra. I’ll bring you updates when the speeches start. Obviously, today has already been a significantly deadly day in terms of the Covid death toll, but let’s have a closer look at the hospitalisation numbers as well. Victoria’s total hospitalisation number has risen by 35 to 1,071, with ICU number going down by six, now sitting at 113. In NSW their hospital total has gone down by 149 to 2,794, with their ICU numbers now sitting at 175 (down 8 from yesterday). Victoria has recorded 13,507 new Covid cases and sadly 35 more deaths. New South Wales has recorded 21,030 new Covid cases and 29 more deaths. Newly minted Australia of the Year Dylan Alcott has been speaking with ABC News Breakfast this morning about what the title means to him. Oh ... I’ve got to stop talking about it because I get a bit emotional about it. Because I hated myself so much growing up. I just didn’t want to be here anymore, to be honest. I hated my disability and you know because of my family and people with disability that came before me, breaking glass ceilings so I can be who I am, athletes like Kurt Fearnley, Louise Sauvage, advocates like Stella Young, in a tougher time they changed everything. And I saw that and I’m so proud of my disability. I love it so much and to be named Australian of the Year and to get it for not just being good at tennis, but for the work off the court. My purpose 10 years ago, yesterday, today and as Australian of the Year has never changed. It’s not to win tennis tournaments, it’s to change perceptions to [allow] people with disability to live the lives they deserve to live. To be given that honour, to hold that platform, to be able to do that, it’s huge. And I’m just so grateful and thankful and it’s unbelievable. I don’t know what to say. Those in the central district of Victoria have been warned to prepare for extreme heat today. Here is Amy Remeikis talking about how uncomfortable Australia really still is with seeing an angry woman. She discusses the shock many felt last year (when the conversation about the culture of sexual assault and harraments in politics really started) after prime minister Scott Morrison said his wife Jenny told him to consider what he would want for their daughters if they were in Brittany Higgins’s position. I couldn’t believe what I was hearing because I really hoped that Australia is better than what we were seeing from our nation’s leaders. And it was a slap in the face to see that, no, we’re not. I was struck down and then the rage came pretty quickly and has probably been flowing ever since then. But rage and anger can be useful. We’re just not used to seeing angry women. Rage is a term with negative connotations, especially gendered ones. Really, you know, women who are angry have been called an ‘angry woman’ many times, ‘she’s so rude’, ‘she’s so angry’. But it can help with coming to terms with what has happened and actually empowering women. Guardian Australia’s fantastic Amy Remeikis is speaking to ABC radio about the strange outcry following 2021 Australian of the Year Grace Tame’s refusal to smile when meeting with prime minister Scott Morrison at the lodge yesterday. I’ll bring you some quotes as soon as I can, but for now have a listen in on what she had to say on The Project last night. Cast members of the Netflix reality series Byron Baes have posted videos to social media of people dancing to live music at a crowded Byron Bay venue in apparent contravention of New South Wales Covid measures. Two of the show’s other stars have posted videos in the days after receiving positive Covid tests that appear to show them out in public. Covid case numbers in the northern NSW health district have exploded since December, and staff at hospitals serving the Byron Bay area have reported they are under “extreme strain”. On 10 January, two days after the NSW government reintroduced a ban on singing and dancing in hospitality venues, at least three cast members of the reality TV show about social influencers in the Byron Bay area – scheduled for broadcast later this year – were tagged in Instagram videos filmed at the night spot Casa Luna at a birthday party for one of the show’s stars, Hannah Brauer. You can read the full report below: A leading health expert has warned of the potential spread of the virulent Omicron Covid-19 strain during events today as large crowds gather for protest or celebration, AAP reports. Jane Halton, chair of the coalition for epidemic preparedness and former health department head, says the closer people pack together the more likely it is the virus will spread. We know it’s highly infectious and the closer everyone gets together, the more the likelihood you’ll be close to someone whose got Covid and therefore the greater the likelihood you’ll contract it. People should be careful. What we don’t want to see is a big increase in cases. Halton said case numbers were coming down and it appeared as if Australia has come off the peak of the outbreak, but this could be jeopardised by large gatherings on the public holiday. She stopped short of suggesting events should be cancelled, instead encouraging people to wear masks, maintain social distance and remain cautious. I don’t think we should be cancelling things. I just think people should be courteous, thoughtful, and a little bit careful. An aged care provider says it has “no faith” in the commonwealth’s supply of rapid tests after deliveries failed to show for almost three weeks after a Covid outbreak, forcing it to withhold them from essential visitors and scramble unsuccessfully to procure its own. The government has repeatedly said it is prioritising its stocks of rapid tests to aged care facilities experiencing outbreaks. But the supply at St Basil’s Homes in South Australia, which runs three facilities in the state, is so precarious that the provider wrote to residents and their families last week, outlining its serious concerns about government supply and warning the tests were “like liquid gold”. The letter, seen by the Guardian, told families they would need to find their own tests or be barred entry. It also said the provider would be attempting to buy its own tests, which could then be purchased by visitors at cost price. You can read the full report below: The aged care and sport minister, Richard Colbeck, attended the Ashes cricket on the same day he declined to appear at the Covid-19 committee citing officials’ “urgent and critical” work combating Omicron. You can read the full story on that from Paul Karp below: But for now, let’s have a listen in to what the chair of that committee, shadow finance minister Katy Gallagher, had to say about the situation. [Colbeck] refused to attend at any point on the fifth day on the 14th of January. So we had a hearing scheduled, it went into the afternoon, there was no offer to attend at any point, whether it was a day/night match or whatever. He refused to attend and said that by attending we divert resources and attention away from dealing with the crisis, and then he attended the cricket for three days. So I just think people in aged care who are living through this crisis loved ones people who are Covid positive, workers who are Covid positive would find that a bit hard to stomach while the system is in crisis, you know, shortage of rep testing, shortage of PPE and 40% of the system in lockdown during that week, that this was the appropriate response. Here is a telling exchange with the Russian ambassador to Australia, Aleksey Pavlovsky, when speaking to ABC radio: Sanctions don’t work when applied to Russia. Host Patricia Karvelas: So you’re saying nothing Australia could do will have any impact? Pavlovsky: I said what I said. The Russian ambassador to Australia, Aleksey Pavlovsky: Isn’t it a funny way to prepare an invasion? Just gather troops on the border and let them sit there for months. When you prepare an invasion, you just do it promptly. The Russian ambassador to Australia, Aleksey Pavlovsky, has told ABC radio that Russia has no intention to invade Ukraine. We don’t intend to invade at all. It’s very regrettable that the situation is portrayed the other way here and by our Western partners. As to the sanctions, by now everybody should understand the language which should be used when talking to Russia. The sanctions just don’t work. These troops are not a threat, they are a warning. A warning to Ukraine’s rulers not to attempt a reckless military adventure. Red paint has been poured over a statue of Captain Cook in Melbourne’s St Kilda as part of Invasion Day protests. In the middle of the night, four young Aboriginal men pitched a beach umbrella on the lawns opposite Parliament House and sat down. When dawn broke on 26 January 1972, a police officer came over to ask how long they intended to stay. “Until we get land rights,” one of the four, Billy Craigie, told the officer. Commissioner Gibson apparently laughed and said, “that might be a long time”. Craigie replied: “Well, we’ll be here a long time then.” It’s 50 years today since the Aboriginal tent embassy was born from that act of defiance. And its demands remain current. You can read the full story from Lorena Allam and Juno Gemes below: In Covid news, NSW is expected to report its one-millionth infection of the pandemic today. Half of those cases were added in the last two weeks and more than 90% of them in the last two months. On Tuesday, NSW premier Dominic Perrottet announced that reintroduced restrictions for mask use, hospitality density limits and bans on singing and dancing – due to end on Thursday – would be extended until the end of February in a bid to suppress the spread of Omicron as children return to school, AAP reports. He said extending restrictions to February 28 was “the right approach” as it would suppress the spread of Omicron ahead of increased movement once schools return next week, he said. It’s better to have the two-square-metre rule than no square-metre rules and not having the confidence in the community to go out to restaurants and bars. Under the continuing restrictions, hospitality venues including pubs, nightclubs and cafes will keep an indoor density limit, masks are required in all indoor settings except homes and QR code check-ins are compulsory at certain premises, including hospitality venues and shops. Good morning everyone, it’s Matilda Boseley here today, and wow there is a lot to talk about already. Australian tennis star Dylan Alcott is the 2022 Australian of the Year, being awarded the title the same day as advancing to another Australian Open wheelchair final. But, he said in his speech, “winning grand slams and gold medals isn’t [his] purpose”. It’s like the 30th priority of my life. My purpose is changing perceptions so people with people like me can get out there and live the lives they deserve to live. We have to have greater representation of people with a disability absolutely everywhere. In our boardrooms, in our parliaments, in our mainstream schools, on our dating apps, on our sporting fields, in our universities, absolutely everywhere. He also used his platform to advocate for free rapid antigen tests for people with disabilities, after the federal government announced they could be purchased through people’s NDIS funds. Of course, the changing of the Australian of the Year mantel means today is 26 January, and Invasion Day protesters plan to gather at Canberra’s Aboriginal Tent Embassy – which marks 50 years of advocacy – before an expected march to Parliament House. Ngambri-Ngunnawal elder Matilda House Williams told AAP the struggle was ongoing. Just because 50 years have gone by, the struggle of maintaining rights, for land rights and all those other inequalities is still there. [The government] say all these wonderful things but we still have the struggle of carrying on, of still not having the things other people have in this country have. I will bring you all the updates on these protests and other events, rallies and celebrations here on the blog. With that, why don’t we jump right into the day?On a cold January afternoon, women gather on the veranda of a government-run nursery in Sarmathla village in the north Indian state of Haryana. Sitting cross-legged on the floor, they are eager to hear the visiting speaker. The men and boys of the village mill about, reluctant to join the women, until Satyaprakash, a social worker, encourages them to sit on the chairs provided. “Please, join us tauji [uncle], today’s programme is about gaali [swear words],” he says. The speaker, Sunil Jaglan, begins with a question, “Raise your hand if you have used cuss words that name mother’s, sister’s or women’s intimate body parts?” People smile sheepishly, looking around for moral support before awkwardly raising their hands, “Everyone here has used gaali, sir, this is normal,” says one man. A woman points towards a five-year-old on his father’s lap, “Even this kid knows to utter gaali.” “But, is it right?” asks Jaglan. To this, the women shout: “Of course not! Why target us or our body in your slurs? Why don’t people understand when they use misogynist profanities they actually target their own mothers and sisters? Is this what we are teaching our kids?” Swear words in India might sound different from region to region, but they have one thing in common: many are misogynist, mocking, shaming or threatening women. Under section 294 of the Indian penal code, those found guilty of obscene acts, songs, or words in public face a prison sentence of up to three months. But many people, especially in rural India, are unaware of the law. As the sun sets, the villagers close the meeting by promising in unison three times. “Hum kabhi gaali nahi denge. [We will never use swear words].” Jaglan’s crusade started in the village of Bibipur, where he grew up. After going away to university, he returned to be elected village head in 2010. “Using profanities is so common in Haryana. I used them during my college days without thinking. One day I asked a friend about the meaning of the words. It was only then that I realised how misogynistic they are,” says Jaglan. In 2014, spurred by complaints from Bibipur women, he formed a committee to monitor and curb sexist language. If children swore, their parents were referred to the panchayat (an elected district official) who warned the families that they risked a period of being formally ostracised by the village or even police action. Three years later, Jaglan, who is also the founder of Selfie With Daughter, a campaign to empower girls and women, launched Gaali-Bandh Ghar (no-swearing house) in Taloda village. A community that pledges to stop using profanities is declared gaali-bandh (no-swearing) village. There are similar designations for households or streets, documented by village heads. Jaglan has since gone from village to village to spread the word, rapidly gaining support from women fed up with a culture of sexist slurs. Shortly after the launch, six Taloda women filed police reports against four men, who were taken into police custody. The matter was resolved only after the men issued a public apology in the presence of the police station officer, the village head and villagers, and gave written assurances that they would never disrespect women or say such swear words in future. “This campaign gave women confidence to speak up against, not only their own family members, but anybody who would hurl slurs at them,” says Madan Lal, Taloda sarpanch (village head). There have been about 800 community outreach programmes aimed at changing attitudes in Haryana. Complaints are reported to local group heads, usually a retired teacher or army officer, or logged on WhatsApp groups. The accused is assigned a counsellor, a local who has already persuaded their own family to stop using offensive language. Jaglan’s organisation has trained 2,000 women and 100 men as counsellors, and taken on volunteers who manage WhatsApp groups, conduct surveys, and coordinate local programmes. “It is difficult for males who don’t like to listen to womenfolk. India is a patriarchal society and such things are expected, but we are also determined to fight back,” says 19-year-old volunteer Anjali from Sarmathla village, who is at studying Haryana University. Jaglan has introduced the campaign to schools in Haryana for 11- to 17-year-olds using questionnaires to identify children who will be counselled against using derogatory remarks along with their family. In 2021, the campaign was adopted by some village elders in the neighbouring states of Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. And it continues to expand. “This year, we have received requests from more than 30 gram panchayats [village councils] from states like Goa, Telangana, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh to implement the gaali bandh ghar model. Even NGOs from Nepal have asked us to come and help launch [it] there,” says Jaglan.Gary Shteyngart’s contribution to the burgeoning genre of the lockdown novel is very, very Russian – in the best possible way. The premise is that a group of old friends are to spend a month in the country (well, several months) riding out New York’s pandemic in a little ad hoc colony in the Hudson valley. The cast is a collection of privileged, mournful “lishnii cheloveks” (as the “superfluous men” of 19th-century Russian literature were known) in late middle age, pottering and squabbling in rural exile, wondering what the world is coming to and regretting the past. The host at what comes to be called the “Dacha of Doom” is Sasha Senderovsky, a dishevelled Russian-Jewish-American author who, like Shteyngart, has had considerable success with a series of comic novels about the Russian-Jewish-American experience. Now, though, his career is on the slide and if he can’t get a troubled TV script across the line he faces losing the country estate (well, house with a few bungalows attached) that is his pride and joy. He doesn’t have an actual cherry orchard, but the reader very much gets the drift. Here’s something of a departure – or at least a mellowing – for Shteyngart; the antic international satire of Absurdistan or the science-fictional Super Sad True Love Story is muted, while on his stylistic mixing board the slider marked melancholy has been notched up to 11. Sasha and his wife Masha and adopted daughter Nat (“Sasha, Masha, Natasha. They didn’t even try, these Russians”) are joined by his college friends Karen, Ed and Vinod. The former are distant cousins of Korean descent, the latter is a down-on-his-luck Gujarati American billed in the dramatis personae as a “former adjunct professor and short-order cook” recovering from lung cancer. Ed is from family wealth, single and – as an extraordinarily detailed and delicious-sounding recipe for veal tonnato indicates – a very good cook. Vinod nurtures a shy, unrequited, lifelong love for Karen. Karen is a wealthy tech-sis, over from the west coast, where she made a fortune with an app called Tröö Emotions that, supposedly, causes people to fall in love. The two wild cards in the group are Dee and a film star known only as The Actor (though, weirdly, we discover very late on that he’s called Joel). Dee is a former writing student of Sasha who has had a hit with a pugnacious essay collection about her poor white upbringing called The Grand Book of Self-Compromise and Surrender. She reveres Joan Didion, uses “y’all” judiciously, and likes to wear cowboy boots and a peasant blouse that “bring out a host of Pavlovian reactions in a wide cross-section of educated East Coast men”. The heroically vain and pretentious Actor – there ostensibly to work on that TV script with Sasha – exerts a power of his own: “Like a small damaged atomic reactor he could generate his own array of ‘feelings’, which he released into the air as background gamma. Everyone at the table except Senderovsky, everyone on the planet, in fact, wanted a dose.” On the first night we find them all on the porch, socially distanced, “seated in their jackets and sweaters at a healthy remove from one another, as if they were organised criminals or dignitaries at the League of Nations”. The effect of the pandemic on writers is drily acknowledged: “Stranded social novelists up and down the river dutifully photographed hard-to-identify flowers and took notes on the appearance of gathering storm fronts and menacing thunderheads. More than one could be found looking up at a slumbering owl or a sunburned meadow beseeching their higher power to help me make something out of all this stillness.” Meanwhile, the dismaying forces of Trumpian America seem to be circling just off stage – white supremacist stickers are posted at the train station, and there are menacing drivebys from pick-up trucks. Soon, Ed and the Actor are both in love with Dee; Masha and Karen are fantasising about the Actor; and K-pop-fan little Nat – who is bright and obsessive – is being semi-adopted by childless Karen. At night, “in accordance with the rules of Russian novels, each thought about another”. One MacGuffin is the manuscript of Vinod’s first novel, which Sasha doesn’t want to admit he’s still hiding in a shoebox in his attic; another is Karen’s app, which is blamed for the Actor chasing Dee. Chekhov’s gun? That would be, I don’t think it’s a spoiler to say, a man with one lung in a Covid epidemic. (The main fault of the book is Vinod’s overlong and slightly repetitious dream/hallucination scenes.) The story is framed by a series of references to Russian literature (near the end, the inhabitants of the colony even stage a production of Uncle Vanya). But this is, being Shteyngart, very far from a solemn tribute to his literary ancestors. Among other things, there’s a pop-cultural parallel as the group become addicted to a Big Brother-style Japanese reality TV show. The real Chekhovianism is the way that Shteyngart’s comic style – the book crackles with good one-liners – is so consistently and to such effect shot through with plangency. Here’s Karen on a country walk: “She stole a great big lungful of a budding forsythia, and then another, a city girl suddenly grateful. Easter would be coming soon, but her mother was still dead.” Or Karen in her bedroom: “There was a piece of paper resting on her side of the bed, the excerpt of a lesson Karen had been teaching Nat, spelling out in Hangul and English the most important of Korean phrases: ‘My head hurts, eyes hurt, mouth hurts, legs hurt, there is too little, there is too much, I don’t like it.’” A deftly equivocal note of sadness towards the end of the book seems to me to capture the tone particularly well: “They sat there between the ferns and the busy bike lane, passing around plates of food, surrounded by faces that looked like their own.” These characters, with their variously thwarted ambitions for love and fame, are wrangling with the realisation that they are ordinary, mortal, vulnerable, just like everyone else. We are all lishnii cheloveks. • Our Country Friends by Gary Shteyngart is published by Allen &amp; Unwin (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.A strange thing happens when rage builds; the tears follow. And with that, the lump in the throat, the burning in the eyes, comes the fear. “Am I making a fool of myself?” “Have I caused more problems?” “Am I even making sense?” Giving voice to that rage comes with constant calculations. And if you’re a woman, it’s usually followed by an apology. So what happens when we’re no longer willing to make nice? What happens when decades of conditioning to smile through the discomfort, for the sole purpose of making others feel comfortable, shatters? What happens when women start declining to make Very Important Men feel better about themselves and their offensive opinions? I found myself thrust into that moment, when appearing on The Project to discuss an essay I had written on covering the sexual assault allegations that dominated the last parliamentary year, as a sexual assault survivor myself. Day after day I had relived parts of my rape while listening to leaders discuss whether we were even able to have a discussion on sexual violence. People, mostly women, told me their stories – countless stories of lives thrown off course, of potential never realised, of fear and shame and anger – while men lamented how tired they were of covering the “issue”. Politicians were quick to deflect, like rape and sexual violence was just another political game, one they could play to their advantage, or dead bat away. I wrote about the rage I saw building, and spilling, the rage that has not dissipated, that is not forgotten. The rage that still simmers below the surface. Since then we have been assured, by Very Important Men, things have been happening. Action was being taken. Women were being listened to. And then Grace Tame didn’t smile at a staged political photo opportunity. Never mind that she had shaken the prime minister’s hand. Never mind that she appeared to be walking past quietly when the prime minister called out to stop her. Never mind that she survived being groomed and told what to do by a predator who attempted to steal her sense of self away from her as he raped her. Grace Tame didn’t smile or appear at ease while having her photo taken in a situation which clearly made her uncomfortable, and in the politics of civility she had committed the worst of crimes. And then one of those men whose actions and words and decisions had contributed to why I wrote of the rage women felt in those months, and still feel now, felt the need to write a piece criticising Tame. Faced with the audacity on national television, my rage bubbled to the surface. I shook. I heard my voice struggle past the emotion in my throat. My eyes burned, my breath caught, and I found I could no longer play nice. And as I shook afterwards, I could only think “Did I embarrass myself?” “Did I even make sense?” We expect women and those with less institutional power to keep the peace. We expect them to smile. We coach children to smile in situations where they are clearly uncomfortable, and then some are expected to keep smiling for the rest of their lives. Because sexual assault is obviously very serious – but could you just be polite while you speak on it? Surely you could just smile for the camera? And if you can’t do that, then just don’t show up. You can have your place in the room – but only if you behave yourself. How can Very Important Men take you seriously when you’re ranting and raving like that? The response to not playing nice has been a little overwhelming, but it has also revealed just how little we see it. Very Important Men and crumb maidens have made a career out of speaking over smaller voices, of challenging others, of playing “devil’s advocate”, of using false equivalence to trip someone up, and discredit what they are saying. But if someone outside of the accepted mould challenges the politics of civility, then civility is weaponised against them. In that arena, it doesn’t matter what you have to say. You didn’t say thank you, so you no longer deserve a seat at the table. Until you learn some manners, you can stay in your place. That place, of course, being far away from any position of power or authority which could challenge the status quo. And in the end, that’s what it is all about. Orders to smile, to be polite, to play nice are just orders to stay quiet. It’s just dressed up in a more polite way. Amy Remeikis is a political reporter for Guardian Australia“Fulham are top of the Championship with a goal difference of +48. I am acutely conscious of their capacity to screw things up, however, so what is the best goal difference a team has had and not been promoted?” asks Richard Hirst. It’s looking good for the Cottagers right now, a positive goal difference of +16 from their last four games sending them soaring at the top. But if you are looking for any historical pointers elsewhere to justify your wariness, then here you go. Here’s Richard Askham. “Huddersfield Town, 1980-81, Steve Kindon et al,” he writes. “Goals for: 71; against: 40 … +31. They finished fourth behind promoted trio Rotherham, Charlton and Barnsley. It would have been +32 had the ball not gone in off the referee deep into injury-time at Hull. Promotion to the Premier League in 2016-17 with a goal difference of -2 more than made up for 1980-81, though.” Then again, teams have qualified for Europe before with negative goal differences … some have even won titles with them. “Brentford finished third in the 2019-20 Championship with a goal difference of +42,” recalls John Curry. “They were not promoted. But in the old Third Division North, where only the winner was promoted to the Second Division, Stockport County finished runners-up in 1929-30 with a goal difference of +62.” The National League also offers a few recent examples, including Wrexham (+52, 2011-12) and Luton (+44, 2009-10 and +48, 2010-11). Worst of all, Hereford United finished second in 2003-04 with 91 points and a +59 goal difference, finishing a point behind champions Chester and losing to Aldershot in the play-offs. Rough, but not as rough as in the Highland League. “Got two belters for you,” begins Mick McMenemie. “Formartine United finished second in 2016 with a goal difference of +102 (32 better than the winners Cove Rangers), but only the champions got entry into the play-offs for a league place. The year before, Brora won the league with a goal difference of +121, but lost to Montrose in the play-off final. No promotion but at least they got a trophy. Formartine got nothing.” One, Cou, three, four, five … “In making his debut for Aston Villa, Philippe Coutinho has now played for five European Cup or Champions League winners,” tweets Jez Orbell. “Can anyone better that?” Coutinho’s loan to Espanyol scuppers his perfect record, but in terms of teams the original Ronaldo can equal this, with his quintet of teams being PSV, Barcelona, Internazionale, Real Madrid and Milan (he also played at the South American champions Cruzeiro and Corinthians). The former Barnet star Edgar Davids can match this European mark too, having turned out for Ajax, Milan, Inter, Juventus and Barcelona. But several readers pointed to someone who has six. “Zlatan Ibrahimovic is an obvious candidate,” mails Paul Fenton, “having played for six European Cup winners (Ajax, Juventus, Inter, Barcelona, Milan and Manchester United) and two runners-up (Malmö and Paris Saint-Germain). All his European clubs have played in the final at some point, but he never has: his clubs have racked up almost 50 finals without him reaching one. Has any other player played for so many without actually playing in a final?” Mor abb Last week we looked at matches with TV score abbreviations within one character of the two teams playing. But there are more incidents of note … Including this, from Michael Thomas: “When Dunfermline Athletic hosted Dundee a while back on TV, the BBC made us ‘DUN’ and Dundee, ‘DEE’. So it just said ‘DUN-DEE’.” And going back to the mention of Crystal Palace losing on penalties at home to Colchester in the 2019 League Cup, Robert notes that “they are also the UK military standard abbreviations for two different army ranks: Corporal and Colonel. In this context, it was no longer a giant-killing, as the far higher-ranking Colonel defeats the lowly corporal (10 ranks apart).” And then there is this. Knowledge archive “I have taunted my fellow workers in our ad hoc quiz, asking who the first-ever sub in Premier League history was,” wrote Dag Fjeldstad in 2016. “I thought the correct answer should be Erik Thorstvedt coming on for Ian Walker. My hunch was hard to prove, but it is to some extent corroborated by the Spurs Firsts website. How nice it would be if you look into this and put the record straight if necessary.” We identified the first ever substitute in the English leagues back in 2001 here. When it comes to Premier League substitutions, sadly the taunting has to stop. The first season of the newly-rebranded Premier League was 1992-93, and Thorstvedt came on for Walker at half-time in Tottenham’s second game of that campaign, a 2-0 defeat at home to Coventry, thus missing out on the title of the new-look top-flight’s first sub by a considerable margin. That honour instead belongs to Mike Phelan, who replaced the crocked Paul Ince seven minutes into Manchester United’s 2-1 defeat at Sheffield United on the season’s opening day. The Guardian’s reporter at this game raged that the Mancunians’ disappointing performance demonstrated, er, “Alex Ferguson’s propensity for dubious judgments”, the need “for Ferguson to learn the difference between a striker and a goalscorer” and “Ferguson’s suspect ability to make the best use of what he has”, after which United went on to win the league not only that season but in six of the following eight as well, while Paul Ince – “rarely fit” – was runner up in the PFA Player of the Year voting and Ryan Giggs – “he seems to have stopped taking on players” – wrapped up the Young Player of the Year award, as well as finishing third in voting for the Football Writers’ Association main gong. Anyway, this particular title was won by Phelan by a margin of 22 minutes, the next substitution coming at Crystal Palace, where Blackburn brought on Chris Price to replace Alan Wright in the 29th minute of a 2-2 draw. Can you help? “As a Blackburn fan I put more stock in 19th century trophies than perhaps I should,” writes Simon Elliott. “However, are Rovers unique in winning major trophies in the 19th, 20th and 21st centuries? Are there any equivalents from other countries? For the purposes of this, the 2002 League Cup is a major trophy.” “What are the oldest floodlight pylons that are still in use at a football ground in the UK?” wonders Gordon Smith. “When Morocco played against Comoros, it occurred to me that this might be the highest ever number of o’s in a first-class fixture (six, three each),” suggests Daniel Marcus. “Can anyone come up with more?” “Has there even been, in a UK match, another pair of opposing captains whose surnames start with Z?” posed this commenter. “Katie Zelem (Manchester United) and Shelina Zadorsky (Tottenham) faced each other on Sunday.” “I was unpacking some deliveries at our shop which arrived in an old copy of the Sun sport pages from about 2010,” begins Warwick Bassett. “In the results, there was a team by the name of ‘The South Coast Team’. Does anyone have any idea who they are or were?” • Mail us your questions or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.As longstanding human rights campaigners, we are both well acquainted with the harsh realities of inequality and injustice in modern Britain. But the government’s nationality and borders bill – which will be in the committee stage at the House of Lords for the next two weeks – feels like a very personal insult. This is because it lays bare an uncomfortable and usually unspoken truth: that people like us, born in Britain but with foreign-born parents, are second-class citizens. We are talking about the bill’s provision to strengthen the government’s ability to deprive people of citizenship – a profound exercise of state power. Currently, the home secretary has the power to do this if they determine it is “conducive to the public good” and if they believe the person being deprived is eligible for the citizenship of another country. This last condition has been estimated to be applicable to several million people. Hundreds of formerly British citizens, especially from ethnic minorities, have already been stripped of their citizenship in the past 15 years. But Boris Johnson’s government wants to go even further. Clause 9 of this generally poisonous bill would give ministers the ability to remove our British citizenship without even telling us. This would severely affect the right of appeal; contesting government decisions needs to be done in a timely and effective way, but how would this be possible if you don’t know that the decision has been made? It seems the government is saying, if we take your citizenship, you’ve lost it. Period. This is why we have come together, as members of the House of Lords, to oppose the government’s plans and will be supporting an amendment removing clause 9 in committee stage, along with other amendments to restrict already draconian citizenship removal powers. Why does clause 9 feel so personal? Because it seems to say that no matter that this is the only country we’ve ever lived in; no matter that our life’s work has been to make our nation fairer; no matter that we are both peers of the realm because of this work; no matter that our ancestors gave their lives in two world wars: our citizenship is precarious and conditional in a way that isn’t the case for many others. It can be stripped away by the government of the day. For those pushing through this bill, the history of Commonwealth migration of British citizens to the UK counts for nothing. Simon’s mother arrived in the late 1950s to give her best years to the recently formed NHS. Soon afterwards, the then health minister Enoch Powell (before he became an overt racist) flew to Barbados to call on British overseas citizens to come to the UK and support the NHS: thousands responded to that call. In that same era, Shami’s parents came from Kolkata to London. Years of race discrimination and even physical attacks never deterred them. In a House of Lords debate on the bill this month, peers spoke about the hundreds of thousands from Africa, the Caribbean and Asia who fought for Britain in two world wars, believing they were part of a wider family. They believed they had earned the right for their children and grandchildren to be treated as equals. It seems they were wrong. And this is not just an argument about morality: because when you have a second class, precarious version of citizenship it becomes open to political interpretation – as we have tragically seen in recent years. Everyone now accepts that the Windrush scandal – which saw legitimate British citizens denied healthcare and benefits, or hounded out of their country and left to die impoverished in places they had left as toddlers – is a stain on this country. So why are hundreds of British citizens still being stripped of their citizenship? Just recently a British-born man with Bangladeshi heritage had his citizenship removed and spent four years challenging the decision. He is now on his way back to the UK after winning his appeal. What the Windrush scandal and other cases show is that governments make a lot of mistakes. The idea that a “good British citizen” – particularly those from the most affected groups of Black and Asian people – can be safe and secure is frankly fanciful. Rather than continuing to erode fundamental rights, the government should be trying to strengthen security and belonging for everyone. That also goes for other parts of the bill, which trash even the 1951 refugee convention by treating the most desperate, who escape persecution by clandestine means, as second-class asylum seekers. This shouldn’t be a partisan issue. When the Conservative Lord Moylan spoke passionately about witnessing citizenship ceremonies as wonderful celebrations of belonging, he said: “My conception of British nationality is much more profound than a mere travel document. It is – or should be – a permanent and reciprocal bond of loyalty on the one hand and protection on the other … we should be building up and strengthening the bond between citizen and nation, whereas it seems to me that this provision goes only to dissolve it further.” He is right, of course. Millions of people in this country, whose passport photos show faces that are not white, are vulnerable to structural racism – including when turbo-charged by broad powers of citizenship deprivation. The thought of citizenship being stripped without notice will only create fear and alienation, and do nothing to bring the people of this nation closer together. Baroness Shami Chakrabarti was shadow attorney general for England and Wales from 2016 to 2020, and was director of Liberty from 2003 to 2016. Lord Simon Woolley is the director of Operation Black Vote. He was chair of the No 10 race disparity unit until July 2020Kitty Wallace remembers very clearly the first time she felt there was something horribly wrong with her face. She was eight years old, in her downstairs bathroom with a friend as they washed their hands before dinner. “I just remember looking at our reflection and thinking how different I looked to her,” she says. “At that moment, I had this very strong feeling that my face was offensive or disfigured compared with hers, and then a sudden realisation that this must be as obvious to everyone else as it was to me.” This belief in the “wrongness” of her own face grew stronger and stronger. By the time Wallace reached her teens, it was all she thought about, along with an acute paranoia about public humiliation. “The fear of people noticing how deformed I was, of being made fun of, was overwhelming,” she says. “It was like everyone was looking at me and judging me.” What Wallace didn’t know at the time was that she was suffering from body dysmorphic disorder (BDD), a condition that causes a debilitating preoccupation with perceived defects in your appearance, often causing crippling self-consciousness and fear of social rejection. Wallace is now one of the UK’s leading campaigners for BDD, using her own battle to raise awareness of this often misunderstood and still largely hidden illness. The Body Dysmorphic Disorder Foundation (BDDF), for which Wallace now works, says there could be hundreds of thousands of undiagnosed cases across the UK. “One study estimates that BDD affects about 2.2% of the population, which is about 1 in 50 people,” says Wallace. She says that, despite celebrities including Billie Eilish, Robert Pattinson and Shirley Manson talking openly about their struggles with BDD, “there’s still barely any recognition or real understanding of what this condition is among health professionals. People just aren’t getting the help or treatment that they need. Most people suffer for 10-15 years before they get a diagnosis.” In her job now, as the BDDF’s head of operations, Wallace is constantly in contact with people who have BDD and sees her story reflected in their struggles. “For me, it was an overwhelming belief that there was something wrong with the very core of who I was, inside and out, and that is really isolating,” she says. “At the BDDF, a lot of our work is trying to show people that they’re not alone and it’s not their fault.” As the charity’s main staff member, Wallace not only fundraises, organises events and manages the website, she also facilitates support groups and organises a biannual national BDD conference. “I was still really struggling in 2016, which was when I went to the first BDD conference as an attender,” she says. “And then the next time they ran the conference in 2019, I was organising it!” Wallace remembers feeling a huge sense of compassion and empathy for everyone who was brave enough to attend. She was 19 when she was diagnosed. “I just think of how different my life could have been if I’d known earlier. All those years I lost to BDD and how it’s still affecting my life now. Nobody should have to go through that.” One of the biggest problems, she says, is that BDD typically manifests in late childhood or early adolescence, around the time of puberty when many people are going through emotional and physical upheavals. “So it’s often just dismissed as a phase or misdiagnosed as anxiety or depression,” she says. “Even though I have really supportive family and friends, people just expected me to grow out of it, which left my BDD to run wild and completely control my life.” Looking back, she now sees the signs were always there. Even as a very small child she always struggled with acute anxiety. “I never remember feeling naturally comfortable or secure in myself, or safe in the world,” she says. She also exhibited many tendencies associated with obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) that she now recognises as signposts to her BDD. “I remember being very young and being obsessed with my clothes being clean – even the slightest mark would mean I’d have to change. I had this really strong feeling that if I spilled something down myself, people would think I was dirty and disgusting.” By the time she was sent to an all-girls boarding school at the age of 12, her BDD had already taken control. “I was already fixated on my face, and I had acne, short hair and glasses. In what was a really image-obsessed environment, it made me the focus of a lot of attention,” she says. “There were constant comments on my appearance and how I needed to change or improve. It was confirmation that I had to find ways to make myself, and my face specifically, acceptable.” Soon, Wallace engaged in multiple lengthy makeup sessions every day. She would get up at 5am every morning and spend two hours on her makeup before she was able to leave her room and go down to breakfast. “I’d eat breakfast really quickly, run back up to my room to check my makeup, go to class, go back to my room to check my makeup, always checking, checking, checking that I’d managed to hide how disgusting my face was. I couldn’t let it slip for a minute. It was exhausting and I was desperately lonely.” Over the years, her BDD shifted focus from her hair to her skin, to individual features on her face. “As well as spending hours on makeup routines, I became obsessed with hair washing, then checking my skin to make sure there were no blemishes,” she says. “I was constantly picking at my skin, which a lot of people with BDD do; everything had to be smooth and perfect. The idea of a whitehead on my face was torture.” Wallace’s nose became an acute source of fear and shame. “I would think all day about when I could have a nose job, how that was the only thing that would make me normal. I grew a long fringe that was my security blanket and I hid behind it for years, trying to cover as much of my face from public view as possible.” Wallace finished school, but says that many students with BDD drop out of education altogether. One study found that almost 60% of young people between 12 and 18 years old with a diagnosis of BDD were either not attending school at all or attending only sporadically. Wallace also points to a study that estimates the risk of suicide among those with the condition is 45 times higher than the national average. She says that she has felt suicidal at points and that if it hadn’t been for the support of her family she doubts she would have survived. “We’ve lost so many people because GPs, health practitioners and teachers simply don’t know what BDD is,” she says. “There are virtually no treatment programmes available, yet BDD leads to suicide, depression and self-harm. Many people alter their faces through multiple cosmetic surgeries and get acute anxiety, which means they lead very limited and painful lives.” When Wallace first heard about BDD, she had finished school and was living “in self-imposed seclusion” at her family home while her friends took gap years and attended universities across the country. Then, her twin brother got a call. A friend had seen a documentary about BDD. “He said: ‘I think this is what’s wrong with your sister,’ so my whole family watched it and there was a collective ‘Oh my God, this is Kitty’ moment,” she says. Her mother found the BDDF online. When Wallace visited the website she says it wasn’t much more than a landing page, but it did have a BDD symptom checklist and when she read it she felt “like someone had crawled inside my brain and written down everything they could find. The idea that what I had was a condition, that it wasn’t my fault, was like a huge weight disappearing from my shoulders. For years, I’d blamed myself for everything.” Wallace checked in to the Priory which, at that time, ran one of the only specialist BDD clinics in the country. She was subsequently referred to Dr Rob Wilson, a specialist cognitive behavioural therapist working on BDD and the co-founder of the BDDF, for counselling. “At the beginning, going into treatment was really tough but soon I was having these huge moments. I clipped my fringe back off my face for the first time and was able to walk down the street without believing that everyone was staring at me,” she says. “It was a slow release from the grip that BDD had held over me since childhood.” It hasn’t been a straight line towards recovery. At 28, Wallace relapsed after she developed dermatitis, which caused her face to break out in an angry red rash. “I didn’t leave the house for six months,” she says. “I totally gave up. I wouldn’t even sit in the back garden in case the neighbours saw me.” She returned to counselling and, during one of her sessions, Wilson told her that most of the BDDF’s funding came from In Memoriam donations from families who had lost children to the condition. “It just made me so angry to realise that my life could be worth more when I was dead than when I was alive,” she says. “I suddenly felt that I owed it to the people who hadn’t made it to get involved and try to change things, so that others didn’t die needlessly.” Wallace started volunteering at the BDDF and, three years on, became its first paid staff member. Since she started working at the foundation she has managed to secure lottery funding to launch a dedicated email helpline, which has helped hundreds of people with BDD get help and treatment. She has also revamped the website and has seen the number of annual visitors more than double, with 500,000 this year alone. “Seeing the numbers go up is hugely gratifying because you know that people will now be able to understand what’s happening to them. But it’s also frustrating because we’re a small charity and we’re struggling to cope with the numbers asking for help,” she says. Prior to lockdown, she co-facilitated monthly face-to-face support sessions, which brought people with BDD together for group counselling. When the pandemic hit, they stopped meeting in person but quickly realised that their community was struggling and launched weekly online sessions. “When we went online, the numbers just boomed,” she said. “We had people from Norway, the US, India, Italy; people in their teens all the way up to their 70s.” She says that facilitating these groups is one of the most rewarding parts of her job. “Sometimes, the people in our groups have never met anyone else with the same condition. You get to see that person change when they realise that they’re in a safe place and that they don’t need to apologise or explain their behaviour, they can just talk and be themselves. There is no judgment.” She says that things are worse for young people with BDD now, compared with when she was growing up: “Now, there is a relentless barrage of images of people looking flawless on social media, with no transparency about how much these [pictures] have been airbrushed or filtered.” Earlier this year, Wallace helped launch a partnership between the BDDF and the fashion brand Monki , lobbying for EU legislation that would see brands and social media users legally required to put a notice on advertising or social media posts that had been altered or filtered. Since it was launched three weeks ago, their petition has been signed by more than 30,000 people. “The campaign with Monki is so important because it gets awareness of BDD out to a huge number of people and this could save lives,” she says. “We’re still a small charity and we’re dealing with such a huge problem, but there is also so much hope for people with BDD if they get the right help.” It is this hope that keeps Wallace fighting. “Even though my BDD is still with me, I’ve got a great job and I’m getting married next year – these things seemed impossible even a few years ago. I just want people with BDD to know that they can get better and that they’re not alone.” The BDDF website is bddfoundation.org and more information about their petition calling for social media image transparency can be found here. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or by emailing jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at befrienders.org.What’s the opposite of a cliffhanger? As the Premier League packs up for its winter break, as those depleted muscle fibres begin to regain their tensile strength, as English World Cup glory is all-but guaranteed (this was the plan wasn’t it?) by winter sun global marketing trips, it is hard to avoid the sense of dramatic entropy. The Premier League has always sold itself as blockbusting cinematic entertainment. As every screenwriter knows the key ingredient of any pulp drama is tension, obstacles, storylines that twang like an overtightened steel guitar string. Twenty-odd games in, the season has dished up something very different. What we have here is a first act marked by the absence of tension: the greatest league in the history of leagues being great, reimagined as a piece of Japanese anti-cinema, all soporific repetition and meandering story arcs. Can we still fluff up some kind of title race out of this thing? Those hopes of a three-way pursuit to the line were all-but extinguished by Manchester City’s annihilating 12-match winning run from November into January. Saturday’s 1-1 draw at Southampton, during which City had 20 shots at goal and 74% possession, is pretty thin gruel when it comes to dredging up some new life. Cut forward to early May and perhaps this perfectly calibrated machine, this suffocating blue mist, a squad so perfectly grooved it has come closer than any other English team to making victory an inevitability, might be persuaded to collapse in a heap of nerves and shanked passes. We might yet see a damp-eyed Pep, headphones clamped, finger jabbing into the camera lens, saying: “I’ve kept quiet about this but when you say that about a man like Thomas Frank, well, you can tell Jürgen, if he’s watching this …” Or perhaps not. In reality the most obvious drama in the Premier League is located elsewhere. The only tension close to the top is the run-in to see which team gets the final place in the VIP lounge, also known as The Race For Fourth Place. There is even a sense of mild inevitability about this. In theory the final Champions League spot could go down to the wire, with Wolves still very much in contention from eighth place. There are interesting, evolving teams in that mix. Are Antonio Conte’s rage-ball contortions really a sustainable plan? Is this all going to be too much for that furred and fragile Tottenham heart? Are Arsenal good now? Is Mikel Arteta creating a new kind of energy, something homegrown and self-propelling, the first genuine post-Wenger iteration? Or is this just styling, soundbites, an expensive jacket, indestructible hair, spun out into a simulacrum of elite modern football? It is evidence of the strangeness of the league, and indeed the herd-think of social media, that it seems possible to believe both of these things almost simultaneously, depending on the last half-hour of football and whether Granit Xhaka has just been sent off or not. The most likely outcome is that the top four will remain as it is now. City, Liverpool and Chelsea are already out of sight. And for all their flaws Manchester United have four of the five best-paid players in the league, can afford to drop £90m footballers and have a revolving roster of attacking talent to hurl at the wall when their own incoherence starts to bite. Wealth and tortured momentum are still probably just about enough. The real heat is located much further down the table. It is probably apt in the current stratified landscape, with a sense of the world being divvied up into the saved and the damned, that the battle to remain in the Premier League is by some distance its most vital strand. There are hard commercial reasons for this sense of lifeboats being divvied up. The Premier League is in the process of refreshing its overseas broadcast deals. North and South America have been locked in over the last few weeks. But outside the top tier there is a genuine sense of flux. Derby County may be the most cinematic example of commercial hubris, but plenty of others have also taken on vast debt. This is not the moment to get stuck in the sunken place. Hence that sharpened sense of jeopardy. Forget titles and top fours. Repurpose the graphics. Add some minor chords to the triumphant music. Redirect the truck carrying Gary Neville and his lighted plinth. Who knows, we may be in for one of the great relegation races. The margins already look tight, with seven points separating bottom-placed Burnley from Everton in 16th. There is plenty of life down there too. Anyone present at Selhurst Park just after Christmas to see Norwich’s 3-0 defeat by Crystal Palace will have assumed we had our first confirmed casualty. That was the day the sarcastic goal-applause went mainstream, when Norwich’s players just looked too timid and broken for his battle. Fast forward three weeks and Dean Smith’s team are 17th and on a roll. The return of key players has helped, with six changes to their Palace starting XI in the team that beat Watford on Friday. Norwich have a tendency to assert their own game against weaker opponents then fall away against teams that can also pass and keep the ball. But it might just be enough, because, frankly, it’s chaos down there. Leeds are surely the most secure of the back markers – dragged into this by circumstance, but still there, just above the lip of the pit. Otherwise that race to the bottom really is wide open. Watford look the most doomed, a club where this kind of jeopardy is factored into the business model, although Roy Hodgson turning up adds an intriguing note of pragmatism. Hodgson is 74 years old now, but he does know how to organise a team. Burnley have the unity of purpose to defy the limitations of an ageing squad. They have also played a massive four games fewer than Norwich and five fewer than Brentford, who have lost six of their past seven and really do need a deep breath and a time-out over the winter break. Much as it might rile a pre-riled fanbase, Newcastle being relegated would be one of the stories of the season in European football. But it seems unlikely from here. The pure, ruthless genius of paying £25m for Chris Wood might yet prove to be the key stroke, a chess move that hurts Burnley more than it aids Newcastle. This is where instant liquidity, and the freedom to chuck that money around without consequence, really does make a difference. Eddie Howe has a sleek, hungry look about him. Kieran Trippier is a very smart signing, and also tactically on-trend: gamechanging emergency right-backs are the new gamechanging emergency centre-forwards. On the other hand Newcastle’s final five games include Liverpool, City and Arsenal, who always beat them, plus Norwich away and the mouthwatering prospect of Burnley on the final day. Things may well settle before then. But there is a grand final act in the making here, a breath of competitive life in a moribund year, and a fitting sense that the real game, right now, is simply surviving.Simple changes to messages on restaurants’ menus can double the frequency of customers choosing plant-based options instead of meat, research on the impact of food on the climate crisis has found. The production, transportation and consumption of food has become an increasing focus for climate researchers, with a recent study finding the food industry accounts for more than a third of the world’s total annual planet-heating emissions. Much of the pollution is centered on meat. Raising cattle, chickens and pigs for meat, a process that often involves clearing large tracts of forest, causes about double the emissions of plant-based foods. Meat consumption remains stubbornly high in the US – the average American gobbled down 264lb of meat in 2020 – and is rising quickly in countries such as China. Many people are receptive to the idea of switching to vegetarian options in order to help the environment, however, the research found, with messaging on restaurant menus a potentially significant way of shifting behaviour. A multi-stage experiment by the research non-profit organisation World Resources Institute (WRI) involved about 6,000 people in the US and their reaction to menu descriptions. Researchers tested responses to 10 different sustainability-themed messages when the participants were asked to choose between different options on a menu, such as a bean burrito or beef burrito. Several of the messages produced dramatic results. Diners who read “Each of us can make a positive difference for the planet. Swapping just one meat dish for a plant-based one saves greenhouse gas emissions that are equivalent to the energy used to charge your phone for two years. Your small change can make a big difference” on their menus chose a vegetarian dish 25% of the time, more than double the rate of diners who were shown no message at all. Another message – “90% of Americans are making the change to eat less meat. Join this growing movement and choose plant-based dishes that have less impact on the climate and are kinder to the planet” – prompted 22% of people to opt for a plant-based dish, again far higher than the standard group. Other messages, about the taste of the food and the need to protect the planet for future generations, also yielded positive results in choosing vegetarian meals, suggesting that consumers’ choices can be significantly shaped by how menus are presented. “We know behavioral science is critical, it really moves the needle,” said Edwina Hughes, head of the “cool food pledge”, an initiative by WRI and the United Nations. “Themes of making a small change for a big impact and also around joining a movement really boosted the plant-based options.” Hughes said Americans were ready for a “nudge” towards vegetarian options, likening such messages to hotels requesting their guests not demand their towels to be replaced every day, as a way to save water needed to wash them. “Using descriptive messages that show the benefits of plant-based food choices can empower people to change their behaviour and choose lower-carbon dishes,” Hughes said. “We can do this because people are primed and ready for this sort of messaging. They are receptive to seeing messages about the climate and are actively seeking out brands and logos that indicate climate-friendly products and services.” WRI researchers said previous attempts to promote vegetarian options had fallen short. Dishes have functionally been named “vegetarian lasagne” or “meat-free sausages”, as compared with more enticing meat nomenclature such as “grass-fed beef” or “butter-fried chicken”. When dishes are called vegan it “really turns off mainstream audiences. It comes across as preachy, righteous, aggressive,” said Jonathan Wise, a consumer researcher who added that more “inclusive” messages could get people to switch more easily to plant-based meals. “We launched a falafel burger in 2009, we said it is organic and it’s for vegetarians – it never sold well and we shut it down,” said Kaj Torok, chief sustainability officer at Max Burgers, a fast-food company that originated in Sweden. “The main thing we thought was: ‘Let’s not just go for this tiny group.’ It was important to go for the flexitarians [people who can skip eating meat] and those people who want to reduce their impact upon the climate.” Torok said Max Burgers’ focus was now taste, rather than whether what’s being served is meat or not, allowing it to drastically increase the number of plant-based burgers on menus. The company is part of WRI’s Cool Food Meals scheme, which has seen several food producers, including the Panera Bread chain, agree to disclose the carbon footprint of menu choices. Such labeling is far from universal, however, with most people unaware of the climate cost of the things they eat. “The time should be here where we have third-party verification of this,” Torok said.Sir Elton John has postponed his concerts in Dallas, Texas, after testing positive for Covid-19 a week after restarting his farewell tour. The singer, 74, had just returned to the stage for the first time after a hiatus of almost two years, resuming his Farewell Yellow Brick Road tour in New Orleans last week. The tour, John’s last after more than half a century on the road, started in 2018 but was postponed owing to the pandemic and then because the star musician needed hip surgery after a fall in September last year. After revealing on Instagram he had contracted the virus, John said his symptoms were mild and that he expected to perform in Arkansas at the weekend. “Hi everyone, wanted to send a message to let you know that I have contracted Covid and so have had to reschedule my shows in Dallas,” he wrote. “If you have tickets, you’ll be contacted with the new dates really soon. “It’s always a massive disappointment to move shows and I’m so sorry to anyone who’s been inconvenienced by this but I want to keep myself and my team safe. Fortunately, I’m fully vaccinated and boosted and my symptoms are mild so I’m fully expecting to be able to make the Arkansas shows this weekend. “As always, thank you for all your love and support and I can’t wait to see you all soon!” John is the latest musical star to have a tour hit by Covid after Adele postponed the start of her Las Vegas residency because of Covid-related delays. The residency, titled Weekends with Adele, was due to begin on 21 January at the Colosseum in the Caesars Palace casino, celebrating her latest album, 30, which topped music charts in the UK, Australia and the US. Adele said the show had been “absolutely destroyed by delivery delays and Covid”, adding that half the crew were down with the virus. John is expected to play in states across the US until the end of April, after which he will begin the European leg of the tour. In November, he announced two special homecoming shows at Vicarage Road, the home of Watford football club, to end the tour in July. The singer recently claimed the No 1 position in the singles chart with a festive collaboration with Ed Sheeran and collaboration with Dua Lipa.Environmentalists are deeply concerned by the Kenyan government’s move to allow boundary changes to protected forests, watering down the powers of conservation authorities. The forest conservation and management (amendment) bill 2021 seeks to delete clause 34(2) from the 2016 act, which makes it mandatory for authorities to veto anyone trying to alter forest boundaries. The same clause protects forests from actions that put rare, threatened or endangered species at risk. Tabled by the National Assembly’s procedure committee, the amendment would weaken the role of Kenya Forest Service, mandated to protect all public forests, allowing politicians to decide who can change forest boundaries. In an election year, many have read the proposal, due to be debated at the end of the month, as politically motivated. The committee’s memorandum to MPs said current laws “unnecessarily limit the rights of any Kenyan to petition parliament” as provided for in the constitution. But conservationists have said this would be a serious setback for the country, which was seeking to increase forest cover to 10% of land by 2022, up from 7.4%. Forest authorities said the move puts endangered species at risk, as well as clearing the way for unscrupulous individuals to encroach into forests that, according to a 2014 government paper, have been shrinking at a rate of 50,000 hectares (124,000 acres) annually. “I am astounded any right-thinking person would consider submitting or supporting such an amendment,” said Paula Kahumbu, chief executive at WildlifeDirect, a conservation NGO. “It will open the door to forest destruction after decades of hard work by agencies, communities and NGOs to increase forest cover, as committed to in our constitution. One can only read mischief in such a motion, with elections around the corner.” Kahumbu added: “At risk are indigenous forests and the biodiversity therein, the integrity of our water towers, generation of hydropower and productivity of our farms. The environmental experts of Kenya and the conservation community call on all citizens of Kenya to reach out to their MPs to wholeheartedly and aggressively reject this heinous bill.” She said the amendment would destroy the legacy of Wangari Maathai, the late environmentalist and Nobel Peace prize winner, who was once attacked and seriously wounded as she led a tree-planting exercise in Nairobi’s Karura Forest. In a tweet, Christian Lambrechts, executive director at Rhino Ark said: “Considering what Kenya has lost in the past, any change that weakens, rather than strengthens the mechanisms to protect our forests, is ill-advised.” Rhino Ark has been spearheading an initiative to put up electric fences around Kenya’s public forests to hamper poachers and illegal incursions. Dickson Kaelo, head of the Kenya Wildlife Conservancies Association, said the move by parliament is intended to “give legitimacy” to those who would destroy Kenya’s biodiversity. “This is a well-calculated move to open the doors for forest excisions and allocation to private persons for development, and may even be a means to normalise current excisions. It is a threat to our forests coming at a time when we have a low forest coverage and a high risk of climate crisis-induced vulnerabilities. We call upon parliament to reject the amendment,” said Kaelo. Protecting forests from developers has been a daunting task in Kenya. Last July, Joannah Stutchbury, a prominent environmental activist, was killed near her home in Nairobi after her protracted opposition to attempts by powerful businessmen to build on Kiambu forest near the capital, Nairobi. President Uhuru Kenyatta has yet to fulfil a promise to catch her killers.More passengers took Wizz Air flights over the Christmas period despite the rise of the Omicron variant, and the carrier said it was cautiously optimistic about the continued recovery of air travel during the spring. The budget airline reported it carried 7.8 million passengers during the three months to the end of December, even more than it did in 2019 before the coronavirus pandemic, while its planes were more than three-quarters (77%) full. The Hungary-based and London-listed carrier sounded an upbeat note in its trading statement to the London Stock Exchange despite reporting an operating loss of €213.6m (£179m) for the final three months of 2021. Wizz Air said it continued to take the hit from Covid travel restrictions, which hurt passenger demand. Despite this, the company has been ramping up its staff numbers, aircraft fleet, airport bases and routes before an anticipated full return to pre-pandemic flight levels by late spring. Airlines have been among the slowest companies to recover from the impact of the pandemic, amid shifting travel restrictions and Covid testing requirements. Wizz said in the summer of 2020 that it expected to become the first major European airline to recover capacity to pre-coronavirus levels. The airline carried three-and-a-half times more passengers during the festive season in 2021 than it did in late 2020, when much of the region was facing tough restrictions on travel. József Váradi, Wizz Air’s chief executive, said: “Despite the short-term headwinds, we are cautiously optimistic for a continued recovery into spring and near-full utilisation from summer onwards.” The airline said it had recruited more than 1,500 staff since the start of last summer, taking its total number of employees to 5,500 by January 2022, surpassing its pre-pandemic workforce. Wizz Air made 1,000 workers redundant in April 2020 and cut staff wages as Covid brought most international air travel to a halt. Wizz Air ended 2021 with a total of 150 aircraft, and took delivery of eight new Airbus A321neo planes. The company intends to have 500 planes by the end of this decade.The Arsenal striker Vivianne Miedema has spoken to several clubs regarding her future, including Paris Saint-Germain and Barcelona. The 25-year-old’s contract runs out in the summer and she is free to negotiate with other clubs. Miedema has been with Arsenal since 2017 and the club sit top of the Women’s Super League but the Netherlands international says that winning the Champions League is a key priority for the next few years. “In the coming weeks I have to get a certain feeling for the right club,” she told the Dutch newspaper AD, where she will be a columnist. “[But] the door to Arsenal is definitely not closed yet. “I want to win the Champions League. I want to get the most out of it [her career]. That means I may have to take the next step. I’m 25 and that’s still quite young, but I’ve been around for a while.” Miedema is regarded as one of the best footballers in the world and will be a target for the top European clubs. She has more than 100 Netherlands caps and will lead their line at the Euros this summer. “The years to come should officially be my peak years,” she said. “I have to spend it somewhere at a club that best suits my ambitions.” She added, however, that she was very happy in London, which is now her second home. “Life is good here. And I know myself: I have to be happy off the pitch to perform on the pitch.”Downing Street has not yet seen the report by Sue Gray into alleged lockdown-breaking parties in government, Liz Truss has said. Asked whether No 10 was still waiting to see the report by the senior civil servant, the foreign secretary said: “That’s correct. And, of course, it’s an independent report, it’s a matter for Sue Gray when she sends that report, when she’s completed her work.” Boris Johnson also faces a parallel police investigation into whether any of the alleged gatherings breached lockdown laws in place at the time. That inquiry was announced by the Metropolitan police commissioner, Cressida Dick, on Tuesday. Truss refused to say whether Johnson would resign if he was interviewed under caution as part of the police inquiry, saying she would not get into “speculation”. “What I’m saying to you is that until we see the results of the investigation, the Sue Gray report and indeed the police investigation, it would be foolish to speculate,” she told Sky News. “We have to wait and see what is the outcome of the police investigation, in the same way that we have to wait and see what is the outcome of the Sue Gray report,” added Truss, who confirmed that she only knew about the police action after Tuesday’s cabinet meeting, although the prime minister knew about it beforehand. If Downing Street was yet to see the report on Wednesday morning, it means the publication could be pushed back until later in the week. Truss also declined to comment on whether Johnson would have to resign if it was found he had misled parliament when assuring MPs in December that no rules had been broken. “The prime minister has appeared before parliament,” she said. “He has apologised for what has happened. He’s admitted that mistakes were made. And I 100% support him and want him to continue as prime minister. “I’m not going to prejudice the findings of the Sue Gray report, or indeed the police investigation that is now taking place about what happened. What I’m saying is the prime minister has apologised.” Asked whether the Gray report would be published in full, Truss reiterated that the only commitment was to release its “findings”. She said: “We don’t know the contents of the report. So there could be, for example, security issues that mean part of it are problematic to publish.” In a separate interview with BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Truss was asked why Johnson had told parliament he knew nothing about parties, and replied: “I simply don’t know what has gone on. This is why the Sue Gray inquiry was commissioned, to give us a clear picture of what has happened.” Pressed on whether she believed Johnson, Truss initially avoided the question, but eventually said: “I absolutely take the prime minister at his word.” She refused to say whether Johnson should resign if fined by police: “I’m not going to answer hypothetical questions about a report that I haven’t seen, and an investigation that hasn’t been completed. I think that’s completely wrong.” Former No 10 staffers have told the Guardian that the police inquiry will uncover evidence which has not yet been submitted to Gray. One senior Tory said the Scotland Yard inquiry was a “different ballgame”, adding: “Officials who don’t tell Sue Gray the whole truth will not hold back from the cops.” Gray has interviewed witnesses and examined key evidence including security logs showing who was in Downing Street and when. She is also thought to have been shown photographs of parties, though Cabinet Office sources stressed these were unlikely to be included in the report. It is understood the Met’s decision to investigate a number of parties in Downing Street and Whitehall was made on Sunday. Johnson had been informed in advance but opted not to tell his cabinet at their weekly meeting on Tuesday, leaving them to find out as they emerged and triggering consternation.Just one glance was enough. In 1974, Prince Philip was returning from a holiday in the south Pacific when he became a god. Midway through the journey, the royal yacht Britannia was anchored off the island of Aneityum. Villagers from Tanna, a neighbouring island, paddled out in their canoes to catch a glimpse of him. “I saw him standing on the deck in his white uniform,” Jack Naiva, the chief of the Yaohnanen people until 2009, said in a later interview. “I knew then that he was the true messiah.” Haile Selassie I, the Ethiopian king, didn’t even need to be seen to be perceived as divine. In 1931, National Geographic ran a 68-page report on his coronation in Addis Ababa. Preachers and pamphleteers read the article in faraway colonial Jamaica and proclaimed him their ordained saviour, a manifestation of the “black divine”. A baroque magazine piece – written by, of all people, the then US consul-general to Ethiopia – became a gospel for generations of believers who called themselves “Rastafarians” after Selassie’s birth name: Tafari Makonnen (“Ras”, a title, was bestowed later). By the 1950s, the anthropologist George Eaton Simpson reported that men were proselytising on the streets of Kingston with the Bible in one hand and a “weathered copy” of the magazine in another. Never mind that Selassie didn’t consider himself “black”, or the fact that National Geographic routinely ran pieces that referred to indigenous people as “savages”, and African Americans were forbidden from becoming members or using its library in Washington DC. As Anna Della Subin notes in Accidental Gods, the cult of the utopian Rastas was born in a crib of contradictions, “among those in the new world living in the obscenity of injustice”. Subin traces tall tales of these inadvertent deities at exhaustive length: Koreans worshipping statues of General MacArthur after the 1950 war; Hawaiian tribesmen revering Captain Cook as a supernatural being after bludgeoning him to death; residents of Papua and New Guinea voting for the US president Lyndon B Johnson in an election. Again and again, a link is made between the effects of modernity – rudderless secularism, ruthless empires and capitalism – and the fervour with which, in reaction, these men end up being immortalised. The script of accidental divinity remains the same over centuries: a stranger, usually white or powerful, becomes a symbol, then an object of veneration, part of an ongoing local power struggle, a conduit for an idea not necessarily his own. Faith, for Subin, is invariably an allegory for something else. This approach can be taken too far. A group described by one contemporary observer as “Maratha simpletons”, for instance, might have been worshipping a statue of Lord Wellesley on an elephant in colonial Bombay. What seems more plausible, however, is that they were just worshipping the elephant. Ganesh, the Hindu elephant god, is, after all, a household deity in the region, and pilgrims flock to Mumbai’s beaches every September to immerse effigies. Subin discerns anti-imperial resistance in everything from Sudanese djinns, or supernatural beings (“a way to contend with the invasion of a foreign force”), to shamanic rituals in colonial Ghana (a counterpart to “the rhetoric of politicians, of colonial discourse”), and even the notion of being possessed by spirits (an idea “born at the crossroads of enslavement and enlightenment”). Deification, she repeatedly asserts, is a “form of defiance”. History and hysteria coalesce in oral testimonies of MacArthur appearing in Koreans’ dreams years after his death, and French colonial officials mysteriously frothing at the mouth in Niger. In India, Subin digs up 18th-century reports of British soldiers’ graves in India being “consecrated” by Hindu rituals, and teenage widows purportedly dissenting against the Raj by campaigning for their right to immolate themselves on their husbands’ funeral pyres. But is all as it seems? At least two older white writers tell Subin about visiting an isolated community or tribe and being confused for someone celestial. What might just as well be traditional gestures of curiosity and hospitality – being asked endless questions, say, or being welcomed with offerings of food and incense – are written up by western travellers as signs of their own cosmic importance, and Subin accepts these accounts uncritically.That said, her portrait of the Rastafarian movement is wonderfully attuned to the transformative power of belief. Despite their obsession with Selassie, Rasta activists did propel Michael Manley to power in Jamaica, and it was Manley who first ushered in the reforms – labour rights, free education, universal healthcare – necessary for a colony to effectively transition to democracy. Another chapter on the theosophist Annie Besant and her protege, Jiddu Krishnamurti, brilliantly dissects their troubled relationship. In India, when Subin isn’t construing the slightest presence of “turmeric and lime” on colonial-era tombstones as evidence of deification, or insisting that it was Besant who first called Gandhi a mahatma or “great soul” (actually, it was either the poet Rabindranath Tagore or an anonymous Indian journalist), she can persuasively describe how British historical writing repeated the same stories of colonels and viceroys being worshipped in shrines – how the idea of white divinity mattered more to the empire than to the natives. But the overarching thesis doesn’t quite impress. The problem with positing divinity as a defence against encroaching modernity is that it only reinforces stale dichotomies: a scientifically advanced west, a permanently backward east. Belief, in this vision, is still the exclusive domain of the oppressed and the enslaved; India is still a land of gods and snakes. It’s all very well dwelling on Bussa Krishna, an Indian villager who stopped eating after Donald Trump contracted Covid-19 in 2020, but how does Subin avoid mentioning the overwhelmingly white followers of QAnon in the US, who believe that John F Kennedy Jr will come back to life? Subin may portray individual white gods as delusional narcissists and racists and imperialists, but white people, in the aggregate, still come across as oddly less deceived. Their superior scepticism is a myth that remains somewhat unchallenged in this otherwise subversive book. • Accidental Gods: On Men Unwittingly Turned Divine by Anna Della Subin is published by Granta (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Piotr Cywiński has spent a lot of time pondering a question that has exercised historians, philosophers and politicians ever since the end of the second world war. What lessons should we draw from one of the darkest pages in human history, the organised mass killing at Auschwitz? A 49-year-old Polish historian, Cywiński has been director of the Auschwitz Museum since 2006. His office is housed in a former hospital and pharmacy built for the camp’s SS guards, and his windows look out over a crematorium and gas chamber. “The biggest task for remembrance today is to combat indifference,” he said in an interview ahead of the 77th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz, which is also Holocaust Memorial Day, and is marked on Thursday. “You can massacre tens of thousands of Rohingya, you can put 1.5 million Uyghurs in camps, in Yemen people are suffering because they do not have anything to eat, and we don’t feel concerned in our world,” he said. Nazi Germany deported about 1.3 million people to Auschwitz and 1.1 million of them died there, 90% of them Jewish. The museum, on the edge of the Polish town of Oświęcim, is housed in the preserved original buildings of the Auschwitz concentration camp, and the ruins of the neighbouring Birkenau extermination camp. Cywiński said that while the events of the Holocaust could not be compared to the present day, “the silence of bystanders” is a topic he wants visitors to the museum to think about and apply to their own lives. As well as combatting a world in which indifference and ignorance about the Holocaust are rising, Cywiński also has to contend with the current Polish government, which has made a nationalist narrative emphasising Polish martyrdom and suffering a major part of its political message. The government funds the Auschwitz museum and appoints its director, and Cywiński’s tenure is up for renewal at the end of this year. Many fear he may be replaced by a more ideological pro-government figure, as has happened at some other Polish museums. The Polish culture ministry said it was “premature” to discuss whether he would be reappointed later this year. The Auschwitz Museum contains some of the most shocking and disturbing exhibits on display anywhere in the world. Once seen, they remain etched into the minds of many visitors for the rest of their lives: the two tonnes of human hair, the tens of thousands of shoes and the piles of suitcases with names scrawled on the sides, symbols of the false hope with which many arrived at the camp. Cywiński wants to retain these gruesome artefacts, aware of the dark power that radiates from their authenticity, but also to add a new part of the exhibition, that will focus on the SS and the Nazi camp administration. “We have to show that this was not an isolated place that suddenly appeared but it was a project that was created, built and grew during that time,” he said. At the ceremony to mark 75 years of liberation in 2020, Auschwitz survivor Marian Turski told the assembled dignitaries that “Auschwitz did not fall from the sky”. He warned of the dangers of discriminating against any minority. “Democracy hinges on the rights of minorities being protected,” he said. While the museum will remain firmly focused on the terrible events that happened there, Cywiński is this week launching the Auschwitz Pledge Foundation, which will distribute grants to groups across the world fighting indifference to hatred. The foundation’s general director, Jacek Kastelaniec, said projects that tackled antisemitism, racism, misogyny, homophobia, transphobia and discrimination against migrants and refugees would all be eligible for funding. This is where things get tricky for Cywiński, given that he serves at the pleasure of a government that has frequently demonised refugees, and recently ran a presidential campaign based almost entirely around anti-LGBT rhetoric. In a 2017 speech at Auschwitz, the then prime minister, Beata Szydło, said the history of the camp showed that “everything must be done to defend the safety and the lives of citizens”. The remarks were widely interpreted as a defence of the government’s anti-migration policy. Last year, the government put Szydło on to the board of a council that oversees the Auschwitz Museum’s activities, leading three of its members to resign. “The basic idea of the historical policy the government represents is to whitewash anything that is seen as a problem in Polish history at that time … I was afraid that they would try to impose those attitudes,” said Stanisław Krajewski, a philosopher and Jewish community leader, who was one of those who resigned in protest at Szydło’s appointment. Cywiński said he did not have a problem with politicians being involved in the council, but said they should not have input into the narrative of the museum. He evaded a direct question about whether the inclusion of Szydło on the council has led to any changes or pressure. “Personally I try every time to keep this place far from politics. It’s a moral place, it’s not a place that should change every four or five years with elections,” he said. In written responses to questions, the Polish culture ministry said the appointment of Szydło “substantially strengthens the council and raises its importance” and that those who resigned had “no substantive justification” for doing so. It also noted part of a new exhibition at the Auschwitz museum, which will culminate in a list of more than 1,200 Poles who assisted prisoners at Auschwitz. More than 70,000 non-Jewish Poles also died at Auschwitz, and many in Poland feel that the overwhelming tragedy of the Holocaust has obscured the enormous Polish losses during the years of occupation and war. Inside the country, the government has focused overwhelmingly on Polish suffering, a narrative that means more Polish people now associate Auschwitz with “Polish martyrdom” than with “the destruction of the Jews”. Jan Grabowski, a Polish-Canadian historian, said Cywiński had gone too far in his cooperation with government-linked figures and institutions pushing this distorted version of history. “Auschwitz has become part and parcel of Polish history policy, in other words, transforming Auschwitz into part of the Polish feelgood narrative,” he said. Last year, Grabowski was forced to stand trial along with fellow historian Barbara Engelking over a book they co-authored that detailed instances of Polish complicity in Nazi crimes against Jews. (The appeals court overturned an initial ruling against them.) The government has tried to focus attention on cases of Poles who were killed for helping Jews. Cywiński said he did not see a problem with marking these heroes, but said: “We have to remember that others were supportive of the Nazi regime.” He criticised the increasing use of history by politicians, but took care to say it was a global problem and not just a Polish one. “When I turn on the television and I hear people speaking about history, 90% of the time it’s not a historian, it’s a politician. It was not like this 20 years ago,” he said. Cywiński would rather focus on how to get visitors to take lessons away from Auschwitz they can apply to their own lives. Many of the museum guides – of which there are currently 340 who work in 21 different languages – say that the best time to make visitors think about their own moral choices is when, overcome with the visceral horror of the museum exhibits, they ask why the world did not do more to stop the Holocaust from taking place. This is the perfect time to speak about “the silence of bystanders”, said Cywiński. “I cannot say to people, ‘Now you have to help Yemen’; ‘Now you should help the Uyghurs’. It is not my role to tell them what to do. But it is our role to help them ask the question, ‘What can I do in this world? Why is it a problem if I stay indifferent?’”Perhaps it’s a symptom of only communicating over Zoom for two years, but I have noticed a direct correlation between the length of time that people keep you waiting at the start of a meeting and how good a person they are. One minute late? Maybe they’re having technical difficulties. Five minutes? Bit cheeky. Ten? Worse than Satan himself. I’m telling you this because my interview with Michael Schur was due to start at 5pm. But , and I really can’t overstate how rare this is, he clicked online at 4:59. “I like to follow rules, man,” he shrugs when he realises how overjoyed I am at his punctuality. As the creator of both Parks and Recreation and The Good Place – perhaps the two finest American sitcoms of the last decade – Schur’s love of rules has stood us all in good stead. Parks and Rec centred on Schur’s belief in the positive potential of proactive government. The Good Place, meanwhile, was even more forthright. It was an afterlife comedy, paced like a thriller, that explicitly asked what it meant to be a good person, based on criteria laid out by three millennia of moral philosophers. If the premise sounds dry, the show was wildly entertaining. You could say something similar about Schur’s new book, How to Be Perfect: The Correct Answer to Every Moral Question. It is his attempt to package everything he learned about moral philosophy during the making of The Good Place in as accessible a manner as possible. It’s an absolute breeze to read; funny and enlightening and revealing, despite its potentially heavy subject matter. “Well, that was the impetus for doing it, and the show”, he explains from his home in California. “I realised that this is the most vital writing that’s ever been done by humans, and it’s dense and impenetrable. The way that I started to think of it was like these people were writing recipes for chocolate chip cookies that were delicious and healthy and would help you lose weight, but their recipes were 800 pages long and written in German”. Spending an hour with Schur is an absolute salve. There’s something reassuringly paternal about how reasonable and inquisitive he is, and how unflappable in the face of moral confusion. This appears to be something that those around him revel in, too. “I have friends who send me texts like, ‘Hey, my cousin asked my brother to borrow money and it seems a little unethical’” he says. “People are going through their own moral quandaries, and I’ve become like an amateur expert to them.” I have to confess that I fall prey to this myself during our time together, basically using him as a philosophical fortune-telling machine to help clarify issues I have struggled with. Inevitably, talk quickly turns to Covid. How to Be Perfect touches on the pandemic a handful of times, but Schur admits that it was difficult not to make it the focus of the whole book. “The pandemic is a perfect way to discuss morality”, he says. “Every time you leave your house, you’re being faced with a bunch of moral choices that involve how you interact with other people, how you treat other people, what your responsibilities are, what other people’s responsibilities are at the family level, the local level, the state level, the national level, the international level. It’s pretty wild that it coincided with the book that I was writing about how to make better decisions.” Overwhelmingly, a huge aspect of moral philosophy is understanding that we share the world with other people, and it serves everybody well to be decent, but the pandemic has also revealed hidden reserves of selfishness. Is there a philosophical explanation for not wearing a face mask? “Ayn Rand is extremely popular because she is basically a ‘get out of jail free’ card for morality, right?” begins Schur. “She’s like, ‘No, actually, the more selfish you are the better off you are – and the better off the world is.’ Now, that is a truly and deeply bananas philosophy. It’s bananas on bananas. Yet because it’s so appealing to people who might be inclined to a selfish outlook, they have a moral basis for behaving that way.” One of the issues, he explains, is our woolly definition of freedom. “It’s such an enormous word,” he continues. “There are no checks and balances on the concept of freedom. However, when your freedom impinges upon the health and safety of others, the natural thing would be to find a membrane where the limits of your freedom meet the wellbeing of others. But they’re screaming and yelling about not having to wear a mask in this McDonald’s and beating you over the head with an American flag. All the nuance is lost in those arguments.” It’s hard not to be despondent. “It’s a real gut punch,” he nods. “It’s a daily gut punch that so many people have taken that position, because it just means that the lives of other people are uninteresting to them, and what else do we have? If you don’t care about anyone else, then what are we doing? What are we doing here?” An entire chapter of How to Be Perfect is dedicated to a subject unlikely to have bothered Aristotle: how to separate art from the artist. We live in a world of problematic faves, and we still lack clear consensus on how to work through the ugliness that arises when someone whose work we love does something personally unforgivable. In the book, Schur talks about his lifelong admiration for Woody Allen, even going as far as crediting Sleeper for kickstarting his interest in comedy. (Allen has been accused of sexually assaulting his daughter Dylan in 1992; he denies the allegations, and was was cleared by two subsequent investigations.) Where are you with his work now, I ask. “I think I can still enjoy the old Woody Allen movies that were meaningful to me,” he begins. “I think he’s artistically a genius. But the key is to not hide from the other stuff. When I watch his old movies, they still evoke memories of when I first watched them. But then some part of me is like, ‘Just remember the other stuff.’ It sucks because it means that, instead of enjoying them 100% I’m only enjoying them 74%, but I think the problem is that you can’t either ignore the reality of who the person is, or get rid of the work entirely. You’ve got to land somewhere in the middle.” Having dealt with the bigger issues, I attempt to end the interview by steering back into lighter territory. One running joke in How to Be Perfect is Schur’s dislike for pineapple pizza. So imagine that I invited you to my house and unwittingly serve you Hawaiian pizza. What do you do? Would you eat it? “First of all, thank you for breaking up probably the most important moral question of our times,” Schur laughs. What happens next is roughly the philosophical equivalent of watching Paul McCartney pull Get Back from thin air. “The answer is yes, I would,” he says. “I would 100% eat it, and I wouldn’t say a word about it. I know this to be true because I’m a vegetarian.” Oh God, I cringe, knowing that even in this hypothetical situation, I’ve committed an unforgivable crime. “There have been times in my life where I’ve gone to someone’s home and forgotten to tell them that I’m a vegetarian, and they serve burgers or hot dogs or whatever,” he says. “The shame and the discomfort of saying, ‘Oh, I don’t eat meat,’ puts them in such an unpleasant position, so I never say anything. The importance of me spending this one meal out of all of the meals that I eat in my life as a strict vegetarian does not outweigh the social propriety of accepting the kind offer of a meal created for me by someone else. I don’t feel like I have compromised my entire value system because I had some chicken salad.” At this point I start to feel bad about not asking if he ate meat before serving him an imaginary pizza. “It’s fine,” he reassures me. “The world keeps spinning. Everything’s fine. I mean, afterwards, I’m definitely going to talk shit about you,” he adds. “Because anyone who likes Hawaiian pizza deserves to be talked shit about. Not even in a moral way. Just, what’s wrong with that guy if he thinks Hawaiian pizza is a good thing to serve someone?” Michael Schur stops, having successfully interrogated the philosophical underpinnings of dinner etiquette. Your version of Curb Your Enthusiasm would be wildly different to Larry David’s, I say. “I don’t think it’d be that funny,” he laughs. “It’d just be a lot of like, ‘Well, actually, that’s a good point.’” How to Be Perfect: The Correct Answer to Every Moral Question is out now via QuercusThe diplomatic avenues appear exhausted. The army units are in position. And perhaps most tellingly, nations including the US, Australia and Britain this week began moving embassy staff out of Kyiv. Is there any hope left of averting a Russian invasion of Ukraine, and how on earth did we get to this point? Luke Harding reports from the frontline in south-eastern Ukraine, while Andrew Roth examines the build-up to the crisis. Then Simon Tisdall ruminates on the increasingly opaque motives of Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, a “rogue male” on the world stage whose destructive actions must be reined in. China’s controversial Winter Olympics are just over a week away, but Beijing’s biggest dilemma in the lead-up may come not from a diplomatic sporting cold shoulder, but an outbreak of Omicron. Will the fast-spreading Covid-19 variant force Beijing to double down on its national strategy of total virus suppression, or will it force a change – both in policy and mindset? Britain this week awaited the publication of a Cabinet Office report into lockdown parties at Downing Street – possibly as soon as today. As Boris Johnson’s desperate efforts to change the national conversation were derailed by new reports of a birthday gathering for the prime minister in June 2020, it emerged the police were also investigating the gatherings. Will it prove the icing on the cake for those who want to see Johnson booted out of No 10? Watch this space … For years, the jet pack was the ultimate symbol of the future, a key to soaring ambition and limitless movement. But now someone has actually invented one that works, hardly anyone seems interested. The author Dave Eggers takes to the skies to find out why. Get the Guardian Weekly delivered to your home address.Australia is considering supplying extra liquefied natural gas (LNG) to Europe after the US and the UK raised fears the continent’s reliance on Russia makes it vulnerable in a growing standoff with Vladimir Putin. With more than 100,000 Russian troops massing near the border with Ukraine, the US said it was working with allies and partners to prepare financial sanctions “with massive consequence” if the Russian president decided to invade the eastern European country. A senior Biden administration official revealed the US was also “looking at the global flow of LNG – whether it’s from the United States or from Australia or from other places”. Qatar is also part of the energy supply talks. “The conversation is really broad with a lot of companies and countries around the world,” the administration official said at a background press briefing. The official said Russia had already restricted the flow of gas through the pipeline running through Ukraine from about 100m cubic metres a day to 50m. The Australian resources minister, Keith Pitt, said Australia was “a leading and reliable global exporter of LNG” and “stands ready to assist with any request for further supplies”. “This shows how important Australian resources are to energy supplies around the world,” Pitt said in a statement. The plans come after the UK also raised concerns about Germany’s reliance on Russian gas. The British prime minister, Boris Johnson, said one of the “big issues we all face” in crafting a strong sanctions package against Russia was “the heavy dependence, of our European friends in particular, on Russian gas”. He said the UK was “in a stronger position to resist the Russian gas blackmail”. “We have to be respectful of this, but the simple fact is that about 3% of the UK’s gas supplies come from Russia, whereas about 36% of German energy needs come from Russian gas,” Johnson told the House of Commons on Tuesday. “We are working together with president Biden and other colleagues to see what we can do to increase the supply of gas both to Europe and of course to this country.” The British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, who visited Australia for talks last week, said a further military incursion by Russia into Ukraine would trigger “coordinated sanctions”. “We are working with allies and partners across the world because this is a threat not just to Europe, but to broader global stability,” she said. Truss warned of “the response we will see from other authoritarian regimes around the world if Putin is allowed to get away with what he is seeking to do”. “That is why it is important that we work with allies, from Japan to India to Australia, as well as the United States and our Nato allies, to strengthen our resolve and our security and to make it absolutely clear that none of these regimes will succeed,” Truss said. The Australian government has called for a de-escalation of tensions and has left the door open to imposing sanctions on Russian officials in the event of an invasion of Ukraine. The foreign minister, Marise Payne, described sanctions as “a potential tool” Australia and like-minded countries could use “to convey our very strong concerns about such aggressive behaviour”. Russia’s ambassador to Australia, Alexey Pavlovsky, brushed off the threat of Australian sanctions, saying it would not have any effect on Moscow’s position. “Sanctions just don’t work,” Pavlovsky told ABC Radio National on Wednesday. He denied that the Russian troop buildup showed any intention to invade Ukraine, arguing it would be “a funny way to prepare an invasion – just gather troops on the border and just let them sit there for months”. “These troops are not a threat, they are a warning – a warning to Ukraine’s rulers not to attempt any reckless military adventures.” Russia’s foreign ministry has pushed for “security guarantees”, including the retreat of Nato from all countries that joined the alliance after 1997. It has also sought a guarantee that Ukraine never be admitted to Nato. Some western analysts have said the sweeping demands seemed designed to fail. Pavlovsky said the Australian government’s position, and its decision to remove family members of diplomats from its embassy in Ukraine, was “regrettable”. “Thirty years ago Nato forces were thousands of miles away from Russian borders and now they are just around the corner,” Pavlovsky said. “I fully understand that some countries situated thousands of miles away might find it difficult to appreciate our concerns, but for Russia it’s not a situation which is thousands of miles away.” The Australian government says it is not considering sending troops or military assets in the event of a conflict but insists it is offering “absolute and steadfast support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity”. Australia has also flagged its willingness to help Ukraine fend off cyber-attacks. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The defence minister, Peter Dutton, said on Tuesday that Russia was “obvious in its intent, amassing troops on the border”, and he predicted “bloody scenes” if it invaded Ukraine. The comments follow the Australian government’s decision on Monday to urge any Australian citizens to leave Ukraine immediately because “flight availability could change or be suspended at short notice”. But Ukraine’s defence minister, Oleksii Reznikov, appealed for calm, telling parliament an invasion was not imminent and people should “sleep well”.Football played by human beings is not like a Madden game, where the “progressive fatigue” factor can be switched off. The players we like to think of as giant Energizer Bunnies get tired. Case in point: the Buffalo Bills defense on Sunday. The Kansas City Chiefs, the Bills’ opponents in an exhilarating AFC divisional round playoff game, ran 16 plays in their final three possessions. The Chiefs covered 194 yards and scored two touchdowns, plus a field goal that they needed to send the game into overtime. They faced third down on only two of those 16 plays, converting both. After the Chiefs scored a touchdown on the first possession of overtime to win, 42-36, the grumbling began: the Bills should have been given a chance to match that touchdown. But that is not how the NFL rules for overtime work. Should they be changed? Maybe. Maybe not. “I love the concept of sudden death,” Rick Gosselin, who covered the NFL for decades for the Dallas Morning News, tells the Guardian. “In hockey, after one team scores a goal in overtime, does the other team get the chance to match it?” Gosselin adds: “There are three elements of football: offense, defense and special teams. Build a defense that can force a punt in overtime. Giving both teams a possession favors the offenses. If you want to go all in on offense, keep winning those coin tosses. If you want to win a championship, build a defense that can be as effective as your offense for 60 minutes and beyond.” Suppose Buffalo had answered with a touchdown, which, considering this game, was quite possible. Then what? Then the next score wins? Declare a tie and schedule a replay? A penalty shootout? As much fun as this game was, these guys can’t play on forever. A day after the game, Kansas City coach Andy Reid said of both teams getting at least one possession in overtime: “I wouldn’t be opposed to it. It’s a hard thing. It was great for us last night, but is it great for the game which is the most important thing we should all be looking out for? To make things equal, it probably needs to be able to hit both offenses, both defenses.” Much attention afterward went to Buffalo quarterback Josh Allen’s final play of the day: calling tails to lose the coin flip that decided which team would get the ball first in overtime. Had the Bills won the toss, Allen very well might have marched Buffalo to a winning touchdown. After all, he had been magnificent, driving the Bills for two touchdowns on Buffalo’s last two possessions of the game. The Chiefs’ defense was gassed, too, giving up a total of 150 yards in 23 plays. Allen gained 23 vital yards on six valiant scrambles on the first fourth-quarter drive. He did not deserve to lose the game. “We should never let a football game be determined from a coin,” Bills left tackle Dion Dawkins said. “Like, I think that’s the most craziest rule in sports. Like, you can fight your entire fight the whole game, and then the game comes down to a 50-50 chance of a coin toss. Like, this ain’t Vegas. Like, we’re not at the casino table. Like, this ain’t no 50-50 bet and there ain’t even no 50-50 bet. And it’s just crazy that that was the outcome.” That is an A-plus quote, but the coin flip did not determine the winner, just the first team to get the chance to score a touchdown. Had Kansas City managed only a field goal, or punted, Buffalo would have got their chance. The Bills knew the rules. Only two players on the Kansas City defense – cornerback L’Jarius Sneed and safety Juan Thornhill – played all 64 snaps. Meanwhile, seven Buffalo players played all 76 of their team’s defensive snaps. Kansas City used 21 players on defense, compared with 17 for the Bills. There is also the question of how the Bills let the game go to overtime in the first place. All the Bills needed to do was to keep the Chiefs out of field-goal range (or from completing a Hail Mary pass) on their last drive of regulation. Kansas City, starting from their own 25-yard line, gained 44 yards in two plays covering 10 seconds before kicking the tying field goal. Much to their credit, many members of Bills’ Mafia took to social media to comment that Buffalo were way too mushy on those two plays, refusing to jam the Chiefs’ receivers at the line of scrimmage to make it harder for them to get open. Others have suggested that the Bills should have squibbed the kickoff before that drive, starting the clock when the ball was touched, rather than booming it into the end zone for a touchback. (That strategy carries risks: What if the kick goes out of bounds, or only 15 yards, or is returned for a touchdown?) In any case, special teams helped determine the outcome – the way it should be. The procedure in college football, which does not use kickoffs or punts in overtime, is lacking. Beginning with the third overtime period, teams alternate two-point conversion tries, not even full 25-yard drives. Even 21-year-olds only have so much energy. As delightful as Sunday’s game was to watch, it is unrealistic to expect much more than what we got from men who had rammed into or run around each other for 3 hours 15 minutes, running up 974 total yards of offense – especially coming after a newly extended 17-game season. Prior to Sunday, the most notable playoff game using these overtime rules came in Super Bowl LI five years ago, when the New England Patriots scored on the first possession of overtime to beat Atlanta, 34-28. The Falcons did not get much sympathy after the game, because they had a 28-3 lead late in the third quarter and got five chances to stop Tom Brady. The Chiefs scored on six of seven possessions after halftime. The Bills had enough chances to win the game. Why should have they gotten another chance, just because the shootout narrative demanded it? Rules are rules, and life is not always fair, as humans say.Cardi B has been awarded $4m (£2.96m) in damages in a libel lawsuit against a celebrity gossip blogger who claimed that the rapper was a prostitute who used cocaine and had contracted sexually transmitted infections. Cardi B, born Belcalis Almánzar, sued the blogger known as Tasha K in 2019 for posting several videos that spread “malicious rumours”. A federal jury found Tasha K, born Latasha Kebe, liable on two counts of slander, one count of libel and one of invasion of privacy (incidentally the name of Cardi B’s 2018 debut album). The jury increased Cardi B’s damages from $1.25m on 24 January, adding an additional $2.8m the following day. The figure includes $25,000 for medical expenses and approximately $1.3m to cover legal fees. Kebe’s YouTube channel, UnWineWithTashaK, has a million subscribers. Lawyers for Cardi B also cited a video in which Kebe claimed that the rapper’s first-born child would have intellectual disabilities. Cardi B testified that the videos made her feel “extremely suicidal” and said “only an evil person could do that”. The rapper’s lawsuit said the videos would damage her reputation and her business prospects and that Kebe was “obsessed with slandering” her and using her name to get views for her content. In response to the verdict, Kebe tweeted: “My Husband, Attorney’s [sic], &amp; I fought really hard. I want to thank them for their long hours and sleepless nights … it’s only up from here.” According to the rapper’s lawsuit, many of Kebe’s videos about Cardi B remain on her YouTube channel despite receiving a cease-and-desist letter in 2018, shortly after she began posting about her. The lawsuit, filed in Kebe’s home state of Georgia, also included a guest on the Tasha K channel, Starmarie Ebony Jones, who claimed to be an old friend of the rapper. She was exempt from this lawsuit after moving to New York, where last year she was also found liable to Cardi B on counts of libel, slander and invasion of privacy. Earlier this month, Cardi B offered to pay the burial costs for the 17 people killed in a fire in a Bronx high-rise building. “I’m extremely proud to be from the Bronx and I have lots of family and friends who live and work there still. So, when I heard about the fire and all of the victims, I knew I needed to do something to help,” she said in a statement. “I cannot begin to imagine the pain and anguish that the families of the victims are experiencing, but I hope that not having to worry about the costs associated with burying their loved ones will help as they move forward and heal. I send my prayers and condolences to everyone affected by this horrific tragedy.” • This story was originally published on 25 January, and has been updated to include information about the increase in damages.With the clock ticking inexorably down to Deadline Day and Newcastle still desperate to get new recruits in the door, fans who have spent the past few months crowing about the wealth of their new Saudi owners now seem weirdly surprised by the notion that clubs who currently employ players they are interested in might want to take them for a ride. Eddie Howe has insisted the club will “draw a line” on prospective deals if they feel they are being rinsed by opportunistic rivals, in a stance likely to be tested to within an inch of its life over the next few days. But, for now, it seems they have abandoned all hope of bringing Jesse Lingard to St James’ Park for the remaining six months of his contract because they feel Manchester United are taking massive liberties by asking for a £10m loan fee. Robin Gosens is another player who has been repeatedly linked with a move to Tyneside in the current window but the Atalanta left-back looks set to join Internazionale for £21m, while Sevilla continue to play hardball over Diego Carlos and have turned down yet another bid for the Brazilian central defender and declared he is not for sale. Newcastle have also tabled an offer of £33m for in-demand Lyon midfielder Bruno Guimarães, who would rather go to Arsenal or Juventus. Despite giving him very limited game time, Manchester United interim boss Ralf Rangnick doesn’t want to let Donny van de Beek leave Old Trafford. The frustrated midfielder is believed to have other ideas and may stamp his feet until he is allowed to go to Crystal Palace or Valencia on loan. The south London club are believed to be in the box seat, with transfer guru Fabrizio Romano reporting that they have “submitted a straight loan proposal” to United. Currently representing Morocco at the Africa Cup of Nations, where his side booked their berth in the last eight with a win over Malawi, Sofyan Amrabat may be off to Tottenham on loan. The Fiorentina midfielder has been identified as a replacement for the Paris Saint-Germain-bound Tanguy Ndombele and will go on loan with an option to buy in the summer for £12m. Spurs seem less likely to sign Luis Díaz, having had a bid rejected by Porto for their Colombian winger. The slump in form being endured by Dele Alli hasn’t put off a raft of Premier League suitors who are willing to take a punt on the notion that a change of scenery might help the Tottenham midfielder rediscover his long-departed mojo. Burnley, Brighton, Newcastle, Everton and Southampton are all believed to be interested in giving the out-of-sorts-but-undeniably-gifted midfielder a chance to resurrect his stagnating career. Brentford have upped their bid for Nottingham Forest midfielder Brennan Johnson, who showcased his skills to a wider audience during his side’s win over Derby last Saturday. Meanwhile in Lancashire, Burnley are in advanced talks with Dinamo Zagreb regarding the prospect of bringing Croatia midfielder Mislav Orsic to Turf Moor. Along with Newcastle and Crystal Palace, Burnley are also being linked with a move for Juventus outcast Aaron Ramsey, who will be keen on getting game time unlikely to be afforded to him by his current employers before the first of two potential World Cup eliminators for Wales in March.The body of a man missing since a boat capsized on Sydney Harbour on the weekend has been found in Middle Harbour. The 49-year-old fisherman had been missing since the early hours of Saturday when he was thrown from a boat along with another man, aged 25, and a dog off North Harbour. The younger man was rescued a few hours later, about 5am, after being spotted by a local fisherman in the water near Dobroyd Head. On Wednesday morning, police were called to Middle Harbour before 10am after two other fishermen located a body in the water near Washaway Bay in Clontarf. The body was recovered by the marine command and identified as the missing 49-year-old. A report will be prepared for the coroner, New South Wales police said in a statement. The 25-year-old was rescued on Saturday morning by surf lifesavers on jet skis and taken to Little Manly Beach where he told police his boat had flipped with his friend and a dog on board. The dog was found alive at nearby Cave Beach about 10.30am after the boat’s fuel tank and rubber mats were earlier recovered about 3.7km off the coast. The 49-year-old, who the ABC named as Darren Huber, was said to have no fixed address and had been living in a camper van in the north shore area.Fifteen months after it was revealed that students could end up leaving school in England without studying a single piece of literature by a Black or minority ethnic author, research has found that teachers are still crying out for more diverse texts on the English syllabus. Asked which changes to the English syllabus they felt would most help their students, 80% of secondary school teachers, and 69% of primary school teachers, said they wanted more diverse and representative set texts. The survey of 2,270 teachers was made by Teacher Tapp for publisher Pearson. The research follows the report last year that just 0.7% of GCSE students in England study a book by a writer of colour, compared with the 34.4% of school-age students in England who identify as Black, Asian or minority ethnic. The research was done by Penguin and race equality thinktank the Runnymede Trust, which teamed up to form the campaign Lit in Colour to help support schools diversify the teaching of English literature. Although exam boards have since expanded their offerings, Lit in Colour found that lack of budget, and books, were key barriers facing those teachers looking to introduce new texts to their classes. In its first year, Lit in Colour offered resources and guidance to 119 GCSE and A-Level year groups around the country, and almost 12,000 students, in diversifying their English Literature curricula. Those participating received the four new texts introduced by Pearson to its A-Level and GCSE set texts – Les Blancs by Lorraine Hansberry, Sweat by Lynn Nottage, Home Fire by Kamila Shamsie and The Cutting Season by Attica Locke – as well as access to set texts ranging from Malorie Blackman’s Boys Don’t Cry to Alice Walker’s The Color Purple. The programme is now opening for a second year to schools looking to diversify their English literature offering. Programme manager Zaahida Nabagereka said Lit in Colour’s aim was “to normalise Black, Asian and minority ethnic writers within the literature curriculum by providing the necessary tools to teachers and students”. She added that, in its first year, the programme had received messages from librarians “who received their mini library donations excited to share the new books with students, but also from students saying they felt inspired after attending an author event”. At Westonbirt school, teacher Tabatha Sheehan said that children need a more diverse curriculum. “As a predominantly white, middle-class school out in the Cotswolds, we knew that we needed to better explore and fully acknowledge the wealth of talent that exists beyond the ‘canon’ of English literature and to move beyond the ‘intellectual’ prescriptivism and elitism in studying the linguistics, narratives and contexts of stories from other cultures,” she said. “We are more committed than ever to making the curriculum as representative as possible, to opening up our students’ minds to the world outside their neighbourhoods, and to ensuring that no young person feels excluded by the books we teach and read.”The Royal Shakespeare Company is taking the innovative step of casting the people of England as the people of England in its new production of Henry VI Part 2 that will be performed at the company’s theatre in Stratford-upon-Avon this spring. Dozens of people with no theatrical background from six areas of the country will take part in the production, alongside a cast of professional actors. All are involved in Shakespeare Nation, a community participation programme run by the RSC and partner theatres, aimed at reaching people who have little or no experience of theatre-going or Shakespeare’s plays. They have started rehearsing in theatres in Blackpool, Bradford, Canterbury, Cornwall, Norwich and Nottingham, and will join the RSC in Stratford when the production opens in April. The 74 adults will be joined by 21 youngsters aged 13-17 drawn from a network of schools that have an association with the RSC. They are youngsters with a talent for acting but from backgrounds that might restrict their chances of getting into the profession, the RSC said. The youngsters come from Barrow-in-Furness, Birmingham, Blackpool, Bradford, Canterbury, County Durham, Hull, Launceston, London, Middlesbrough, Northampton, Nottingham, Stoke-on-Trent and York. Shakespeare’s Henry VI trilogy tells the gripping and blood-drenched story of the brutal struggle for the English crown in the 15th century. The RSC has renamed part 2 as Henry VI: Rebellion. Its run will be followed by part 3, renamed Henry VI: Wars of the Roses. In the two productions, nine main parts will be reserved for actors that graduated from drama school last year, who have found launching their careers especially difficult when theatres and productions have been forced to close as a result of the Covid pandemic. Owen Horsley, who directs Rebellion and Wars of the Roses, said there were 85 characters on the cast list of Henry VI Part 2. “One of the reasons for this wide array of characters is a series of scenes that Shakespeare writes concerning the people of England, who in various ways interact with the royal family.” Horsley and Gregory Doran, co-director of Rebellion, had the idea of using the RSC’s outreach programme to cast ordinary people to play the people of England. Some scenes will see more than 50 people on the RSC stage. “This is an extremely exciting project as it allows this history play, written over 400 years ago, to respond directly to the state of the nation,” said Horsley. Kelly Harris, 23, from Bradford said she was “anxious and excited” about the prospect of taking to the RSC stage in a full-scale performance of Shakespeare. “At school I got really sick of Romeo and Juliet. But then I did Much Ado About Nothing for GCSE, and fell in love with it. I watched different Shakespeare productions on live streams, YouTube and the BBC – and then my mum sent me a link to the Shakespeare Nation project. I applied for it during lockdown for something to do.” Harris said she rarely went to the theatre. “Not many Shakespeare productions come to Bradford.” She has yet to find out what her part in Rebellion will be. “The play has a really good backstory, and there’s lots of gore and fighting. It’s right up my street.” In Rebellion, the nonprofessionals will play the roles of working people who take part in the uprising led by the character of Jack Cade against Henry VI, and townsfolk in a scene where Henry VI is out hunting. Some will have speaking parts.Actor-turned-director Romola Garai makes her feature debut with this accomplished upscale British horror with touches of Eraserhead and Alien; it’s that particular kind of crepuscular indie chiller which you could call “body horror”, where the body in question is every single manky, mouldy surface and inanimate object. The film might not fully absorb all its images and ideas, and the dynamic between the male lead and two different female co-stars in the story’s “past” and “present” sections feels in some ways like a slightly redundant duplication. But it’s stylish and well-acted, and leads up to a surreal image of evil. Alec Secareanu plays Tomas, an ex-soldier from a central European war zone haunted by his memories. While in uniform, he had befriended a fugitive civilian called Miriam (Angeliki Papoulia) and in that field of conflict he had become guilty of violence and evil – symbolised by his unsettling discovery in the woodland of a pagan amulet buried in the soil, whose shell motif eerily recurs all around him. Now Tomas has made it to the UK as a refugee, carrying his anguish around with him, and twinkly-eyed nun Sister Claire (Imelda Staunton) appears to take pity on him, offering him a place to stay in a crumbling, derelict old house with Magda (a very good performance from Swiss actor Carla Juri), a young woman who lives there with an invalid mother dying, in agony, from some nameless disease in the topmost bedroom of the house. Naturally we hear this woman’s unearthly screeches and groans, and we’re permitted increasingly explicit glimpses of her monstrous appearance. But there is something strange about Sister Claire, and it’s an enjoyably unsettling and startling performance from Staunton. Could it be that Garai has studied Kathleen Byron’s performance in the Powell/Pressburger classic Black Narcissus? Amulet is flawed, but it does a good job of alchemising drear into fear. • Amulet is released on 28 January in cinemas.From menopause calendars to menopause scented candles, and menopause supplements to menopause spa breaks, there is no shortage of products to help ease a woman’s transition into her post-reproductive years. If you’re after something stronger, how about vaginal rejuvenation laser treatment or bioidentical oestrogen? You could even try to postpone menopause for a decade or so – provided you are willing to freeze a slice of your ovary in your 20s and then have it grafted back on in later life. Menopause is enjoying a moment. After centuries of enduring the rollercoaster of physical and emotional symptoms that often accompany it, middle-aged women have never been so well-catered for with products purporting to help. But is this sudden choice empowering, or just exploitative? Half the world’s population will experience the menopause and, according to one recent report, the global menopause market represents a $600bn (£450bn) business opportunity. Dietary supplements, symptom-tracking apps, telemedicine and cosmetics represent some of the biggest investment prospects. “Women in this life stage continue to be sorely underserved,” says Adrianna Samaniego, an investor at the US venture capital company the Female Founders Fund (FFF), which produced the report. “And it’s not like the maternity experience where it’s nine months – this can last for 10 to 30 years.” But while medical experts are delighted that common symptoms such as night sweats, heavy bleeding, anxiety and low libido are being discussed more openly, and welcome the development of workplace programmes to better support women, some are concerned by the apparent menopause gold rush that is under way. “Overall, it is absolutely brilliant that so many more people are talking about menopause, but I think it’s getting too complicated, too medicalised, and too commercial,” says Dr Heather Currie, an associate specialist gynaecologist at Dumfries &amp; Galloway NHS, and managing director of the menopausematters website. “When I was experiencing symptoms five years ago, I couldn’t get hormone replacement therapy (HRT) from my GP” says Dr Louise Newson, a GP, menopause specialist and founder of the Menopause Charity, who has set up a private menopause clinicI would have spent thousands on anything to save my job as a doctor, and to save my marriage, because I was really struggling.” Menopause occurs when a woman’s periods stop and her ovaries cease producing significant amounts of the hormones oestrogen and progesterone. This can occur naturally, due a diminishing number of eggs – usually between the ages of about 45 and 55 – or it can occur prematurely, if the ovaries are surgically removed, for example, or damaged by treatments such as chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Oestrogen affects the body in many ways – from brain function, to bone density, skin elasticity, vaginal lubrication and the distribution of fat – so losing it causes our organs and tissues to behave differently. However, this transition does not occur overnight. Perimenopause refers to the time leading up to a woman’s last menstrual period. “During that time, women’s hormones are very variable,” says Dr Paula Briggs, a consultant in sexual and reproductive health at Liverpool Women’s NHS Foundation Trust and chair elect of the British Menopause Society. These fluctuating hormone levels underpin some of the symptoms women experience, such as heavy and/or irregular periods, heart palpitations or mood swings. As perimenopause progresses, women may experience other symptoms, such as hot flushes, night sweats, sleeplessness, skin irritation, anxiety or a reduced interest in sex – some of which may continue even after a woman stops having periods. “Very few women will get away without anything at all,” says Briggs. Post-menopause, hormone levels tend to be low and more stable, but this too can create problems. In the short term, falling oestrogen levels affect the part of the brain that controls body temperature, resulting in hot flushes and night sweats. Many women will experience vaginal dryness, itching, or pain during sex, which, left untreated, may increase the risk of recurrent urinary tract infections. Longer-term, low oestrogen affects the strength and density of bones, putting women at greater risk of osteoporosis, fractures and chronic pain. It may also cause changes that make women more vulnerable to heart disease and stroke. For centuries, many women suffered this transition in silence but, today, there are broadly two “camps”: those plumping for hormone replacement therapies (HRT) to alleviate their symptoms, and those seeking alternatives to hormone treatment. The history of HRT began in the early 1940s but it wasn’t until the 60s that the use of HRT became widespread. arious studies began to suggest that HRT might have other benefits, such as the prevention of osteoporosis or cardiovascular disease. This illusion was shattered in 2002, with the publication of the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) study, which found that HRT actually increased the risk of coronary heart disease and heart attacks, and also breast cancer and stroke – although the risk of colorectal or endometrial cancer and osteoporosis was reduced. The results triggered panic among many HRT users. “There was a 70% or greater decline in the use of prescription menopausal hormone therapy,” says Prof JoAnn Manson of Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, US, a principal investigator on the WHI study since its inception in the early 90s. This sudden rejection of HRT left a large vacuum in terms of treatments for women. “Companies rushed in to fill the void,” says Manson. “They were not required to list the potential risks. They did not have to put a black box warning on compounded bioidentical hormone therapy, for example, or on these over-the-counter products that are untested for either safety or efficacy.” It does appear that some women benefit from taking such products. For instance, a 2016 review in the Journal of the American Medical Association (Jama) found that phytoestrogens (plant-based compounds that mimic the effects of oestrogen in the body), such as soy extracts or herbal remedies, including red clover and black cohosh, were associated with modest reductions in the frequency of hot flushes and vaginal dryness but produced no significant reduction in night sweats. “However, because of general suboptimal quality and the heterogeneous nature of the current evidence, further rigorous studies are needed,” its authors said. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice) also states that black cohosh or St John’s wort may relieve hot flshes and night sweats. However, “the quality, purity, constituents, and safety” of complementary products “may be unknown, and different preparations may vary”, it said. “I think the assumption is that if you can buy something over the counter, it’s safe, but that’s not necessarily so – and you wouldn’t necessarily get the same level of consultation as if you spoke to a health professional,” says Briggs. “Black cohosh can be toxic to the liver, depending on the concentration, and St John’s wort is an enzyme-inducing drug, so it can interfere with other medications. Phytoestrogens like red clover are OK, but you wouldn’t take them if you’d had oestrogen-receptor positive breast cancer – because it could stimulate any residual cancer cells to grow.” Then there are compounded “bioidentical” hormone therapies beloved of celebrities such as Oprah Winfrey – plant-based preparations promoted as being identical to human hormones. Crafted into bespoke creams, lozenges or vaginal preparations by “specialist pharmacies” – often following costly blood or saliva hormone tests – they are sometimes painted as a natural or safer alternative to standard HRT. “These are not regulated, they’re not licensed, and they come under supplements, so they don’t have to follow the same standards as regulated hormones to be produced,” says Newson. Neither do you have to be a doctor to prescribe them . “I think a lot of it is a big marketing ploy, because people have been scared off HRT.” In their efforts to avoid conventional HRT, some women who are experiencing vaginal or bladder symptoms are resorting to expensive “laser vaginal rejuvenation” treatment. This involves creating “micro-abrasions” to stimulate the production of collagen and boost the blood supply. Although some studies have suggested that laser rejuvenation may help to alleviate some symptoms, the evidence for this is mixed: one study published in Jama in October found that so-called “fractional carbon dioxide laser treatment” may be no better than a placebo. There are also concerns that laser treatment could be harmful in some situations. In 2018, the FDA issued a statement warning about the possibility of burns and scarring as a result of it. Laser therapy may not be necessary. If over-the-counter lubricants and moisturisers don’t help, low-dose vaginal oestrogen delivered as a cream or pessary often proves an effective treatment. Because the hormone is released locally “it doesn’t raise the blood level of oestrogen above what is considered the normal menopausal range”, says Manson. “Local oestrogen is very effective and it’s safe for most women.” Evidence is also mounting that some of the fears about HRT may have been overblown. “Many of the risks [identified in the original studies] were driven by women who were more distant from the onset of menopause when they started hormone therapy – particularly women who were at least 70 years old when they were enrolled in the trial,” says Manson. “Women in their 50s tended to do quite well. They even had a signal for a lower risk of heart disease and all-cause mortality.” Also, the HRT formulations available today are different from what was available to those women enrolled in the WHI study. Alongside this, women are often given capsules of progestogen – similar to the progesterone that women naturally produce during their reproductive years – to counter the effects of oestrogen on the lining of the uterus and reduce the risk of cancer. HRT isn’t risk-free, but then no medical product is. Newson argues women should be allowed to take HRT for life if they want to. “Menopause is a hormone deficiency, but people have been scared away from their own hormones because of poor data, and because of scaremongering in the media and medical press,” she says. Because Newson runs a private menopause clinic she, arguably, has commercial skin in the game. She balks at this, pointing out that she channels some of the proceeds into her not-for-profit enterprises, such as the Menopause Charity and the balance menopause app. She claims she set up her private practice because women have often struggled to find help within the NHS, and “have nowhere else to go”. Also, because there aren’t enough dedicated menopause clinics for specialists like herself to secure NHS jobs. However, that’s starting to change. “For some women, it might depend on who they’ve seen,” says Currie. “To counteract that, there’s huge amount of education going on with the aim of women being able to get consistent advice wherever they are in the country.” If a woman’s GP isn’t helpful, she advises asking if anyone in the surgery has a special interest in menopause, or to be referred to one of the regional menopause specialist services that exist in many areas of the UK. HRT isn’t the only option, though, and with recent publicity around the benefits of HRT from celebrity advocates such as Davina McCall, some experts feel that the pendulum is now starting to swing too far in the opposite direction. “I’m now seeing women who often have significant health problems, who are being led to believe that HRT will miraculously cure them,” says Briggs. “Some of that is coming from celebrities who often have a very different lifestyle from the patients I’m dealing with.” She is anxious that the overprescribing of hormone therapies could trigger the same sort of crash as the publication of the WHI study did in 2002. She says: “I think there’s a lot of us who are feeling very uncomfortable – largely around very high [hormone] doses being used, lack of progestogens, testosterone by the shedload. Of course, HRT might be appropriate, but it might not be.” But pills and procedures are only part of the solution. “Menopause is a natural life stage for the majority of women, and it needs to be embraced and managed, rather than treated as a disease,” says Irene Aninye, director of science programmes at the Society for Women’s Health Research, which recently recommended preparing women early (as young as 35) for better health during the menopause transition and beyond. “This transition is different for everybody, and how your body responds to it is affected by your overall health and any specific conditions you may have,” Aninye says. A woman who is overweight or unfit is likely to gain more from healthy eating and exercise than taking hormones. Eating a healthy diet and taking regular exercise will also help guard against the longer term consequences of low oestrogen, such as cardiovascular disease and osteoporosis. “What is needed,” says Briggs, “is a situation where menopause is talked about so that people know what’s likely to come, and they can make informed decisions about how they want to manage that part of their life.”The Zimbabwe Football Association (Zifa) and Fifa have been accused of “going silent” over allegations that female referees were sexually harassed by Zifa officials. The allegations – made against Zifa’s referees committee secretary general, Obert Zhoya, and its chairman, Bryton Malandule – were first reported by local media in September 2020 before two of the alleged victims, both referees, officially registered their complaints with the Zifa board. The allegations were also sent to Fifa, the global game’s governing body, the Confederation of African Football (Caf), and the Council of Southern Africa Football Associations (Cosafa). It was not until the alleged victims reported the claims to police, in December 2021, that a formal investigation was launched. One of the alleged victims, who did not want to be named, told the Guardian that she had not officiated since making the complaints and felt “emotionally drained” by the whole experience. “Zifa is a huge disappointment,” she said. “I’ve told myself I can never rely on them. I had high hopes that Fifa would intervene and fight to defend us female referees but they let me down as well. My question is why would Fifa go silent? I’m not saying they have to rush and make my case a first priority but at least show me that you’re keen to assist me.” One alleged victim said she had been “humiliated, intimidated and degraded” by Zhoya, claiming she had received a series of WhatsApp messages from him asking for her to spend the night with him in a hotel. “I would like to put on record that he had been making these unwelcome sexual advances since September 2019,” she wrote in a letter to Zifa. “The allegations I make herein are backed by evidence in the form of phone call voice recordings. I then got the courage from the evidence I had, and learning that I’m not the only one [who] was subject to this harassment. “I have been on the Zifa [referees] panel since 2019, I’m 30 years old. I expected to be treated with respect, not like a lady of the night. I however request you to look into the matter and possibly address the issue and in the process protect me and my fellow female referees who are suffering silently.” Another official accused Malandule, who is also a member of the Zifa board, of making “sexual advances” towards her in March 2019. Contacted by the Guardian, Malandule said: “I am sure that you appreciate that when issues are before judicial bodies, one cannot comment as per the sub judice rule.” Zhoya had not responded to the Guardian’s request for comment at the time of publication. Another experienced referee claimed she has been “frozen out” of officiating at matches for offering support to alleged victims. She claimed several more officials are too afraid to report abuse claims because of the way the cases have been handled. She said: “These reports were made immediately when the stories came out and we have gone more than a year without anything being done or any feedback. I think Fifa should have kept in touch with the victims to reassure them that they are still working on it. By going quiet, it seems like it is a minor issue. The girls feel very, very bitter about their experiences.” In November, the entire Zifa board was suspended by the Zimbabwe government’s sports and recreation commission (SRC) over “several incidents of gross incompetence” that the SRC described as “contrary to the national interest”. As well as alleged mismanagement and lack of accountability in the use of public funds, it cited the allegations of sexual harassment of female referees. Fifa disapproves of governmental interference in the running of member associations. It warned Zimbabwe that it could be banned from the Africa Cup of Nations unless the elected FA was restored by 3 January 2022 – a threat that failed to materialise. “There are clear rules in the Fifa statutes that prohibit any undue third-party interference in the affairs of any Fifa member association,” a Fifa spokesperson said. In December 2021 Joyce Cook, Fifa’s chief social responsibility and education officer, said Fifa had referred the sexual harassment allegations to Caf for three months because it “did not have the competence to investigate and judge such conducts”. A Fifa spokesperson told the Guardian: “The Fifa ethics committee is aware of the allegations and a process is ongoing in accordance with the rules of competence set out in article 30 of the code of ethics. Please understand we cannot comment further at this stage.” A Caf spokesperson said: “Caf is aware of the matter. We have been in touch with the relevant authorities in the country because it is now a matter being handled by the relevant competent authorities in that country. There is nothing further Caf would say at this stage.” A global investigative network intended to tackle sexual abuse across all sports is due to be established by Fifa and a United Nations agency this year in the wake of the scandals in Afghanistan and Haiti revealed by the Guardian.“Every day is different,” said Tim Davis, a concrete mixer truck driver in the Seattle, Washington, area. The work Davis and his coworkers do on a daily basis provides the foundation for every big construction and infrastructure project in the region, with long hours and varying start times every workday, leaving little time to spend with family. “We live in those trucks day in and day out,” Davis said. He is one of 330 concrete mixer drivers and plant workers – represented by Teamsters Local 174 – who have been on a general strike over unfair labor practices, accusing their employers of refusing to negotiate in good faith. The striking workers fear employers want to purge unionized workers from the area’s construction industry and attempt to bankrupt the union through litigation. The strike is reverberating through the construction industry in and around Seattle, which has the second most construction cranes of any city in the US and has been leading the country’s construction boom since the pandemic hit. Hundreds of contractors have been laid off as construction projects have ground to a halt or been forced to reduce operations without concrete, and layoffs are expected to continue as the strike drags on. “The industry is moving forward and we’re falling behind,” added Davis. “The employers say they are family run, but I would never treat family like that. We were out on the picket lines through the holidays in the cold and there’s over 300 other guys out there. They all have families and their healthcare or medical is up this month. That affects 300 families and there are others now being laid off and that affects their families.” Some 34 dump truck drivers began striking on 19 November at Gary Merlino Construction, with about 100 workers joining the strike on 1 December. The remaining workers launched an industry wide strike on 4 December at six different employers that dominate the concrete industry in the Seattle area: Gary Merlino Construction, Stoneway Concrete, Cadman, CalPortland, Salmon Bay Sand &amp; Gravel and Lehigh Cement. Workers unanimously voted in favor of authorizing the strike. The companies’ lead negotiator, president of Gary Merlino Construction Charlie Oliver, did not respond to multiple requests for comment for this story. The workers’ contract expired on 31 July 2021, and they had worked without a contract for months before walking off the job in response to the stalled negotiations. “Since the contract expired, we’ve gotten nowhere. It’s actually gotten worse,” said Todd Parker, a concrete driver at Cadman Seattle and member of the bargaining committee. “What we’d like to see is what everybody else got this year. We just want to be treated as equally as everybody else and they’re not right now.” Workers have argued employers’ proposals for a new union contract included less compensation than other construction industry workers in the area receive, and would result in a decrease in compensation over the next three years, with inflation and the high cost of living in the area taken into account. The union has also claimed employers refuse to fund healthcare for retirees, even though the union offered to cover any cost increases. “For the last two years we have been deemed essential workers fighting through this pandemic. You think we’d be met with just a little bit of appreciation and gratitude, but that sure hasn’t been the case,” said Brett Gallagher, a concrete mix driver at CalPortland and bargaining committee member. Gallagher emphasized the pride he takes in his work, along with his coworkers, who get to see and help lay the foundation the rest of the building trades build upon. But he argued that concrete workers shouldn’t be treated with any less respect, as most of the office workers at their employers have been working from home throughout most of the pandemic. “We’re fighting for not just us, but for everybody else in these trades and everybody else in our communities,” added Gallagher. “A lot of us have families, some with young kids. I have three kids myself who depend on my medical insurance. I’ve got child support to pay and this is tough. It was tough to tell them that it was going to be a lean Christmas this year and they wonder why. It’s because a few people decided they don’t want to sit and talk to us like grownups.”The Arizona Republican congressman Paul Gosar had a simple message for the crowd when he recently addressed a packed Donald Trump rally in his home state – a gathering that had focused on promoting the baseless lie that Trump had been cheated out of a second term as president. “This is where it all began,” Gosar said in a speech before Trump came on stage. “This is where we questioned: ‘Was there fraud? Absolutely. Was it enough to overturn the election? Absolutely.’” The far-right congressman is one of Trump’s most loyal backers in Congress, earning him one of more than 90 endorsements made so far by the former US president ahead of this year’s crucial midterm elections. Gosar is the kind of politician that Trump – who is embarking on a series of rallies to try to cement his allies’ power in the Republican party – is increasingly seeking to support. But Gosar has extensive links to white nationalists and Capitol rioters and, many observers say, represents a dangerous new breed of Republican politician, who would have once been considered fringe, but whom Trump is increasingly making central to Republican party politics. “I’m considered the most dangerous man in Congress,” Gosar told the crowd, briefly touching on popular rightwing talking points – critical race theory in schools, disrespect for the military, and “empty shelves” in stores – before focusing on the central theme of the rally: elections. In the Arizona desert the fervor among supporters huddled against the wind was a clear sign of the size of a constituency more loyal to Trump than to the party, and even as some lawmakers distance themselves from the former president amid the January 6 fallout, the far right is doubling down. In his first public appearance since the anniversary of the January 6 attack, Trump’s appearance was marked with a reaffirmation of election denial, conspiracy theories and anti-democratic ruminations. “I ran twice, and I won twice,” Trump told his supporters gathered in the windy Arizona night. At the rally the “Stop the Steal” organizer Ali Alexander moved through the crowd while on stage three members of Congress, who all voted against certifying Joe Biden’s 2020 presidential election victory, gave speeches affirming their support of the “big lie”. Gosar’s allegiance to Trump and his false claims extends beyond speaking the shibboleth of the big lie: on January 6 Gosar voted against certifying the election even as rioters penetrated the Capitol. “We no longer have an ability to make a clear delineation between the right and far-right in the Republican party,” said Joe Lowndes, professor of political science at the University of Oregon and co-author of Producers, Parasites, Patriots: Race and the New Right-Wing Politics of Precarity. “The Trumpist wing of the Republicans isn’t just ascending – it’s the dominant wing of the Republican party. It’s the dominant wing not just in national politics, but in state and local politics as well,” said Lowndes. “The Republican party has committed itself to a party of minoritarian rule, figuring out ways to rule in the long term without having majority support of voters.” Gosar’s involvement with the January 6 Capitol insurrection has come under scrutiny from lawmakers. A House select committee investigating the deadly Capitol attack has been working for six months, in meetings mostly closed to the public, interviewing more than 300 witnesses and collecting more than 35,000 pages of records, according the Washington Post. Information has surfaced that link Gosar to one prominent Capitol riot organizer. A lawsuit filed by Alexander to block the release of his phone records, subpoenaed by the House committee, reveals testimony that discloses contacts with Republican members of Congress before the Capitol riot. The lawsuit states Alexander testified that he “had a few phone conversations” with Gosar and spoke to the Arizona congressman Andy Biggs “in person”. Lawmakers are debating whether sitting members of Congress can be subpoenaed to appear before the committee. Gosar also has longstanding links to far-right and white nationalist groups. Last year Gosar was the keynote speaker at an America First Political Action Conference (Afpac) organized by white nationalist Nick Fuentes, whom the Department of Justice in a court filing calls a “white supremacist” and who marched in the deadly Charlottesville “Unite the Right” rally. The January 6 committee is also seeking testimony from Fuentes, who has praised Gosar as supporting his agenda. “There is some hope, maybe, for America First in Congress, and that is thanks almost exclusively to representative Paul Gosar,” said Fuentes in a video message to his supporters last year. Gosar distanced himself from Fuentes after outcry over his appearance alongside the white nationalist in a promotion for a fundraising event. But he has also appeared to defend him. Gosar once tweeted: “Not sure why anyone is freaking out. I’ll say this: there are millions of Gen Z, Y and X conservatives. They believe in America First. They will not agree 100% on every issue. No group does. We will not let the left dictate our strategy, alliances and efforts. Ignore the left.” That was not the first time Gosar has incorporated white nationalist themes into his politics. Last year Gosar and the extremist Georgia congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene were linked to an “America First Caucus” that imploded in disarray after planning documents reported by Punchbowl News revealed language that included recruiting people based on “Anglo-Saxon political traditions”. Gosar was also censured and stripped of his committee posts late last year after tweeting a Photoshopped video of a violent anime sequence depicting him killing congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and attacking President Biden. “I do not espouse violence towards anyone,” Gosar said during the House debate on his censure. “I voluntarily took the cartoon down, not because it was itself a threat, but because some thought it was. Out of compassion for those who genuinely felt offense, I self-censored.” But Gosar has a history posting of far-right content, including retweeting a QAnon conspiracy theory and a now-deleted tweet of a meme popular in white nationalists circles. Yet it is now in the area of election integrity that Gosar is becoming most prominent, helping to lead a charge across the US by Republicans claiming that elections in America are vulnerable to fraud and manipulation. “There’s a comfortable embrace of anti-democratic sentiment,” said Lowndes. “The Republican party hasn’t just opened the door to the far right, but it now relies on the far right.” At the Arizona rally Gosar told supporters to campaign locally on the election fraud issue. “Take it upon yourself that in your county you go to your county recorder and ask them what your ballot does. Make them walk you through it. That’ll tell them one thing: that you’re watching them. That you’re not going to let this happen, what happened in January of last year.” Gosar was among the Arizona Republican officials pushing for an audit of the election results of Maricopa county, the state’s most populous county. Before the Trump rally, the Maricopa elections department released a 93-page report rebutting each of the 76 claims about the 2020 elections made by elected Arizona Republican officials. The report found “the November 2020 General Election was administered with integrity and the results were accurate and reliable.” The report also found “despite all evidence to the contrary, false allegations continue to persist and damage voter confidence.” But there is at least one group of people close to Gosar who are not fooled – some of his own family. Three of Gosar’s siblings have publicly called for their brother to be expelled from Congress, the Arizona Republic has reported. “We know him to be an extremist and we took that very seriously,” his sister, Jennifer Gosar, told the newspaper. His brother, Dave Gosar, told NBC News: “I consider him a traitor to this country. I consider him a traitor to his family.” In the 2018 election six of Gosar’s nine siblings endorsed his opponent.In keeping with the times, Bill Manning did his own research. Toronto FC’s president was inspired in his online trawling not by pandemic conspiracies but Canada’s sporting past. Manning’s stunning and successful pursuit of Napoli and Italy star Lorenzo Insigne ended earlier this month with the winger becoming the richest recruit in Major League Soccer history. It began with Manning in front of a laptop scouring transfermarkt.com for the kind of stop-the-world signing that this moment in Canadian football was calling for, if not demanding. “Lorenzo Insigne is going to be a player that people want to come see,” Manning said when the deal, which sees Insigne paid $15m a year over the next four years, was confirmed. “We think the World Cup here in Toronto in 2026 [is] going to be a transformational moment for this sport in this country and we want to be at the forefront.” The transfer’s ambition and execution was impressive. But Manning might have still been a little off on one of his numbers. That transformational moment may come a whole lot sooner than the summer of 2026. In truth there’s a feeling in Canada that over the past six months, it has already begun. In August the Canadian women’s team claimed historic Olympic gold in Tokyo. Then the men’s team continued their emergence as the most improved side in the world. When you add in the Insigne coup, this has been a period without parallel north of the 49th. On the eve of a six-day international window which could end with Canada qualifying for a men’s World Cup for the first time since the 1980s, the idea that Canada has now become a football nation is inching away from provocative quote tweet territory and towards reality. “It’s the definition of serious momentum, isn’t it?” Steven Caldwell told the Guardian this week. “There’s no other way to look at it than to say that the sport in this country is at the highest point it’s ever been.” Caldwell, like many in and around the Canadian game, is a blow-in. First, second and next-generation Canadians have long clawed for football’s place in the sporting hierarchy here. Caldwell has called the country home for nine years but is particularly well-placed to survey the change. The former Scotland defender also captained Toronto FC, is an analyst for Canadian network TSN and was part of the Canadian men’s backroom team as recently as last summer. “To see that national team success – women’s and men’s – that aspirational value of seeing a team win a gold medal or atop the final qualifying stage for a World Cup, it’s incredible,” Caldwell said. “[TFC owners] MLSE have felt the moment. Insigne coming to TFC is a byproduct of the successes of the national teams, particularly the men’s. The fact that they’re tracking towards the World Cup and there’s this fervour, viewing figures through the roof, that excitement of what’s next, MLSE don’t want to miss out on that.” Where Manning’s first-Insigne-and-then-the-world energy might have been scoffed at not too long ago, it’s now, rightly, lauded. MLSE also own the NBA’s Raptors and Toronto’s most etched-in-ice (and infamy) team, the NHL’s Maple Leafs. Insigne’s contract will see him rival most of the highest-paid Raptors and eclipse every Leafs player. A gamble? Perhaps. But also a sign of the times. And maybe a more permanent change. John Herdman and his team of effervescent youth, stubborn and sturdy experience and all focus and heart won minds and eyes too as they took early control of the final stage of Qatar 2022 qualifying over the fall. The numbers tell the tale: when Alphonso Davies lit up Toronto with an electrifying goal to down Panama in October, the TV audience was 342,000. The following month when Jonathan David grabbed the only goal against Costa Rica that number doubled. Four days later a landmark was passed when almost 1.2 million watched the historic 2-1 triumph over Mexico on a frigid night in Edmonton. “The game against Mexico was up there with NHL games going on at the same time,” Adam Seaborn, a Toronto-based sports marketing and audience expert, told the Guardian. “What it tells me when you go to such a big number in such a short space of time, is something we have seen here before – when a Canadian story emerges, viewership can spike dramatically. The country loves a Canadian story and it becomes a big thing.” Herdman is a coach and leader who leans into narratives and plotlines. He discusses themes as freely as teams, litters press conferences with talk of moments and missions. At the start of qualifying he spoke to the Guardian about proving that “a guy who’s read 400 books is [as capable of succeeding as a coach] as a guy who’s played 400 games.” So far, he has. Never more so than in November when Edmonton’s Commonwealth Stadium became the Iceteca and Mexico froze in the frenzy. Defender Sam Adekugbe’s celebratory dive into a pitch-side snowbank instantly became what is known in these parts as a Canadian heritage moment. The country continues to buy in. Sunday’s meeting with the US in Hamilton (sandwiched between away games against Honduras and El Salvador) sold out before tickets even went on general sale. With Drake and Justin Trudeau clamouring for a selfie, Davies is becoming the kind of cultural, crossover star that no male footballer has ever come close to being here. Caldwell marvels at how far the men’s team has come. While the women’s team, who Herdman coached before switching jobs, kept the fire burning for so long, their male counterparts floundered. Not just decades in the wilderness after their solitary World Cup appearance in 1986 but fresh nadirs even in the past decade, an 8-1 humbling by Honduras in 2012 the lowest low. “Playing for Scotland, you know your gran is watching, everyone is watching the country,” Caldwell said. “When I came here to Canada I never had that feeling. I never even knew there were national team games on. I’d wonder where a couple of my teammates [had] gone. I couldn’t believe it.” When Herdman took over in 2019, Canada were 94th in the men’s rankings, just above the Faroe Islands. When 2021 finished, they were 40th, named Fifa’s most-improved side, sat top of Concacaf qualifying as its top scorers, joint-best defence and only unbeaten side. What’s perhaps most impressive is that Herdman and his staff have taken a gifted young generation who don’t carry the scars of the past and blended it with some who do: their 39-year-old captain Atiba Hutchison is healing and defying age in midfield. Herdman has also unearthed gems who’ve caught the eyes of Europe’s elite. Even since that Mexico game, winger Tajon Buchanan linked up with Club Brugge and midfielder Stephen Eustáquio joined Porto. Lille striker David is likely to soon join Bayern Munich’s Davies among the upper, upper echelon. In such a pivotal three-game window and with so much on the line, the loss of Davies (due to Covid complications) for the upcoming matches could have crushed previous Canadian generations. Not so this one. “The collective sum of their parts is what they live by, so I don’t think they’ll be fazed,” insisted Caldwell. “They believe 100% that they can win the group and that’s important. It’s all about proving that point. “John has done great things in terms of the culture. These guys understand that it’s about the code of the shirt and a nation, getting to change the game forever in this country.”The luxury carmaker Bentley has announced that its first fully electric car will be developed and built at its Crewe factory. The British brand’s first battery electric vehicle is scheduled to roll off the production line in 2025. Bentley, which has been making cars since 1919 and is now owned by Germany’s Volkswagen, has committed to investing £2.5bn in sustainability over the next 10 years. This will include what the company called the “complete transformation” of all Bentley vehicles and its Crewe plant, which employs 4,000 workers. Workers who build the brand’s internal combustion engines will be retrained and redeployed to work in different areas of the plant. Bentley, known for its large and powerful cars, announced in late 2020 that it would stop making vehicles that run on fossil fuel by 2030, aiming to make its operations fully carbon neutral by the same date. Sales of new petrol and diesel cars will be banned in the UK from 2030. As part of the brand’s Beyond100 strategy, mapping out its plans beyond its centenary, the company set itself ambitious targets in the transition towards electric vehicles. In Bentley’s switch from building cars with traditional internal combustion engines, it will first make hybrid vehicles, before introducing its first pure electric cars, with zero-carbon exhaust emissions. The company has not revealed any details of its first fully electric car. Adrian Hallmark, Bentley’s chairman and chief executive, said: “Securing production of our first BEV in Crewe is a milestone moment for Bentley, and the UK, as we plan for a long-term sustainable future in Crewe.” Bentley’s plant at its Cheshire headquarters will be turned into an advanced manufacturing facility as part of its move towards environmental sustainability. The carmaker, whose vehicles cost from about £130,000 to more than £240,000, has previously said its environmental targets would help it to be “financially resilient and recession-proof” after the coronavirus pandemic. Electric vehicle sales boomed in 2021, according to recent figures from the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, as carmakers sold 190,000 battery electric cars, accounting for almost 12% of total sales.A first edition of Diamonds Are Forever, in which Ian Fleming thanks his friend and fellow author Paul Gallico for “spread[ing] his wings over my first-born [Casino Royale]”, is set to be auctioned on Friday as Gallico’s private library goes up for sale. Gallico, who died in 1976, worked with Fleming as a journalist on the Sunday Times. The James Bond author sent him the initial typescript of Casino Royale to see if it was publishable; Gallico told him it was a “knockout”, adding that Fleming’s torture scene “beats everything I have ever read”, and that the novel “goes in for frankness and detail far beyond any American-type thriller and could have a big sale”. “Get out of that office kid and write,” urged the American author of novels including The Snow Goose and The Poseidon Adventure in a letter included in John Pearson’s biography of Fleming. While his papers are at Columbia University, Gallico’s private library has remained in his island home on Antibes since his death. It reveals the closeness between the two writers: “To Paul, who spread his wings over my first-born, 1956,” writes Fleming in the first edition of Diamonds Are Forever, which is expected to fetch £12,000-£18,000 at Chiswick Auctions on 27 January. In a first edition of Casino Royale, Fleming writes “To Paul from Balzache 1953” – a play on “balls/ache”, said Chiswick Auctions. Along with personal artefacts including Gallico’s leather Abercrombie &amp; Fitch flying jacket from his time as a war correspondent, and his typewriters, the collection also reveals Gallico’s friendships with luminaries including Noël Coward, who wrote to him: “I was riveted by ‘Poseidon’ from beginning to end [...] I didn’t actually read it hanging upside down from a glass chandelier, but I was certainly hanging from the chandelier for several days after”. Marlene Dietrich writes in a telegram, “Thinking of you. Lonesome down under, Marlene”, while Graham Greene, a neighbour of Gallico’s on Antibes, gave him a first edition of his novel A Burnt-Out Case. The inscription reads: “For Paul Gallico – arrears for gratitudes to Antibes … From Graham Greene, 1961.” “The collection is a tangible reminder of a writer whose presence and works continue to entertain us, inspire us, so many years after his death,” said Clive Moss, head of rare books at Chiswick Auctions, describing Gallico as “a supreme writer and talent with an enduring quality that never fails to entice and capture our attention”. A film adaptation of Gallico’s novel Mrs Harris Goes to Paris is due out next month.Along a paved road that climbs the hillside to Celaque Mountain national park in south-western Honduras, one-room shacks are overshadowed by high-walled mansions – including the homes of President Juan Orlando Hernández and his political allies. Local people say the results of Hernández’s eight years as president are on full display. “He worked hard for his own good – not for the good of the people,” said Jesús Martínez, 68, a farmer resting in the picturesque colonial park in the center of Gracias. “The people continue in calamity, and he’s leaving as a millionaire.” On Thursday, Honduras will inaugurate Hernández’s successor: the country’s first female president, Xiomara Castro. Her resounding victory in November’s general election was propelled by a wave of anti-Hernández sentiment that reached even into his home town of Gracias. “The results of the election are an expression of the overwhelming rejection of Juan Orlando and what he represented,” said Gustavo Irías, director of the Honduran watchdog group Cespad. Hernández is widely expected to be indicted by US prosecutors on drug trafficking conspiracy charges upon leaving office. It would mark a spectacular fall from grace for a president who was once considered one of Washington’s top allies in the region. The son of a prominent landholder who fathered at least 17 children, Hernández, 53, began his decades-long political career here in Gracias. He was raised in relative comfort compared with his rural counterparts – but far below that enjoyed by the urban elite. “[His father] had his properties, his cattle and a vehicle – and in those times a person who had a vehicle was wealthy,” said Ana Guillermina, a local historian and retired teacher who once counted Hernández among her primary school students. “I don’t recall that there was anything special about him.” When Hernández joined congress in 1998, fellow legislators from the time described him as quiet, humble, with few friends but with a keen interest on capitalizing upon his office. Hernández rose steadily up the political ladder, becoming president of Congress in 2010 and then president of the republic four years later. At the time, Honduras had one of the world’s highest homicide rates and was plagued by violent gangs and drug traffickers. To combat the crime wave, he deployed the military in the streets, filled the country’s prisons and started extraditing high-level drug traffickers to the United States. He was commended for his administration’s efforts by numerous US agencies, including the Drug Enforcement Administration. But at the same time, drug trafficking allegations mounted against one of his brothers, former legislator Juan Antonio “Tony” Hernández, who was linked to a drug lab in 2014 and later to a helicopter that had transported cocaine, among other accusations. In 2016, Hernández announced that he would seek re-election despite a constitutional prohibition against it. That decision would ultimately turn many Hondurans against him, and the subsequent 2017 election was marred by allegations of fraud and violent repression of protesters by state security forces. “It would have been best for him to step aside because he was re-elected in a very unclear way,” said high school teacher Wilmer Oliva, as he sat in the shade of Gracias’s central park in December. Oliva voted for Hernández twice, but quickly regretted the second time. “These last four years have definitely been lousy. So many corruption and drug trafficking scandals.” In November 2018, less than a year into Hernández’s second term, Tony was arrested while visiting Miami and charged with drug trafficking and related weapons charges. A year later, a New York jury found him guilty on all counts following a trial that gripped the nation and exposed the depths of the government’s complicity in drug trafficking. Prosecutors named Hernández as an unindicted co-conspirator in the case against his brother and accused him of receiving millions in bribes from drug traffickers in what they described as “state-sponsored drug trafficking”. Hernández was then named by US prosecutors as a co-conspirator in two additional drug trafficking cases, including one in which he allegedly plotted with a drug trafficker to “shove the drugs right up the noses of the gringos”, Hernández has denied all allegations related to drug trafficking, calling them lies made up by violent criminals who are seeking to reduce their sentences. He did not respond to an interview request. The Trump administration turned a blind eye to the accusations while Hernández continued to bend to the will of its migration agenda. But the Biden administration, which has pledged to fight corruption as part of its plan to address the root causes of migration, has essentially shunned the outgoing president, preferring to wait out his term with the hope of a fresh start with the new administration. Meanwhile, the drug trafficking accusations piled on top of numerous corruption scandals, in which Hernández has also denied involvement. A bungled response to the Covid-19 pandemic and a devastating pair of major hurricanes in November 2020 made matters worse. Poverty rose to its highest level in four decades. Perhaps it was unsurprising then, that when the country went to the polls in November, Hernández’s party suffered unprecedented losses across the country, even losing control of city hall in Gracias, one of the party’s historic strongholds. “The king is dead, long live the king,” said the outgoing mayor of Gracias, Dr Javier Enamorado. With his party set to lose control of government and his power in Honduras withering away, Hernández has been forced to look abroad for allies – and potentially a place where he could avoid arrest and extradition to the United States. Until now, he has been protected from indictment by a Department of Justice policy of not presenting charges against sitting heads of state. On 10 January, he attended the inauguration of Nicaragua’s leader, Daniel Ortega, who was re-elected for a third time after an election broadly denounced as a charade. “He showed up as a defeated emperor without his great entourage,” said Irías, who noted that Nicaragua is already providing refuge to two former presidents of El Salvador who face corruption charges at home. “His intention was clearly to support one of the most authoritarian regimes of the region in exchange for an eventual refuge.”It might not be your breakfast-table topic of choice, but we need to talk about cricket equipment. During the lockdown summer of 2020, Prof Martin Charter, from the Centre for Sustainable Design (CfSD) in Surrey, and the British Association for Sustainable Sport (Basis) pulled stakeholders together to discuss the issues surrounding the manufacture of cricket gear. They weren’t quite sure what they would find. Following Tuesday’s hand-over-eyes showing at the DCMS committee hearing, it won’t perhaps come as much of a surprise to learn that one of the biggest issues they encountered in the game was a lack of transparency. “Although there has been quite a lot of work done on sustainability and cricket at the macro level, for example on cricket stadia,” says Charter, “that is very different when you come to manufacturing. There is very little research in the public domain, especially when you consider that we are talking about the second-biggest sport on the planet. We know very little of the supply chain. There is a lot of outsourcing to Asia, for example, with details unknown.” The final report on Sustainability, Cricket Gear, Clothing and Apparel, published last week, reveals a dearth of information from manufacturers on topics ranging from employment rights and child labour to working conditions. As Charter points out, football started addressing a number of these issues in the 1990s (though stories of outrageous practice still crop up) – with the World Federation of the Sporting Goods Industry (WSGFI) working alongside Fifa to try to ensure its licensed products are made in compliance with the WFSGI code of conduct. There appears to be no such scheme in cricket. There is also a lack of knowledge about the environmental footprint of the industry. There are big questions about water pollution, carbon emissions, micro-plastics and waste – but not many answers to be found. This lack of accountability does not, Charter stresses, mean there are necessarily major problems. It does, however, mean that no one buying in anticipation for the new season has much idea of how their new gear is being processed. Good practice is certainly not being shouted from the rooftops, with sustainability information not generally shared on cricket gear suppliers’ websites. And what happens to kit at the end of its life? Are there vast bundles of shirts, trousers, jumpers and pads stored in cupboards or garages or has it all been packed up, shoved on a boat and exported to landfill abroad? The answer, again, is that we simply don’t know. It feels like there is a huge potential for kit to be re-used in cricket, where interest often wanes after a season or as children move from softball to hard-ball cricket, and as kit is outgrown from summer to summer. This would both help the game become more accessible to those on a lower income – something highlighted recently with stories of families being charged fees running into hundreds of pounds to access county pathways – and feed into the circular economy. This might be something as simple as whites being passed on, to the more complicated process of helmet grills being re-used, or cricket nets repurposed. Professionals are often shining examples of this, mending and reusing their favourite bats until they fall to pieces. Charter hopes that cricket can plug into to the sort of work pioneered by Play it Again Sport, a small Welsh social enterprise that tries to ensure that all sports equipment gets re-used and nothing goes to landfill. Cricket doesn’t always help itself. There was a test case in 2019 when Gray-Nicolls produced an up-cycled pair of batting gloves made from production waste – and cricket’s man of the moment, Sam Billings, wore them for a couple of warmup matches. The International Cricket Council then banned him from wearing them for the white-ball series against New Zealand because they contravened a pedantic rule on colour. With a dearth of available data to work with, the CfSD did some exploratory research on the environmental impact of five pieces of cricket equipment. The results led it to believe that it would be worth manufacturers investing in a vegan leather for cricket balls, something that the former Australia cricketer Jason Gillespie, a prominent vegan, has already called for. It also suggests investigation into possible alternatives to willow, with studies into the viability of bamboo cricket bats already under way by researchers at Cambridge University. Also tucked inside the report is a fascinating paragraph on the manufacture of bats and balls in the UK: sadly, the industry is on its knees. The Heritage Craft Association’s May 2021 Red List of Endangered Crafts records the manufacture of hand-stitched cricket balls in the UK as extinct. The UK’s cricket bat manufacturing industry is nearly as sickly, classed as an “endangered species”. With many of the practitioners heading towards retirement age, there may well be an opportunity here for the England and Wales Cricket Board, or even the Professional Cricketers’ Association, to sponsor apprenticeships. With the help of Basis, the CfSD has set up the PASIC website as a forum for information and to stimulate discussion around the sustainability of cricket equipment and clothing. Future projects plan to focus more closely on the circular economy and cricket clothing. During the process of compiling the report, Charter spoke to a number of past and present players, including the former South Africa opener Daryll Cullinan. He believes there is a real interest in making the industry more sustainable, but that it will need both quality research to assess the environmental and social awareness in the sector and action from the game’s governing bodies. Good luck with that. • This is an extract from the Guardian’s weekly cricket email, The Spin. To subscribe and get the full edition, visit this page and follow the instructions.Amid concerns of a Russian attack, we we would like to hear from people living and working in Ukraine about the situation in the country. What is the mood like at the moment? Are you making any plans in the event of a possible conflict? Share your views and experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below, anonoymously if you wish. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. IP addresses will be recorded on a third party webserver, so for true anonymity use our SecureDrop service, however anything submitted on the form below will be encrypted and confidential if you wish to continue. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.A Conservative MP’s claim that Boris Johnson was “ambushed with a cake” at his birthday gathering held in Downing Street during lockdown has gone down a treat on social media after yet another day of high political drama. Northern Ireland minister Conor Burns, a long-standing ally of the prime minister, told Channel 4 News on Tuesday evening that the gathering was not a “premeditated” party and that Johnson was working in the room before staff came in and presented him with a birthday cake. “It was not a premeditated, organised party,” he said. “He was, in a sense, ambushed with a cake.” The MP for Bournemouth West added: “They came to his office with a cake, they sang happy birthday, he was there for 10 minutes – I don’t think most people looking at that at home would characterise that as a party.” Social media erupted with mockery at Burns’ remarks. Nigella Lawson tweeted that the term “ambushed by cake” would make the perfect title for a recipe book. In response, the minister said Lawson was more than welcome to use the name if she included his “Granny’s Christmas cake recipe”. Lawson was unimpressed, responding: “This is too meta. Plus, you think it’s a joke? Says it all.” Elsewhere on Twitter, people poked fun at Burns’ comments. One user shared a 2011 video of former deputy prime minister John Prescott sticking his fingers in a BBC cake being offered to celebrate the first anniversary of the coalition government. Another edited footage from the Jurassic Park film to show the game warden being ambushed by a birthday cake. The historian Greg Jenner was poised with a series of cake puns featuring military figures ambushed by cake. One person envisioned scenes from the Cabinet Office, which has played a pivotal role in the Metropolitan police’s decision to formally investigate alleged parties at Downing Street and Whitehall. And the campaigner and food writer Jack Monroe shared a photo of a Peppa Pig cake, perhaps in reference to the PM’s infamous praise of Peppa Pig World.The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has unveiled plans to conduct unannounced inspections of plants suspected of air pollution violations in the heavily industrialized region in Louisiana known as Cancer Alley and other locations around the US south. The move, announced on Wednesday morning alongside other significant new enforcement and monitoring actions, is aimed at reining in pollution in an area with much of America’s most toxic air. The agency intends to expand air monitoring in a number of locations visited by the EPA administrator, Michael Regan, last November, and will work to develop new measuring techniques for the “emerging contaminants” chloroprene and ethylene oxide. Both pollutants are likely or known human carcinogens that are emitted at dangerous levels in locations around the region, notably in St John the Baptist parish. Regan unveiled a new air monitoring program in the parish, which is the location of the Guardian’s extended Cancer Town series, around the fence line of a synthetic rubber plant operated by the Japanese chemicals firm Denka. The site is the only location in America to emit chloroprene and does so at levels regularly above the EPA’s lifetime exposure guidance of 0.2 micrograms per cubic meter. In a letter addressed to the CEO of Denka and the plant’s former operator, the chemical giant DuPont, which was shared with the Guardian, Regan expressed significant concern about the effects of chloroprene emissions on children at a nearby elementary school, which sits close to the Denka fence line. “As a parent I remain extremely concerned about the more than 500 children at the elementary school. I am writing to you today to reiterate what I hope are our shared concerns and expectations regarding the health and wellbeing of the students,” Regan writes. “The EPA expects DuPont and Denka to take other needed action to address community concerns.” In a press release, the administrator also announced his enforcement and compliance office would work with the US Department of Justice to seek “additional and timely avenues of relief” for residents around the plant. The EPA did not provide further details. A spokesperson for Denka said the company had just received the letter and would review it. “That said, we look forward to a continued dialogue with Administrator Regan and the EPA,” the spokesperson said, adding that the company had been “working with the community for some time and will continue to do so”. In neighboring St James parish, Regan said his department would provide technical assistance to the US army corps of engineers in an ongoing re-evaluation of a proposed plastics facility operated by the Taiwanese company Formosa, in effect placed on hold by the Biden administration last August amid widespread community concern. The gargantuan facility had been permitted to emit 13m tonnes of greenhouse gasses a year, the equivalent of three coal-fired power plants, along with 15,400lb of ethylene oxide. In the same parish, the administrator announced enforcement action against a steel plant, run by the industrial giant Nucor, which last year was revealed to have been quietly emitting cancer-causing sulphuric acid mist and hydrogen sulphide for six years without a permit. In unveiling a new plan of unannounced inspections in the region, Regan told reporters: “We want to keep these facilities on their toes so that they’re doing their due diligence all the time, not just when there’s a planned EPA inspection.” He added: “When facilities are found to be non-compliant, we will use all available to to hold them accountable.” The EPA also announced a $600,000 investment in mobile air pollution monitoring equipment to be used throughout the Cancer Alley region, in the town of Mossville, Louisiana and other locations around the south. In the neighborhood of Gordon Plaza, in New Orleans, a cancer hotspot built on top of a toxic waste site in the 1980s, Regan announced he would expedite a federal review of the site, which would commence in March this year.Rahsaan “New York” Thomas the acclaimed journalist who co-hosts the Ear Hustle podcast from inside San Quentin prison, was granted clemency this month, prompting celebrations from listeners and supporters across the country. But it could be months – or years – before he walks free. California’s governor, Gavin Newsom, granted Thomas a commutation for his sentence of 55 years to life, acknowledging the “work he has done … to transform himself”. In addition to co-producing and co-hosting the Pulitzer prize-nominated show, Thomas, 51, writes for the San Quentin News, the Marshall Project and Current; chairs a Society of Professional Journalists chapter; mentors youth; co-founded a non-profit for incarcerated writers; and directed a Sundance documentary short. The commutation of his sentence for second-degree murder and related charges allows Thomas for the first time to go before the parole board, which will then decide whether he is “suitable” for release. But it could be months before his hearing date, and if he is denied parole, as the majority of incarcerated people are after their first board appearance, it would be more than a year before he gets another shot. The uncertainty is not stopping Thomas from mapping out ambitious plans for life after incarceration. The New York native recently spoke to the Guardian by phone about his 21 years behind bars, his career goals and what he’s learned about the system. The conversation has been edited and condensed for clarity. Congratulations on the news. What was your reaction when you got the call? I was happy, of course, and proud. It’s a great honor for the governor to recognize that you’re a different person today than you were 20-something years ago. And I was relieved. Until he commuted my sentence, I didn’t have a path to freedom. Freedom was something that was hypothetical, with changes in law that might happen one day. But now the clock starts for my freedom. Now I get to be scheduled for a parole board hearing. I don’t know if I’ll make the first one, but at least I’ll get to talk about it. And if I get denied, I’ll go a couple years later and try again, and I’ll keep trying until I get out. For a guy like me in prison with all of these [Covid] lockdowns, the sooner the better. It’s a race against the next Covid variant. How are you feeling about going before the parole board? I’m grateful for this opportunity that I didn’t have before, but I also recognize that it’s going to be hard. You have to talk about the worst thing you’ve ever done and all your trauma. I know a lot of great people that are out [of prison] now, but the board didn’t see their greatness their first hearing. You can go in there nervous and blow your answers. Even though I’m not confident that I’ll make it the first time, I believe I’ll make it the second time, and hopefully be home by 2025. And in the meantime, I’ll keep doing Ear Hustle, keep writing and keep getting better. I know the parole hearing is a long process, but I’d love to hear what your overall message will be to the board? I think the primary thing is that I’m a different person, and the person I am today is an asset to the community. The debt I owe, I could never pay. But I’m not paying it in prison. Prison was a place to put me to punish me. But now, it costs $106,000 a year [to incarcerate me] – that’s money taken away from schools and Covid relief. And I think I’m a person that can bring violence down on the outside. I’m a person that is making a difference in this world and I just want a chance to pay taxes and pay society back. I don’t know how far ahead you have thought, but what are your plans for your first few years out? I hope I come home in time for Ear Hustle to still be there, for me to get a job. I’m also part of a program called Squires where I mentor at-risk youth. I want to continue that on the outside and be on the frontlines. That’s my way of staying grounded in the work and what’s going on in the community, so I can try to come up with solutions. But the big thing I want to do is to write books. I’m writing stories that take on the challenges of [prison abolition organizer and writer] Mariame Kaba who wrote a book called We Do This ’Til We Free Us: Abolitionist Organizing and Transforming Justice. She talks about how people can’t imagine what change looks like, because they have never seen it before. They can’t imagine a world without prisons, because there are people who did really harmful, harmful stuff and will do it again if let out. So how do we change that behavior? How do we stop these cycles of violence? That’s great – how have you been thinking about solutions? I’m writing books that imagine these solutions, and they’re real. They’re real to me, because I’m in San Quentin, a prison that was once notorious and very dangerous – and it turned into one of the nicest places I’ve ever been, where celebrities come hang out [with arts, education and other programs that bring people in from the outside]. I’ve seen the impact of therapy, and having a connection to the community, feeling like you’re part of this society, and not some outcast that can’t even vote, like a refugee in your own country, being connected to a society that cares about you and has support for you, and what that looks like, and how that helps and how that changes people. If we can do that in a prison, why can’t we do that in our neighborhoods? How can we change the conditions so you don’t have to get these services after you’re incarcerated, after somebody is harmed and you can’t repair that harm, ever. I want to tell those stories. It sounds like the community in San Quentin and your work with Ear Hustle have really changed you. It’s life-changing. When I was 19, I went to prison for two years and made the decision to do right when I came home, and I did at first. But my trauma got triggered. I got stressed about poverty, injustices with my little brother, all this stuff and I relapsed and went back to my old ways. My old ways were never gone because I never dealt with my trauma and I never healed. In San Quentin, not only have I found a trade I love, but I met all these incredible people and community members. Growing up [in Brownsville in Brooklyn], I lived in a segregated neighborhood with all Black and Puerto Rican people and limited resources. I felt like nobody cared about me, like the world was unjust and the laws were designed for me to fail. I didn’t feel an obligation to society, because I felt like society didn’t care about me. I don’t feel like that any more. I learned why my neighborhood was so messed up, that it’s bigger than just the people and the trauma. That it’s systemic, it’s what was done to us for generations. I was also trying to be a writer for 13 years and it didn’t start really poppin’ until I got to San Quentin. It’s the worst conditions, but it’s the best prison for opportunities. I want that opportunity to exist in Brownsville, in Oakland, in Los Angeles. I want it to be a before, not an after. What do you want the public to know about others behind bars like you who may not get the same opportunity to come home? I’m going to go home with a list of names of people that I feel have been ignored or forgotten about. I have a little campaign going now at FreeRahsaan.com, with T-shirts to raise money, and when I get home I want to keep the momentum going. There’s one guy I know who has done 30 years already because of the three strikes laws. It was a horrible crime, but the person he is today, I know it will never happen again. I also created this program called Empowerment Avenue [for incarcerated writers and artists] to help people develop the right careers in prison and come home to a society that is ready for them with open arms. I’m creating the opportunity that I had in San Quentin the best way I can for people in other prisons. So these people exist to the world, because their writing is out there, they are making these connections, these editors know them. And so if they’re trying to prove their case to a governor, they’ll have that kind of support that I have, because they are known and part of society, and are not behind a wall, hidden and invisible. There is a lot of public attention on your case – what message do you want to share to your supporters? I can never say I deserve freedom. I can just say it doesn’t make sense for me to be here any more. People say I earned it and “good job”, and I just want people to know I can’t earn it. There’s nothing I can do to make up for what I did, it’s impossible. I can’t bring this person back. I don’t say his name, without the permission from the family, but I try to honor him by making amends. And I can at least pay society back in a better way, or do the best I can to pay an unpayable debt. And for other people who are incarcerated, I say just keep doing good. Don’t give in to hopelessness. I was sentenced to 55 to life – and there was no reason to be a good person when you have that sentence. I started at 29 years old. I was going to be 85 before I saw a parole board, and Black people just don’t live that long. I had to find hope in the next life. I got into religion, became a Muslim. And that faith, whether God exists or not, kept me good enough and on the right enough path to have this opportunity now. Just find a way to be productive and be of service. Do you feel hopeful about progress and changes to the system? I do, though I was kind of shocked to see the stories about the retail thefts and see the news blow things out of proportion. It’s not anything new, but the news kept it on repeat. Homicides are up – not to the level of the 80s and 90s, but they are up. So we’re in this moment where money is shifting from the police to the neighborhoods, but with homicides going up, is it going to shift back? Are people going to understand that it’s Covid and the trauma and poverty and the other underlying root causes, and that we’re not going to solve this with handcuffs, and that if we leave the root causes, the next individual will take up the same cycle? I’m hoping that people are smarter than that. And we keep pushing to put resources into the neighborhoods that solve the root causes. I know it’s a cliche question, but what food are you most looking forward to eating? Shrimp, steaks and asparagus. All the Italian food. What else are you most excited to do? Besides finding a wife, sex and food (laughs), it’s the simple things, like driving around in a car, and traveling. I’ve never left the country. I want to go to Japan and France and Amsterdam and England. I’ve got about one more minute to chat with you before the [guard cuts us off], but I want to have an opportunity to just be free, and take what I learned in prison and apply it to the world, and see how it works. I’m looking forward to that challenge.In 1966, a colliery spoil tip above the Welsh village of Aberfan collapsed; 116 children and 28 adults were killed when the village was buried under a wave of slurry. Jo Browning Wroe’s debut novel, A Terrible Kindness, purports to be the story of a young embalmer who attends the disaster. The first thing to say is that it resolutely isn’t: it is, in fact, the kind of novel I used to enjoy reading off my grandparents’ shelves, a domestic saga about a young man struggling to overcome his childhood while joining the family business. Mentally scarred by Aberfan, William Lavery tries, unsuccessfully, to break up with his girlfriend Gloria, and tells her he will never want to have children. The story then spools back to his chorister childhood in Cambridge, his falling out with his best friend, Martin, when Martin more or less assaults him in his sleep, and his determination never to sing again after inviting his uncle, who is gay, and his uncle’s partner to hear him at a service. His mother makes a scene on discovering them there, and William ends up moving in with his uncles. While taking Gloria around Cambridge, William bumps into Martin again; he later embarks on a redemptive trip to Aberfan. This is the story of a man who has been profoundly affected by the death of his father and who, as a result, acts with extreme selfishness towards everyone in his life. William is a difficult character to like, no matter how much trouble he’s put through by Browning Wroe, a writer with a promising instinct for handling the tectonic elision of narrative events, so the next setback is always appearing round the corner in her well-structured tale. The novel affords limited emotional access to him, often relating the bare facts of events without letting the reader in on their impact. There is also a good deal of clunky writing throughout. Sentences such as “the roast pork … moved from William’s plate, to his mouth, to his stomach easily”, or “Ray’s baby is nestled inside her warm body”, sound like faltering translations, while the description “Aberfan is black, white or grey” will seem cursory to anyone who has seen images of the landslide. There are other difficult elements. A fair chunk of the book is preoccupied with the homophobia of the period, which is well drawn, but presented without comment, so that for sustained periods the reader is simply wading through pages of anti-gay prejudice; a strangely dated experience. More troubling still is the use of Aberfan, which is presented as an instigating incident, but by the end of the novel has been acknowledged to be actually quite incidental. As Gloria tells William: “You’re scared of help because of what else it will uncover. This isn’t just about Aberfan.” Gloria is one of several characters whose dialogue often seems to sum up the book’s themes. William’s mother, Evelyn, helpfully informs him, “There’s a madness that comes with grief”, and Martin is similarly educational: “You shut [music] out as if it was the thing that hurt you, when all along, it’s been the thing that can save you.” When William finally returns to Aberfan, the focus is not on the disaster that happened there, but on how a bereaved mother was comforted by hearing him sing. Frankly, it feels a little tasteless – a tragedy bolted on to a conventional 1960s family saga, written and published half a century later. Has the passage of time made it acceptable to use the dead of Aberfan as a literary device that prompts a character to re-engage with the troubles of their childhood? • A Terrible Kindness by Jo Browning Wroe is published by Faber (£14.99). To support The Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.A new analysis of popular brand name products detected toxic PFAS “forever chemicals” in nearly 75% of items labeled stain- or water-resistant. The study’s authors say the companies are needlessly putting customers’ health at risk. The findings highlight how the compounds are widely used in everyday products and clothing despite mounting evidence that the entire class of PFAS chemicals is associated with a range of serious health problems, and safer alternatives exist. “When companies use PFAS to make products stain- or water-resistant, they are using chemicals that contaminate homes, drinking water, and breast milk with highly persistent chemicals,” said Erika Schreder, one of the study’s co-authors and science director of Toxic Free Future, a Seattle-based group that pressures brands to stop using the chemicals. PFAS are a class of about 9,000 compounds most often used to make products water-, stain- and heat-resistant, and are called “forever chemicals” because they don’t naturally break down. They’re so effective that they’re used in thousands of applications across dozens of industries, but they’re also linked to cancer, decreased immunity, liver disease, kidney problems, birth defects and more. The study analyzed a total of 60 products – including jackets, hiking pants, shirts, mattress pads, comforters, tablecloths and napkins – from large retailers including Amazon, Bed Bath &amp; Beyond, Costco, Dick’s Sporting Goods, Kohl’s, Macy’s, REI, Target, TJX and Walmart. PFAS were detected in 34 of 47 products that were labeled water- or stain-resistant, or a similar variation like “waterproof” or “water repellant”. Independent laboratories conducted the testing. Among brand names that were found to use PFAS were jackets made by Alpine Design and Patagonia, or in partnership with Gore-Tex and Teflon. Jackets produced by Mammut and the North Face did not contain PFAS, though some of their products do. The chemicals are applied as a surface treatment to create a barrier against stains and water, or are used to create a membrane that makes rain gear more “breathable”. As the barrier or membrane breaks down, the chemicals can end up in the air and inhaled, or on surfaces where they can be ingested. “When you have these products indoors, depending on how many PFAS treated products you have, there will be high levels of PFAS in your indoor air,” Schreder said. The chemicals also can also be absorbed through the skin and are a problem for workers in textile factories, where researchers have found high exposure rates, Schreder added. The study also found 13 products that were labeled water- or stain-resistant but did not contain PFAS, which Schreder said highlights that alternatives are available. Some products use materials like polyurethane or polyester to help products resist water, while others have had success with paraffin wax. Sometimes companies will use different chemicals that they will claim as trade secrets and aren’t required to disclose. Even among companies like outdoor brands Patagonia and REI, which tout their green credentials on their websites, PFAS are still commonly used. Brands that have resisted pressure to eliminate the chemicals from their products and supply chains often say they haven’t found alternatives that perform as well as PFAS, Schreder said. “On the other hand, you can find plenty of information about companies that use alternatives and they find that the performance is excellent,” she added. All products tested that were not labeled stain- or water-resistant were found to be PFAS-free. Most companies won’t say if they use PFAS, which they claim as a trade secret. Without accurate labeling, it’s nearly impossible for consumers to determine if a product contains PFAS, though they can call the company to inquire. But the study stresses that it shouldn’t be up to consumers to determine if their clothing or home products are toxic. “Retailers, manufacturers, and state and federal leaders each have a role to play to bring a swift end to this unnecessary use of PFAS,” the study states.I saw a man in skinny jeans and winklepickers the other day, and found myself transported back to a time when I cared about men’s shoes. “I used to go wild for men dressed like that,” I told my bemused husband, who is older than me, and so didn’t buy into the early 00s indie scene and has never worn a pair of drainpipes in his life. Later that day I discovered that indie – or rather, the early-millennium indie aesthetic – is back, as popularised by the nostalgic Instagram account @indiesleaze and the TikTok trend. This is being old, I guess. “Are you ready for the return of indie sleaze?” Vogue asks, and the answer is no, I am not, because it was what, five minutes ago? I suppose it comes for all of us eventually, that feeling, which my mother fondly remembers as being encapsulated by the day I appropriated her boots from the 90s, declaring them “vintage”. Friends ponder whether the internet has accelerated trend cycles and, while there is probably something in that, it’s also time for ageing millennials to accept that, like every generation, we will be forced to see our youth subcultures appropriated and sold back to teenagers. “They’re selling Nirvana T-shirts in H&amp;M now,” I remarked a few years back, offering an unwittingly late-capitalist bastardisation of Withnail and I (“They’re selling hippy wigs in Woolworths, man”). I was an indie girl, as the boys called us then, though I was never as much of a scenester as some of my friends. Yes, I drank at the Hawley Arms and the Good Mixer in Camden, went to Trash, saw the Strokes at a tiny secret gig. I wore the skinny jeans and the ballet pumps and the leather jacket, though I was always too Welsh to fully jettison the fake tan and eyelashes. On balance I preferred the way we dressed for the less pretentious nights out at indie clubs in Liverpool and Manchester: Converse-puncturing stilettos, prom dresses, big beehives scaffolded by rollers, but all with that slightly down-at-heel, sordid edge – smudged eyeliner, bra straps showing, big wet pouts – complemented by how our clothes smelled the next day of stale cigarette smoke, sweaty dancefloors, Chance by Chanel, and snakebite (God, snakebite!). Of course there was the music, that was the point of it, though it quickly became so heavily commercialised and marketed that it became known as “landfill indie”, the history of which was memorably narrated in a 2016 Vice article by Johnny Borrell, a man whose hubris rose to such heights that his quip that: “Dylan is making the chips, I’m drinking the champagne” went down in music interview history. (A Guardian review of Razorlight’s 2018 single Olympus Sleeping sniggered: “Hey Dylan, fire up the deep fat fryer, because Razorlight are back baby”.) It still makes me laugh, because that’s what much of that scene boiled down to, really: male egos. A part of me will always love the Libertines, but when they sang “And they all get them out … for the boys in the band”, they basically summed the whole thing up. Though there were some magnificent exceptions, especially on the more dancey, electro-y side of things – Karen O, Beth Ditto, Lovefoxxx, Peaches, Karin Dreijer – the early-00s indie scene was in large part about dirty-haired men with guitars, posturing and preening for the girls watching them. As a friend (not one of those pictured) who was “big in Camden” at the time fondly remembers: “My overriding memories involve starving myself to fit into the required uniform of denim cutoffs, getting ghosted by men a decade older than me in their skintight Topshop jeans … and putting so many drugs up my nose that I still have no feeling in my right nostril. “As a skinny, white, conventionally attractive girl I was welcomed into this hedonistic world where the boys in bands were king and sad girls their courtiers. The girls forgave all their bad behaviour – stealing our money for drugs, serial cheating, rampant misogyny – to avoid being called boring.” This was all pre-Me Too, remember, and we were very young. I liked the feeling of men being attracted to me, that locking of eyes across the dancefloor, the “meet me in the bathroom”-ness of it all, and to the men’s credit, they all danced. But I was less certain what to do with the feeling of being objectified by them, and the way women were photographed and perceived within the scene, as exemplified by Terry Richardson’s lo-fi, pornified aesthetic. By the time the music had descended to the nadir that was Kings of Leon’s Sex on Fire and, that same year, druggy footage of Pete Doherty, Amy Winehouse and some baby mice appeared on YouTube, indie had faded. It all started to feel hollow and sad, all court dates and tabloid headlines and ballet pumps filling with blood. Then Amy died and the party truly was over. So, while Gen Z are welcome to borrow from that time, they should bear in mind that there was always a bit of a dark side to it all (and should also be prepared, should they decide to play the Libertines’ Death on the Stairs, to be joined on the dancefloor by an onslaught of ageing millennial indie kids gesticulating wildly and mortifyingly). My mind boggles somewhat at the feminist strides that have been made even over the past decade when it comes to toxic male behaviour. Progress is a wonderful thing. Perhaps prioritise the style over the substances, is my advice. But what do I know? I’m an old lady now. An old lady who is about to clean up selling my old clobber on Depop. Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett is a Guardian columnistThe final point said it all. An 11-shot rally that started with a Kaia Kanepi serve and finished with Iga Swiatek’s racket somewhere other than in her hand. Poland’s world No 9 had spent the intervening 19 seconds stretching, sliding and almost slipping, but still somehow conjuring answers to each question set by her aggressor up the other end. “Defensive” can mean all manner of things. An over-concern with self-justification. A means of driving a car safely. A negative way of playing football. In Swiatek’s case it was steely resolve, the bedrock of her three-hour passage to a second grand slam singles semi-final and first on a hard court. The 2020 French Open winner was on the back foot throughout this finale of a point, just as she had been at many junctures over the course of three hours in 36C heat. Kanepi was sending down smash after smash and it was surely only a matter of time before one stuck. But when the Estonian landed a shot outside the tramlines, Swiatek’s pressure valve finally released, and with it went her racket, slung into the humid air inside Rod Laver Arena. An emotion-charged exclamation point on the longest match of her major career. “I wasn’t even thinking a lot, I was just running,” Swiatek said. “I was actually thinking: ‘Where is like the biggest probability where she can hit the smash?’ It’s luck that you’re going to go the right way. There is that probability, but you never know what your opponent is going to do.” Swiatek’s last two matches have been dogged examinations. Against Sorana Cîrstea in the fourth round on Monday she lost the first set and rallied to win in three. On Wednesday she repeated the feat against Kanepi, the unseeded world No 115 and, at the age of 36, the oldest quarter-finalist across both the men’s and women’s singles. In the previous round Kanepi dumped out second seed Aryna Sabalenka in arguably the upset of the tournament, but here she found herself in the presence of a 20-year-old who would not go lightly, who saved eight set points before eventually ceding the opening set and then utilised old-fashioned grit to hold on at key moments in the subsequent two before eventually prevailing 4-6, 7-6 (2), 6-3. Swiatek, who is now 5-0 in three-set matches at grand slams in which she lost the first set, returns to action on Thursday to face American Danielle Collins in the semi-finals. The American 27th seed shattered Alizé Cornet’s bid to make a first grand slam semi-final at the 60th time of asking, cruising to a 7-5, 6-1 win against the French player to continue her resurgence after surgery last year for endometriosis. “It feels incredible, especially after some of the health challenges that I have had,” Collins said. “To be able to get back to this level and be able to compete the way I have and be as physical as I have has been so rewarding. “I definitely feel more free [without pain]. I feel like I have solutions to be able to manage it when there are things that come up. I certainly feel a lot freer just not having to deal with the symptoms that I used to deal with, that not being a continuous issue that I’m dealing with on a daily basis.” Cornet was resilient regardless of the scoreboard, but simply left her run too late and was still feeling Monday’s marathon win over Simona Halep. “Emotionally it was a lot to handle, I’m not going to lie,” she said. “But I felt pretty ready for this match today. Physically I recovered well. Mentally I was ready for another fight. I think the way Danielle was playing just didn’t help me at all. I couldn’t get into the rhythm. She was playing super fast on my forehand which I was not comfortable at all with.” Collins is joined in the semi-finals by unseeded compatriot Madison Keys, who will challenge the world No 1 and home favourite Ash Barty on Thursday. Swiatek was unfazed by the thought of facing world No 30 Collins. “I have played with some heavy hitters on this tournament already, so I feel like I’m feeling her game on my racket pretty well,” she said. “[Those] two matches showed me that even in tough moments I can come back, and I have skills to win matches even when they are really hard. “For sure it’s going be hard, and she’s in great shape – you can see that – and really confident. But I also feel that way.”Morrissey has accused his former Smiths bandmate Johnny Marr of using his name in interviews for “clickbait” and playing into the British press’s appetite for “cruel and savage” remarks about him. “If you can, would you please just leave me out of it?” he wrote in an open letter published on Morrissey Central. “The fact is: you don’t know me,” Morrissey wrote. “You know nothing of my life, my intentions, my thoughts, my feelings. Yet you talk as if you were my personal psychiatrist with consistent and uninterrupted access to my instincts.” Marr responded to Morrissey’s open letter, writing on Twitter: “An ‘open letter’ hasn’t really been a thing since 1953, It’s all ‘social media’ now. Even Donald J Trump had that one down. Also, this fake news business…a bit 2021 yeah?” Marr is promoting a new solo album, Fever Dreams Pts 1-4. His offending remarks appear to come from the March 2022 issue of Uncut magazine, in which he mentions Morrissey in a discussion about collaboration. “It won’t come as any surprise when I say that I’m really close with everyone I’ve worked with – except for the obvious one,” he said. “And that isn’t that much of a surprise because we’re so different, me and Morrissey.” Marr is a left-wing, teetotal vegan who runs 10 miles a day. Morrissey has descended into infamy for his remarks on race and politics. After Stormzy headlined Glastonbury in 2019, Morrissey shared a video that accused the British establishment of using the rapper to promote multiculturalism at the expense of British culture, which Morrissey posted under the title: “Nothing but blue skies for Stormzy … the gallows for Morrissey.” He has frequently denied accusations of racism. He has referred to Hitler as “left wing”, praised Brexit, expressed support for the far-right political party For Britain, criticised sexual assault survivors and said that immigration diminishes British identity. In 2019, Liverpool’s Merseyrail transport network removed posters advertising his album California Son following a complaint from the member of the public regarding his views. In the open letter, Morrissey accused Marr of hypocrisy. “You found me inspirational enough to make music with me for six years. If I was, as you claim, such an eyesore monster, where exactly did this leave you? Kidnapped? Mute? Chained? Abducted by cross-eyed extraterrestrials? It was YOU who played guitar on Golden Lights – not me. “Yes, we all know that the British press will print anything you say about me as long as it’s cruel and savage. But you’ve done all that. Move on.” Morrissey pointed out that the pair haven’t been close for 35 years, “which is many lifetimes ago. When we met you and I were not successful. We both helped each other become whatever it is we are today. “Can you not just leave it at that? Must you persistently, year after year, decade after decade, blame me for everything … from the 2007 Solomon Islands tsunami to the dribble on your grandma’s chin?” He told Marr to move on and “take responsibility for your own actions and your own career, with which I wish you good health to enjoy”. “Just stop using my name as click-bait. I have not ever attacked your solo work or your solo life, and I have openly applauded your genius during the days of Louder Than Bombs and Strangeways, Here We Come, yet you have positioned yourself ever-ready as rent-a-quote whenever the press require an ugly slant on something I half-said during the last glacial period as the Colorado River began to carve out the Grand Canyon.” Marr is not exactly voluble on the matter of Morrissey, and generally approaches journalists’ and fans’ curiosity about their relationship – and evident differences of politics and personality – with a measure of diplomacy. In 2019, Marr told NME he wasn’t concerned about Morrissey’s controversial views affecting the legacy of the Smiths. “I don’t think you can change history … I’m not worried. It’s got nothing to do with my world or my life. The songs are out there for people to judge, relate to and hear. I think that’s all going to be forgotten in a few weeks, as these things inevitably are – for better or worse.” That same year, he told the Independent that he and Morrissey weren’t still friends and repeated the line – as he often does – about them being “very different … but everyone knows that! Everyone knows everything there is to know.” Fans have thrilled to any potential sign of a reconciliation between Morrissey and Marr, who met in 2008 to discuss the possibility of reforming – a discussion that Marr said ended abruptly, the topic never raised again. In 2019, Marr responded to a fan on Twitter who asked whether rumours about a Smiths reunion were true. Marr responded: “Nigel Farage on guitar.”The number of trafficking victims locked up in immigration detention centres has increased more than tenfold in the last four years, according to data shared with the Guardian. The charity Focus on Labour Exploitation (Flex) obtained freedom of information data showing that in 2017 86 people – 14% of those suspected of being victims of trafficking – obtained what is known as positive reasonable grounds decisions after being locked up. This decision indicates someone is a potential victim of modern slavery. By 2020 the number had jumped to 1,053 people – 86% of those suspected of being trafficking victims – obtaining positive reasonable grounds decisions. While part of the increase is likely to be because of better Home Office procedures for identifying trafficking victims, anti-trafficking campaigners say it is concerning that such a large number of these victims are not identified before a decision is made to lock them up. Organisations such as After Exploitation, Women for Refugee Women and Detention Action have documented cases where trafficking victims have been detained for several months and in one case for more than a year. Campaigners say the data is particularly concerning because the government has admitted new policies will lead to more trafficking victims being locked up. Under new rules, potential victims of trafficking who are placed in immigration detention are likely to have to provide medical evidence of future harm for officials to consider releasing them – the same rules that apply to others who are detained. Prior to the introduction of the new rules there was greater recognition of the vulnerability of this group. The newly established Immigration Enforcement Competent Authority has the power to decide whether or not someone is a victim of trafficking when they are detained and in some circumstances when they are not detained. Peter Wieltschnig, of Flex, said detention was an unacceptable environment for victims of trafficking that could have a severe impact on detainees’ physical and mental health. He warned that the new rules could jeopardise victims’ willingness to come forward and seek help if their immigration status was uncertain. “This data demonstrates that the government’s immigration-enforcement-centred approach is failing victims. It shows a systemic failure in providing opportunities to disclose trafficking or modern slavery so that victims can be identified and supported rather than detained,” said Wieltschnig. A Home Office spokesperson said: “The government is committed to tackling the heinous crime of modern slavery; ensuring that victims are provided with the support they need to begin rebuilding their lives and that those responsible are prosecuted. “Decisions to detain are made on a case-by-case basis and vulnerable people will only be detained when the evidence of vulnerability in their particular case is outweighed by the immigration considerations, such as risk of escape or for the protection of the public. “Staff in immigration removal centres undertake training on the national referral mechanism and as a result potential victims of modern slavery are regularly identified in detention.”Good morning. Joe Biden has said he will consider personal sanctions against Vladimir Putin if Russia invades Ukraine, as western leaders step up military preparations and make plans to shield Europe from Russian gas being cut off. The rare sanctions threat came as Nato placed forces on standby and reinforced eastern Europe with more ships and fighter jets in response to Russia’s troop buildup near its border with Ukraine. If Russia attacked, Biden said, it would be the largest invasion since the second world war and would “change the world”. The president said he would consider adding direct sanctions on Putin to a raft of measures being drawn up. “Yes. I would see that,” Biden said when asked by reporters in Washington about targeting Putin, whom opponents have long accused of holding gigantic secret wealth. Why are Germany and France at odds with the Anglosphere over how to handle Russia? The differences reflect not just different short-term assessments on intelligence, but a deep fissure going back decades about what Germany and France, as opposed to the Anglosphere, regard as the best way to handle Russia. Boris Johnson braces himself for release of report on parties during lockdown The British prime minister is facing the most perilous time of his premiership, with exasperated Conservative MPs due to see an official report on allegations of Downing Street parties that have now triggered a criminal inquiry. The report could lead to a vote of no confidence in Johnson, and in turn to a Tory leadership election and potentially a new prime minister for the UK. Or Johnson may choose to simply resign, although it is said he intends to fight. The Metropolitan police commissioner, Cressida Dick, announced yesterday that her officers were investigating allegations of law-breaking at the heart of government on the basis of evidence unearthed during the inquiry by the senior civil servant Sue Gray. Former No 10 staffers have told the Guardian that the police inquiry will uncover evidence that has not yet been submitted to Gray. One senior Tory said the Scotland Yard inquiry was a “different ballgame”, adding: “Officials who don’t tell Sue Gray the whole truth will not hold back from the cops.” What’s happening today? Johnson faces MPs in the weekly prime minister’s question time today. You can follow along here. Last week during the fixed session, some of his own MPs called for him to resign. Did Johnson have a birthday party in lockdown? Apparently so, although one Tory MP claimed it wasn’t a proper party and that Johnson was “ambushed with a cake”. Social media erupted with mockery at the MP’s remarks. US Coast Guard searches for 39 people after boat capsizes off Florida The US Coast Guard has been searching for 39 people missing for several days after a boat believed to be used for human smuggling capsized off Florida’s coast en route from the Bahamas. A good Samaritan called the Coast Guard early on Tuesday after rescuing a man clinging to the boat 45 miles (72km) east of Fort Pierce, the maritime security agency reported on Twitter. The man said he had been with a group of 39 others that left the island of Bimini in the Bahamas on Saturday night. He said the boat had capsized in severe weather and that no one was wearing a lifejacket. The Coast Guard is calling it a case of human smuggling. The agency tweeted earlier yesterday about the search and then later posted a picture of the stranded man. What has the agency said? “Navigating the seas in overloaded &amp; less than seaworthy vessels is extremely dangerous and can result in loss of life,” it said on Twitter. It has been searching by air and sea over a roughly 135-mile area extending from Bimini to the Fort Pierce Inlet. Out-of-control SpaceX rocket on collision course with moon A SpaceX rocket is on a collision course with the moon after spending almost seven years hurtling through space, experts say. The booster was originally launched from Florida in February 2015 as part of an interplanetary mission to send a space weather satellite on a million-mile journey. Space observers believe the rocket – about four metric tonnes of “space junk” – is on course to intersect with the moon at a velocity of about 2.58km/s in a matter of weeks. Bill Gray, who writes software to track near-Earth objects, asteroids, minor planets, and comets, has said the Falcon 9’s upper stage will very likely hit the far side of the moon, near the equator, on 4 March. Has anything like this happened before? “This is the first unintentional case [of space junk hitting the moon] of which I am aware,” Bill Gray, who writes software to track near-Earth objects, asteroids, minor planets, and comets, said. Will the collision be visible from Earth? Gray says it will probably go unobserved. “The bulk of the moon is in the way, and even if it were on the near side, the impact occurs a couple of days after new moon.” In other news … A documentary film about Alexei Navalny, who narrowly survived an apparent poisoning attempt with novichok, has premiered at the Sundance film festival. The 90-minute film, simply titled Navalny, was filmed during the several months he spent in Germany in late 2020 as he recovered from the poisoning. Seattle’s cement workers are striking over unfair labor practices, accusing their employers of refusing to negotiate in good faith. The striking workers fear employers want to purge unionized workers from the area’s construction industry and attempt to bankrupt the union through litigation. Cardi B has been awarded $4m in damages in a libel lawsuit against a celebrity gossip blogger who claimed that the rapper was a prostitute who used cocaine and had contracted sexually transmitted infections. Cardi B, born Belcalis Almánzar, sued the blogger known as Tasha K in 2019. Joe Manchin, a darling of the US coal industry, has attracted global anger over the climate crisis. The West Virginia senator’s name is reviled on the streets of Bangladesh and other countries facing climate disaster as he blocks Joe Biden’s effort to curb planet-heating gases. Stat of the day: ghostly monkey and slug snake among 224 new species found in Mekong region A monkey with ghostly white circles around its eyes is among 224 new species listed in the World Wildlife Fund’s latest update on the greater Mekong region. The conservation group’s report, released on Wednesday, highlights the need to protect the rich biodiversity and habitats in the region, which includes Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, Thailand and Myanmar. There are also dozens of newly identified reptiles, frogs and newts, fish and 155 plant species. Don’t miss this: could a ‘fun-tervention’ improve my life – in just one month? The author of a new book The Power of Fun says having more fun builds resilience and will help get us through the next stage of the pandemic. Fun, Catherine Price argues, is not something that’s nice to have, but actually essential to a happy, healthy life – and it’s possible to have more of it, even during a pandemic. But can she get the Guardian writer Elle Hunt out of her funk? Climate check: Xi Jinping warns China’s low-carbon ambitions must not interfere with ‘normal life’ China, the world’s biggest source of climate-warming greenhouse gas emissions, has been under pressure to “enhance ambition” and take more drastic action to tackle global warming. However, President Xi Jinping has said China’s ambitious low-carbon goals should not come at the expense of energy and food security or the “normal life” of ordinary people, signalling a more cautious approach to climate change as the economy slows. Last Thing: eerie ‘iceberg’ was a wonder of nature – just not an iceberg Clear winter skies and the promise of a recent evening’s beautiful sunset led the photographer Simone Engels to a nearby park on Vancouver Island. But as she trained her lens on the pinkish hue of the landscape of the Pacific coast, she was shocked to see a large, iceberg-like shape on the horizon. “It was this huge, shiny, three-dimensional tubular structure,” she said. “It looked so real.” She later learned that the mysterious iceberg was really a mirage. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comThe tuba is an instrument of some magnificence. Warm bellied and low-rumbling, it’s been the bedrock of orchestras for quite some time, but is perhaps not what you might think of as a centre-stage star. As part of lauded London group Sons of Kemet (and a collaborator with Moses Boyd and Nubya Garcia), Theon Cross is making it his mission to rehabilitate its image. At the overlap between R&amp;B, hip-hop and jazz, his second album Intra-I adopts a cinematic approach to brass beat-making, vibrating with contemporary cool. On headphones, Intra-I invites main character syndrome: it’s like an imaginary soundtrack for an enthralling inner city crime drama. In a venue as intimate as this, it’s a different kind of arresting; the kind of intense communal experience that makes you wonder how it can happen so casually on an otherwise regular Tuesday night. In a world of samplers and loop pedals, it’s remarkable how little he relies on tape; whether establishing a beat, texture, or buzzing-bee melody, Cross’s pause for breath is so imperceptible that you suspect he must have gills to generate his astonishingly full sound. Chat between songs is minimal (“we’re going to keep it more musical than verbal”), and from the crash-bang jungle-jazz of Activate to the disco marching band of 40tude, every moment laces itself neatly into the next, attitude lingering like the trail of a sparkler on a winter’s night. Far from a showboat, he builds space for each player to shine; drummer Patrick Boyle whacking his cymbal with meticulous chaos, guitarist Nikos Ziarkas laying down math-rock melodies with eyes tight shut, and Chelsea Carmichael demonstrating exactly why she is one of the country’s most exciting young saxophonists, matching Cross’s energy with ease and joy. In a multigenerational room of attendees, many are left agog, wondering if it’s too late into the New Year to take up a new hobby. If you have pondered the tuba, now might well be the time – this instrument just got seriously hip.My father, Tony Moulam, who has died aged 94, was a pioneering rock climber and mountaineer. Born in Derby, the son of Albert, a clock repairer, and Mabel (nee Priestley), a housewife, he was rather a solitary child. Receiving a bicycle for his 12th birthday, he cycled out to the Peak District, which was a catalyst to a lifelong love of the outdoors. Tony was inspired by reading Let’s Go Climbing by Colin Kirkus while at Bemrose school, and his expeditions soon centred around scrambling on Derbyshire gritstone. A chance meeting with Peter Harding, an established climber, at Black Rocks in Cromford, led to serious climbing with hemp ropes. The pair forged a longstanding partnership, tackling numerous climbs in the orbit of their cycle rides and became expert at harder gritstone routes. They employed “hand jams”, necessary when the only feature is a crack in the rock, and my father recalled introducing a young Joe Brown to this developing gritstone art along with Chris Bonington, who remembers Tony as “hugely important” in inspiring his passion for climbing. Volunteering for the army, Tony never saw active service but was commissioned into the Royal Corps of Signals. Posted to Worcestershire, Catterick and finally Vienna, where he oversaw the military telephone exchange, he used every opportunity to pursue his climbing and took advantage of the army’s encouragement to explore the crags and hills. Demobbed in 1948, Tony, with Harding, published A Guide to Black Rocks and Cratcliffe Tor the following year. Tony’s exceptional memory meant he could recall intricate details of each route – invaluable to upcoming climbers – a skill he maintained until the end of his life. Tony attended Manchester University from 1949 to 1951 and graduated with a BSc in electrical engineering. Thereafter, his climbing focused on north Wales, where he developed new routes and techniques in the Carneddau and Glyder ranges. He made many first ascents, including Mur-y-Niwl on Craig yr Ysfa in 1952, and contributed significantly to British rock-climbing, publishing guidebooks to these areas and elsewhere. Joining the Climbers’ Club in 1947, Tony was president from 1969 to 1972 and variously custodian of two club huts: Cwm Glas Mawr and Helyg. In 1970 he was also president of the British Mountaineering Council, overseeing key negotiations with the Central Council of Physical Recreation. He accepted a position with ICI in July 1952. Before starting, he had been invited by the Everest Committee to join an expedition to climb Cho Oyu in early 1952 and a year later to attempt Everest, if “his efforts this year should show him worth including in the 1953 party”. Declining this invitation was perhaps his greatest regret. He wrote articles about his adventures, and these are being collated into a single publication. Tony married Pauline (nee Chapman), my mother, in 1956; they separated in 1984, and she died in 2020. In 1985 he met Annie Price, and they were in a partnership until her death in 2017. He is survived by me and my brother, Peter, and by Annie’s children, Janice and Russell.My father, Graham Pike, who has died aged 82, was an entrepreneur and academic with an infectious enthusiasm for travel, aeroplanes, maps and stamps. His company Green Cuisine Food Products Ltd grew to become one of the country’s leading herb and spice packing businesses. Born in London, the son of Bill Pike, manager of an autoparts company, and his wife, Pearl (nee Owen), who grew up in India, Graham spent his formative years in Leeds. His father’s wartime service in the RAF sparked in Graham a lifelong passion for aviation. Aged 17, he joined the Saunders-Roe aircraft company on the Isle of Wight as an apprentice engineer, going on to study aeronautical engineering at Southampton University, where he learned to fly. In 1960 Graham’s irrepressible taste for adventure took him first to work in Canada, then across the US by car, before travelling by boat to Sydney, Australia where he completed a PhD in physics and met his future wife, Rhonda Jones, an occupational therapist. In 1966 he hatched a plan to sail back to Britain in the Eilander, a battered old Victorian fishing ketch, with a small crew of fellow adventurers. With little sailing experience and virtually no money they island-hopped around the Pacific to New Guinea and Indonesia, working to pay their way. From Borneo, Graham and Rhonda continued their adventurous journey overland. Arriving in London in late 1967, the couple first lived in a van inside a disused laundry, then in a caravan in the hold of the barge Ironsides, moored near Kew Bridge. When Graham took up a two-year postdoctoral research post in the Physical Chemistry Laboratory in Oxford, where he became a graduate member of St John’s College, they moved to Horspath, a village outside the city, married in 1969 and started a family. They spent a year, 1970-71, in Barcelona, where Graham taught maths, physics and chemistry. On return to Britain they moved to rural Norfolk and Graham worked as a tutor for the newly established Open University. Inspired by their travels and the fact that Graham’s parents had lived in India, my parents had a love of cooking world cuisine. The range of ingredients available in Norfolk at that time was limited and Graham went to London to buy herbs and spices direct from the importers. The wholesale quantities were much more than needed for home use so he started selling the surplus. Before long it became apparent that this sideline was going to be more lucrative than remaining in academia. In 1972 Graham started his own business supplying herbs and spices to shops, restaurants and the public. Early products included a successful range of mail-order curry-making kits, complete with accompanying recipes. The Green Cuisine factory was later established in Watton, Norfolk. Graham and Rhonda renovated the derelict Old Rectory in Foulden as a home for their growing family before finally settling in Norwich. Graham rekindled his interest in sailing and had many boating adventures with his family on the Norfolk Broads. He was a long-term supporter of charities including the 1st Norwich Sea Scouts and Action Village India. He maintained his interest in travel and was always keen to explore new places with family and friends. He is survived by Rhonda, their three children – my siblings, Alistair and Jules, and me – and three grandchildren.Rob Wilkins, Terry Pratchett’s former assistant and friend, is writing the official biography of the late Discworld author, which will move from his childhood to the “embuggerance” of the Alzheimer’s disease he was diagnosed with in 2007. Pratchett was working on his autobiography when he died in 2015, but “following his untimely death from Alzheimer’s disease, the mantle of completing Terry Pratchett’s memoir was passed to Rob”, said publisher Transworld. It will include “fragments” from the memoir Pratchett was working on before he died, the publisher added. Wilkins, who is now head of Pratchett’s literary estate, worked alongside the author for over 15 years as his assistant and business manager. He has drawn on his own memories, as well as those of Pratchett’s family, friends, fans and colleagues, in writing A Life With Footnotes – the title a nod to the author’s dab hand with an annotation. “The responsibility of documenting his life when I lived so much of it with him has been such an emotive experience. A Life With Footnotes is a book that I hope would have made Terry proud,” said Wilkins. “Living a life alongside one of the world’s greatest authors, then reliving every moment for his biography, has been an incredible journey. Terry was one of the most talented, complex, intellectually stimulating people I’ve ever had the privilege of meeting – a true genius.” The biography will be published in September. Publisher Transworld said it would move from Pratchett being told at the age of six by his headteacher that he would never amount to anything, through the writing of the bestselling Discworld series, his winning the Carnegie medal and his knighthood for services to literature. Wilkins will also cover how Pratchett coped with the challenges of Alzheimer’s. Transworld managing director Larry Finlay said that “only Wilkins” could have written the “intimate, engaging and revealing portrait of one of the UK’s most loved and most missed authors”. “A Life With Footnotes captures the genius that was Terry Pratchett, with warmth, poignancy and great good humour – and with no small amount of love,” said Finlay. “It is a masterclass in great biographical writing.’”My friend and colleague Fraser Woodburn, who has died aged 70 of cancer, was a top administrator in UK higher education for more than two decades. From 1977 to 1980, he carried out various roles in university administration at the University of Stirling. He then moved to Edinburgh University (1980-88), where he held administrative appointments with responsibility for postgraduate affairs, computing policy and, latterly, planning and resource allocation. Fraser was also academic registrar at Hull (1988-92), and university secretary at Essex (1992-98). He served his longest tenure (1999-2015) as university secretary at the Open University, where he was responsible to the vice-chancellor for the administration of the university and to the council for the governance of the institution. Inspirational and dedicated, Fraser thought in a strategic way that won admiration from all who worked with him. He supported institutions through significant changes and made a huge contribution to the OU. With great deftness he navigated the institution through some very challenging times, particularly the changes in the higher education fees and funding regime in England, when he was pivotal in the university successfully making the case for part-time students to have access to loans on a par with full-time students. Fraser was responsible for unusually complex, panoptic briefs, stretching from governance and finance to government relations and capital projects. Many of the OU’s successes in groundbreaking research, world-class teaching and creative innovation were made possible thanks to his exceptional leadership. Known for his kindness, wit, willingness to listen, astute problem-solving and practical encouragement to staff at all levels, Fraser was a member of Humanists UK. He said the critical factor that had helped him to succeed in life was understanding that many people do difficult things well and make an important contribution. In retirement he became a member of the governing board, and, later, senior independent director, of the University of Suffolk (2016-21). He was also a member of the audit committee of the Higher Education Funding Council for England (2004-10). As well as reaching the pinnacle of his profession, he was a great family man. Born in Ayr, to Anna (nee Hogg) and Alexander, a civil servant, Fraser had a twin brother, Robin, and two older sisters, Rosemary and Sandra. After attending Boroughmuir high school in Edinburgh (1963-69), he graduated in 1973 with a BSc (Hons) in mathematical physics from the University of Edinburgh, where he attended lectures by Peter Higgs, of the Higgs boson. He obtained a diploma in public administration from the Napier College of Commerce and Technology, also in Edinburgh. Fraser met Anne De Roeck, now emeritus professor at the Open University, in 1992, when he first joined the University of Essex, where she was a lecturer in computer science. They married in 2005. He is survived by Anne, his children, Nicola and Graham, from a previous marriage that ended in divorce, by his stepchildren, Max and Emma, grandchildren, Alex, Poppy and Albie, and Robin and Sandra. Rosemary died in 2018.The England footballers Marcus Rashford and Jesse Lingard have said they do not condone any form of discrimination, after a photograph emerged of them posing in Dubai with the grime MC Wiley. Wiley is a hugely controversial figure. In 2020 he was banned from Twitter and Facebook for a series of antisemitic posts, including one rant in which he compared Jews with the Ku Klux Klan and described them as snakes. On Tuesday the Jewish Chronicle published a photograph of Rashford and Lingard, both Manchester United players, posing with Wiley after a performance at a nightclub in Dubai on Sunday. It had been posted on Wiley’s Instagram page and was later deleted. A backlash prompted both players to make statements on antisemitism. Rashford said: “This picture has been brought to my attention which I understand now, given context, could easily be misconstrued. I would like to reinforce that I do not and will not condone discriminative language or behaviour of any kind aimed at the Jewish community or any other community.” A Manchester United-supporting reporter, Ben Bloch, asked what the context was, adding: “All I’m seeing right now is you posing next to a man who hates me and other Jewish people to his core. Please help me understand.” Rashford replied: “Hey Ben, I wasn’t aware of comments that had been made when I got pulled into a photo opportunity. Comments that I absolutely condemn. I apologise for any upset caused. We just all happened to be in the same place at the same time.” The footballer also said: “I truly believe that tackling antisemitism in and outside of the game requires a greater level of attention and should very much form part of the game’s anti-racism stance.” Lingard posted on Twitter: “I’ve been made aware of a photo circulating currently, that can easily be misconstrued. I want to make it clear that I do not condone any form of racism whatsoever!” Wiley, known as the “godfather of grime”, has refused to distance himself from the comments but apologised for “generalising” about Jewish people. He said they came after a falling out with his now former manager, who is Jewish. He told Sky News: “My comments should not have been directed to all Jews or Jewish people. I want to apologise for generalising, and I want to apologise for comments that were looked at as antisemitic.” Wiley was awarded an MBE in 2018 but told the interviewer he would happily give it up as he “never wanted it”.It’s a new year, so it’s time for a new cryptocurrency buzzword to escape the sector and become the latest fad that baffled news anchors try desperately to explain to their increasingly confused audiences before giving up and passing over to the sports desk. In other words: move over “NFT”, now “DAO” is the hot acronym on the block. Just as NFTs weren’t new this time last year, when the gestalt eye of the internet turned towards them as an investment opportunity after the buzz of pumping and dumping GameStop stock had worn off, so too are DAOs an old idea given a new lease of life by untold millions of consumer cash flooding into the sector. But, I’ve got ahead of myself: what are they, what are their history, and why are we talking about them now? WTF even is a DAO? Standing for “decentralised autonomous organisation”, a DAO isn’t really in the same class as an NFT. Rather than being a singular digital asset, like a picture of a monkey or a dog-themed copy of a dog-themed copy of bitcoin, a DAO is more like a company – but one which is directly controlled by its shareholders, without the need for employees or directors. (Although, we should note, a DAO is Not A Company and owners of DAOs are Not Shareholders, because if it were and they were, the whole thing would be wildly illegal. Glad we’ve cleared that up.) At its platonic ideal, a DAO exists in the realm of code-as-law that much of the cryptocurrency community fetishises. An organisation is set up by some clever bod, who sells membership to anyone who’ll buy its tokens. The cash used to buy the tokens becomes the organisation’s treasury, and it can be used by simply writing a smart contract (to, say, loan some money out at an 8% interest rate) and securing the votes of enough of the organisation’s token-holders, at which point the smart contract is executed. In that idealised vision of the organisation, there barely needs to be any human-level structure at all – hence the “autonomous” part of the name. The DAO itself exists as a smart contract, and while the founder may reserve some special perks for themselves (typically in the form of giving themselves some tokens for free before they go on sale), they have no formalised power beyond the same votes that everyone else has. But in the real world, DAOs have hit two major problems. The first is that coding is hard, and the second is that most things you would actually want to do in the world today still don’t exist on the blockchain. Coding is hard The problem with outsourcing all of your governance to smart contracts is that writing code for cryptocurrency platforms is hard, and reading it is even harder. It’s all very well to be shown a smart contract and told that it will authorise a loan of 8% to a safe counterparty, but it’s trivial to hide nasty surprises in plain sight. Take the story of the “YEAR” token, which was launched on New Year’s Eve. The token had a very simple use, which was to plug into a smart contract that showed owners their activity on the Ethereum blockchain, but it also arrived with a curious bug: what looked like a typo in the aspect of the contract governing buying and selling it, that meant that if you tried to sell the token to the contract owner, it would fail. What happened then was simple. Once the token launched, and gained a bit of word of mouth, the founder transferred its ownership – to the only cryptocurrency exchange where it was listed. That meant, at a stroke, that the token became a honeypot: people could buy it, but couldn’t sell it, and the value went up and up on the exchange as a result. Then, thirty minutes later, the founder drained about £100,000 from the account, and disappeared into the night. That’s a small loss in the grand scheme of things, and “rugpulls” – where a project is launched with great fanfare before its founder steals the funds – are so common in the sector that the phrase is now a one-word term. But a bigger example of the same problem is the failure of a much bigger DAO: in fact, the very first one, called simply TheDAO. Launched in April 2016, TheDAO made all the same promises as those around today, and rapidly gained thousands of investor/members and more than 11m Ether under its control (worth well over $100m then, and $25bn now). But a bug in the foundational code of the project, unfixed since May that year, was exploited on 17 June, to drain 3.6m Ether into another account. The hack was so enormous by the scale of the then nascent Ethereum blockchain that it had ramifications far outside TheDAO and its direct investors. In the end, the entire Ethereum cryptocurrency was rewritten from the ground up to reverse the transactions: the Ethereum in use today is technically a “hard fork” of the original, and some users still cling to “Ethereum Classic”, the blockchain where TheDAO’s hack was allowed to continue existing. Against that background, it is … somewhat odd to me that people continue to describe their projects as DAOs. It seems a bit like deciding that hydrogen airships are the future, despite their historical safety record, and then calling your new business “Hindenburg Aviation”. The blockchain isn’t the world But the cryptocurrency sector of 2022 is a different beast from the one of 2016. Perversely, it feels like the vague chance of losing everything to rugpulls and hacks has become more accepted as the sector has moved toward the mainstream, with consumers embracing cryptocurrency as a high-risk, high-reward way of gambling their savings. These days, the more pertinent flaws of DAOs are becoming apparent as the ambitions of the sector outstrip its ability, with projects such as ConstitutionDAO and theSpiceDAO. We’ve covered the former, a crowdfunded plan to buy a copy of the US constitution, here before (the project ended in chaos after the group was outbid by a Wall Street executive and failed to buy the constitution at all). TheSpiceDAO is the “second as farce” version of the same idea. A DAO built around an auction of a rare book detailing the abortive production of an adaptation of Dune by Chilean director Alejandro Jodorowsky, the community managed to actually buy the book. Unfortunately, it was confused about what it had actually acquired. After spending €2.66m on the book, the group planned to: Make the book public (to the extent permitted by law) Produce an original animated limited series inspired by the book and sell it to a streaming service Support derivative projects from the community In other words, rather than buying a copy of the book, they seemed to believe they had licensed the actual rights to the property. Needless to say, they are not legally entitled to produce an animated series based on Dune. Despite this, the project is steaming ahead. One popular idea has been to mint NFTs, one for each page of the book, and then to burn the book, ensuring that only the NFT owners “really” own the content. It’s a bold move, let’s see if it pays off for them. Where next? I don’t like making predictions (I am, after all, the guy who called bitcoin a bubble when it was worth £30), but I think it’s almost guaranteed that the next few big cryptocurrency stories will be focused on DAOs. The steam has started to run out on NFTs, narrowly construed: the art bubble has stopped growing, the profile pic projects are too easily parodiable, and the gaming-related NFTs are still stumbling on the fact that none of the games that exist are good, fun or exciting in any way. Money will flow in, but mainstream attention is moving on. DAOs, by contrast, can be anything: a project to buy a valuable thing, to build a real asset, to move billions, or just to make a lot of money. And they’re also the perfect vehicle for the newly minted millionaires of the sector to throw their influence into the real world: want to buy and run a football team, get celebrities to act in a movie you’ve written, or just spend a lot of money so people think you’re serious? A DAO is the way you do that. It’s going to be chaos. If you want to read the complete version of the newsletter please subscribe to receive TechScape in your inbox every Wednesday.Fifa and the Confederation of African Football face a test of leadership over whether Sadio Mané plays in Senegal’s Africa Cup of Nations quarter-final, according to the brain injury charity Headway. The Liverpool forward was taken to hospital with a suspected concussion after clashing heads with Cape Verde goalkeeper Vozinha during Senegal’s last-16 win in the Africa Cup of Nations on Tuesday. Vozinha was sent off for the 53rd-minute foul and received immediate treatment for his head injury. Mané played on after treatment, however, and scored the opening goal of Senegal’s 2-0 win in the 63rd minute. Following a lengthy VAR review of the goal, the 29-year-old dropped to the pitch holding his head and was eventually helped off and substituted in the 70th minute. Mané later posted a picture on social media of himself and Vozinha in hospital with the caption: “Senegal vs Cape Verde in the pitch, in the hospital. Everything is fine, thank you all for the messages.” He should now undergo a graduated return to play, placing his availability for Sunday’s quarter-final against Mali or Equatorial Guinea in doubt. Headway believe it would demonstrate the weakness of football’s protocols on concussion should the Liverpool striker feature. Luke Griggs, the charity’s deputy chief executive, said: “This was a sickening collision that clearly left both players in enough distress for a concussion to have surely been considered a possibility at the very least. At that point, the principle of ‘If in doubt, sit it out’ should have resulted in Mané being substituted without another ball being kicked. “The image of the player collapsing on the ground and having to be helped from the pitch after scoring his goal should tell you everything you need to know about the impact and the effect it had had on his brain. Yet again, the desire to win is seen as being worth serious risks to players’ health. It is simply shocking that this continues to happen. “This is now a real test of leadership for the Confederation of African Football and world governing body Fifa – particularly if Senegal declare Mané fit for Sunday’s quarter-final. If football wants to be taken seriously when it comes to concussion, it simply must take action to enforce and strengthen its protocols.”Environmental campaigners are fighting to stop a water company being given almost total immunity from any private legal action for discharging untreated sewage into waterways. The Good Law Project (GLP) and the Environmental Law Foundation (ELF) are challenging a decision by the high court that the water company United Utilities cannot be subject to any private legal action for its discharges of raw sewage from storm outfalls into the Manchester ship canal. The decision made last April is being reviewed by the court of appeal, which this week granted permission for the legal groups to submit evidence as part of the case. Jo Maugham, the director of the GLP, said if United Utilities was to win the case it could end a vital legal option to hold water companies to account for sewage dumping. Lawyers for the GLP say the decision would effectively act as a precedent which all water companies would seek to rely on. The environmental groups will tell the court of appeal it has now become clear that sewage dumping from storm overflows has been occurring with alarming regularity and does not just take place in exceptional circumstances, for instance after very heavy rainfall. Emma Montlake, the joint executive director of the ELF, said: “ELF works with and assists communities across the country plagued by the environmental and health consequences associated with sewage pollution into British water systems. “We are delighted that the court [of appeal] has agreed that the ELF’s evidence and that of others in the consortium will be able to assist the court of appeal to understand the context and wider ramifications of unchecked sewage pollution.” The fight over the rights to sue a water company over discharges from outflows of raw sewage began in 2010 when the owners of the Manchester ship canal sought damages against United Utilities for discharges of sewage into the waterway. MSC argued that water companies did not have a legal right to pollute waterways with raw sewage. They argued that untreated, or inadequately treated, discharge that was unauthorised would be unlawful and therefore could be challenged by legal action. In response United Utilities sought a declaration in court that as a water company it could not be subject to private legal action because it was a matter for the regulator. The high court agreed with the water company and granted the declaration it sought, that there was no case in law against United Utilities in respect of discharges from the company’s outfalls. The judge – in supporting his decision – said discharges were “the effect of sudden heavy rainfall, which causes flooding and results in the capacity of the existing system being exceeded” and had “occurred without United Utilities doing anything to cause it or being able to do anything lawfully to stop it, except by spending money on large-scale capital improvements”. In 2020 water companies discharged raw sewage into rivers and waterways more than 400,000 times over 3.1m hours. A United Utilities spokesperson said: “The legal case you have referenced is not about avoiding accountability, the aim is to clarify the regulatory position regarding wastewater outfalls. This is the latest in a long series of cases brought against United Utilities by the owners of the Manchester ship canal. We cannot comment any further on this as the legal proceedings are ongoing.”Writer-director Garth Jennings has returned with a sequel to the highly successful family animation Sing, about a koala called Buster Moon (voiced by Matthew McConaughey, a musical theatre impresario with a never-say-die attitude and a cute troupe of talking, singing animals. That was a slick product with a fair bit of charm, but this follow-up has all of the varnish but the actual heart and soul has dwindled to a blandness. It feels like a screensaver, a movie generated by an algorithm, the same algorithm that calculated the likely profit on extending the Sing franchise. Now Buster and the gang are yearning to make it big in the world’s entertainment capital: a flashy but fictional place called Redshore, like Vegas with a dash of LA. They somehow blag their way into an audition for thuggish media magnate and arctic wolf Jimmy Crystal (Bobby Cannavale) who lets them put on their sci-fi spectacular in his hotel showroom, as long as it stars his pampered princess of a daughter Porsha (voiced by Halsey). Fast-talking Buster also claims he can tempt out of reclusive retirement a legendary singer and lion called Clay Calloway (voiced by Bono) who slightly tiresomely sings his version of I Still Haven’t Found What I’m Looking For, without anyone breaking the fact-fiction dividing wall and wondering why this supposed icon is performing a U2 cover instead of his own material. The movie runs smoothly on rails, like a fairground ride or a Vegas attraction, although the central plot point – Porsha’s turnaround from being a spoilt brat to a decent and loyal member of Buster’s cast – isn’t satisfyingly explained. This is the kind of movie that could be put on to keep young kids happy … though maybe not so happy as they could have been. • Sing 2 is released on 28 January in cinemas.Also known as pease pottage, or a London particular, depending on which century you hail from, this thick, smoky pea soup is a world away from the silky, vivid green versions of midsummer. Instead, it relies on dried peas, a staple starch of the medieval table before potatoes came along and still cheap as chips, and equally comforting on a winter’s day. Prep 15 min, plus optional overnight soaking Cook 3 hr 15 min Serves 6 For the ham (or use 1½ litres ham, chicken or vegetable stock, plus some shredded ham) 1 smallish smoked ham hock 1 onion 4 cloves 1 celery stick 1 carrot 1 bay leaf 2 sprigs fresh thyme For the soup 2 tbsp butter 1 onion, peeled and diced 1 carrot, peeled and diced 500g dried peas (green for preference), whole or split 1 Whole or split peas? If using whole dried peas, soak them in plenty of cold water overnight. If you can’t find any dried peas in the dried pulses section at the supermarket, you may well have more luck in Asian food stores; British dried peas are available online from Hodmedod’s. If using split ones, simply soak them in cold water while you prepare the ham. 2 Prepare the ham If you’re cooking a ham from scratch, put it in a largish pan (start from step 4 if you’re using stock). Wash and cut the onion in half (there’s no need to peel, unless it’s filthy) and stud it with the cloves. Very roughly chop the celery and carrot (wash, but again no need to peel) into a few pieces and add these and the herbs to the pot. 3 Cook the ham Add enough cold water barely to cover the contents of the pan and bring it to a boil. Skim off any froth from the top, turn down the heat and simmer for about two and a half to three hours, until the meat is tender and cooked all the way through (if you have a food thermometer or probe, the internal temperature should be at least 60C). Turn off the heat and leave the ham to cool in the liquid. 4 Start the base of the soup Drain the ham, reserving the cooking liquid but discarding the vegetables. If you’re using readymade ham stock, start the process from here. Melt the butter in a large pan, add the chopped onion and cook gently for about five minutes, to soften. Add the chopped carrot and cook for another five minutes. 5 Add the peas Stir in the peas (drained, if you soaked them), stir to to coat in the butter … … then add a litre of the ham stock (if you don’t have enough cooking liquor, make it up with water). Bring to a boil, then turn down the heat and cook until the peas begin to break down – bear in mind that whole peas will take longer to cook than split ones, and may also require more liquid. 6 Shred the ham and finish the soup Meanwhile, strip the ham from the bone and shred (or shred whatever ham you are using). Once the peas have broken down (if using whole peas, once they’re soft, you can use a stick blender or a potato masher to hurry them along), use the remaining stock to thin the soup to your desired consistency, if need be. 7 Add the ham and serve Stir most of the shredded ham into the soup (depending on the size of your joint, you may well not need it all), season to taste, then serve with a little more ham sprinkled on top. This soup keeps and reheats very well, though you might want to thin it again with water. 8 For a vegetarian twist To make this vegetarian, use vegetable stock instead, and stir a teaspoon of smoked paprika into the pan just before you add the drained peas. I also add a tablespoon of Marmite at the end, dissolved in warm water, to give it some extra savoury oomph, but that’s entirely optional. 9 For a side dish twist If you don’t thin the soup and keep it very thick, you can even serve this as a side dish for the sliced ham, rather than as a soup. It’s also very nice with roast or braised pork, or indeed as a side dish in general. Garnish with chopped herbs or spring onions. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoWhen we think of Greek myths we think of vengeful gods, legendary heroes, sweeping love affairs and dastardly deeds. They are transformative tales which explore the full range of human experience so it is hardly surprising that writers continually turn to them for inspiration. Poets such as Dante and Petrarch were enthralled by Greek myth, so too were Chaucer and Milton. Mary Shelley famously incorporated the theme of Prometheus into Frankenstein, and CS Lewis drew on Ovid’s Metamorphoses in his 1956 novel Till We Have Faces. In recent years mythical retellings have been booming, especially those that bring the role of women to the fore – Circe by Madeline Miller was released in 2018 while 2021 saw debuts such as Claire Heywood’s Daughters of Sparta and Rosie Hewlett’s Medusa hit the shelves, and Jennifer Saint’s much-anticipated Elektra is due out later this year. But retellings come in many forms and guises. In my debut novel Pandora I wanted to explore female agency and the complexities of human nature, all through the richness of a Georgian lens using the myth of Pandora’s box as an anchor. All the works I’ve chosen have interpreted the Greek myths in different ways, but they are all testament to how these ancient stories have got under our skin. 1 House of Names by Colm Tóibín This intricately plotted novel draws on a number of Greek myths, chief among them those found in Aeschylus’s Oresteia. It is the story of Agamemnon and Clytemnestra, beginning with the brutal sacrifice of their 16-year-old daughter, Iphigenia. A deeply human tale of a warring family, the story is steeped in violence and cruelty but Tóibín brings empathy and depth to the characters, offering a nuanced understanding of their anger, fear, hatred and guilt. 2 Autobiography of Red by Anne Carson An arresting novel in verse which brings the Greek monster Geryon (who features in the 10th Labour of Heracles) into a modern-day setting. Drawing on surviving fragments of the lyric poet Stesichorus’s work Geryoneis, this is a moving coming-of-age tale about love and yearning which is whimsical, sad, and a fascinating take on a character overlooked in favour of the larger-than-life man who slayed him. 3 Ulysses by James Joyce Homer’s epic poem the Odyssey is reimagined in 1900s Dublin, chronicling in minute detail a single day in the life of Leopold Bloom, his friend Stephen Dedalus and his long-suffering wife Molly. An epic work in its own right, the novel is divided into episodes that roughly correspond to those in the original poem. It is both brilliant and infuriating in its sheer scale and narrative styling, and one of the greatest literary achievements of the 20th century. 4 Girl Meets Boy by Ali Smith The myth of Iphis and Ianthe is one of those rare Greek myths that ends happily. The story is told in Ovid’s Metamorphoses, where a girl is raised as a boy to avoid her father’s wrath and falls in love with another girl. Later, her gender is changed by the goddess Isis, allowing them to marry. Smith takes this story into modern-day Inverness in the guise of Anthea and Robin, and deals with gender, transformation and acceptance of self. It’s a small book at only 176 pages but it is vibrant, joyful, funny and poetic. 5 The Silence of the Girls by Pat Barker This critically acclaimed novel is a retelling of Homer’s Iliad, told from the perspective of Briseis, a Trojan queen who is captured and forced to become the concubine of Achilles. It is a brave, powerful story about survival and resilience, which in no way shies away from the horrors of war and the cruelty women suffered at the hands of their enslavers. There are harrowing scenes including child murder, gang rape and suicide making it a ruthless story, but one that should not be ignored. 6 An Orchestra of Minorities by Chigozie Obioma Another reinterpretation of the Odyssey. Obioma tackles the myth by lifting it out of Ancient Greece and into Umuahia, Nigeria. When young poultry farmer Chinonso sees a woman about to jump off a bridge his whole life is set off course, and the aftermath of this event takes him further and further away from his dreams. Told from the perspective of Chinonso’s “chi” (a guardian spirit of Igbo cosmology), this novel is unlike any other. It is a thought-provoking and challenging tale exploring themes of love and sacrifice, vulnerability and misfortune, and the unyielding power of fate. 7 A Thousand Ships by Natalie Haynes Broadcaster and classicist Natalie Haynes brilliantly retells the story of the Trojan war from an all-female perspective. She presents a kaleidoscopic view of the war and the women involved in a series of episodes narrated by Calliope, the Greek muse of epic poetry. A fresh take on the Iliad brimming with wit and atmosphere. 8 The Giant Dark by Sarvat Hasin Loosely inspired by the myth of Orpheus and Eurydice, this is a genre-bending novel which centres on rock star Aida, who finds herself trapped in a destructive love affair. The novel is split into two parts in homage to the myth’s thematic origins, and echoes the original’s message about the dangers of using a lover as a muse. A wholly original story that explores themes of jealousy, trauma and the crippling effects of fame with visceral panache. 9 The Maidens by Alex Michaelides Dark academia meets Greek myth in this literary thriller set at Cambridge University. The story follows Mariana Andros who returns to her alma mater after her niece’s friend is murdered. Mariana suspects that charismatic classics professor Edward Fosca is responsible, and that the girl’s death is linked to a secret society of young female students known as The Maidens, named after Persephone, the goddess of death. It’s a twisty tale, with lots of red herrings to keep you guessing, that is also a clever tribute to Greek tragedy. 10 Ariadne by Jennifer Saint This story of Ariadne, princess of Crete and daughter of King Minos, reimagines the classic tale of Theseus and the Minotaur. It is the compelling story of her whole life rather than one event in it, and by widening the reader’s perspective we are skilfully given an insight not just into the novel’s captivating heroine but the stories of other women such as Medusa, Semele, Pasiphaë and Phaedra. The men, too, are well drawn, allowing for a deeper insight into why they act as they do without excusing their failings. Ariadne’s relationship with Dionysus is fascinating and the alternate perspective of Theseus a refreshing take in light of past misogynistic retellings. Beautifully written and utterly immersive. • Pandora by Susan Stokes-Chapman is published by Vintage. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Glass Animals have become the first British band to top the daily global Spotify streaming charts, with their single Heat Waves currently amassing 4.26m plays a day on the platform. The milestone comes 10 years into the band’s career and their song is the definition of a slow-burn hit: originally released in June 2020, it took until October that year to sneak into the lower reaches of the official UK chart. It finally entered the Top 40 in February 2021, and by October it had made its way into the Top 5. The breezy, summery song – which blends dream-pop vocals with crisp rap-style production – performed even more highly in the US, reaching No 3 there, where it currently stands. It had the longest climb to the Top 10 in US chart history, at 42 weeks. Heat Waves has a sole songwriter, Dave Bayley, making it the first Spotify chart-topping song since Pharrell’s Happy in 2014 to be written by a single person. Bayley fronts the Oxford-formed quartet, who released their debut EP in 2012. After touring heavily on both sides of the Atlantic, they had their first major success with second album How to Be a Human Being in 2016, which reached the US Top 20 and was nominated for the Mercury prize. Third album Dreamland, which features Heat Waves and was recorded after drummer Joe Seaward recovered from a serious cycling accident, reached No 2 in the UK and No 7 in the US. Heat Waves is nominated for best single and Glass Animals are nominated for best rock/alternative act at this year’s Brit awards.While Covid cases in the UK have fallen in the past few weeks, there is a rise among children where vaccination rates remain slow. Children between the ages of 12-15 are eligible for a vaccine, while vulnerable five- to 11-year-olds are also able to have a Covid vaccine. We would like to hear from parents in the UK about their experiences of Covid infection and reinfection among their children. How many times has your child tested positive for Covid? Do you have any concerns? What are your views on vaccinations for children? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.If the Chinese film industry needs a stock foreign villain, I’m their first port of call. I was a Gatling gun-wielding mercenary in 2015’s Wolf Warrior, one of the first of the new wave of military blockbusters, and a hitman in Jackie Chan’s Kung Fu Yoga in 2017, among many others. And I recently played an American colonel in the Korean war in The Battle at Lake Changjin, the most expensive and successful Chinese film ever: it made $909m (£675m) last year. It’s surreal – coming from humble beginnings in Huntingdon, Cambridgeshire – to find myself in the middle of a massive field in Hubei province filming the likes of The Battle at Lake Changjin. You’d think you were in a real-life warzone – there were hundreds of tanks supplied by the government. I grew up watching Jackie Chan, Bruce Lee and Jet Li movies, which kickstarted my passion for China. I originally came here to study martial arts in 2004. Then I came back 10 years later to work as a financial consultant, which I didn’t really enjoy. I had had a few roles in small local films, but a chance meeting with Wu Jing, who’s the biggest star in China now, changed everything. I was at Beijing’s Public Security Bureau, renewing my visa, when he rocked up the escalator. He looked like a superstar with his sunglasses and leather jacket, collar turned up. We talked, and when he realised I had studied acting, he said he needed a big guy – I’m 6’6” – for his new film. I went into his office to meet him again and read some lines, but it was a disaster. The audition was in Chinese – and at the time, my language skills weren’t as good. But he said: “Kevin, there’s something about you that I really like. I want to give you an opportunity.” A week later, I got a call from his assistant saying they wanted to offer me the role of Crazy Bull in Wolf Warrior. It was a big success and opened up the right doors. It was very fortunate for me that I worked on one of the first big Chinese action blockbusters. There’s an unwritten rule about foreigners not playing lead roles here – but then how many Asian leads do you see in Hollywood films? Chinese audiences prefer to see Chinese leads. One can’t complain about that because we’re in their backyard. But I’m happy to play a villain, absolutely, even if I get my ass kicked by someone half my size sometimes. A bit humiliating maybe! I’m not the first westerner to specialise in playing foreigners here. The American actor Jonathan Kos-Read, who became known in China as Cao Cao, started his career a few years before me when there weren’t any foreign actors here. But he did a lot of TV shows, and there weren’t many film roles of any kind for foreigners at the time. Then the floodgates opened. There’s still only a small bunch of decent professional foreign actors here – probably less than 20 that I would personally recommend. But I’ve never had too much competition because of my height and the niche I’ve carved out. As a foreigner, you have to tread carefully in China, with it being very patriotic. They have their history with what certain countries have done to China, and the British playing their part. So I’ve got to be careful about how I’m perceived. In Changjjn and Sharpshooter, a movie I worked on recently with Zhang Yimou, I’m essentially killing Chinese soldiers. So I can’t be too excited when I post stuff to my followers on TikTok/Douyin. I have to show a lot of humility and respect to the fallen Chinese soldiers. I try and be an ambassador for Britain here – if people ask, I never refuse a photograph. If there’s one thing I could change about the Chinese industry, it would be to open up the doors a little bit more to being creative. Scripts go through so much official scrutiny before they can even get produced: out of thousands that go through the vetting process, only around 5% make it through. As a director or writer, you’re very limited in terms of the kinds of narrative you can make. Also the standard of acting here is not as high as in the west, where there is more formal training. If we had the opportunity to work with more kinds of narrative, the acting skill set would improve – and Chinese blockbusters would compete more internationally with Hollywood. It’s a little unfortunate that my mother doesn’t get to see a lot of the movies I’m in – though maybe Sharpshooter, which could even surpass Changjin, will make it over. Will I stay here long term? We often speak about this among the expat actors. I would like to be tested more. So I want to push myself and work in the west, where I can be surrounded by more established actors. It might not be easy: I met up with an agent in the UK a few years back, and he wasn’t interested in any of the credits that I’ve got under my belt in China. He said: “I’ll be frank with you, I really want to hear your Jackie Chan stories.” He said I would probably have to start from scratch working on shows like EastEnders. But I will always leave the doors open here in China – I’m very fortunate and grateful to be living here. It’s given me success. I wish people would be more open-minded and give the country a shot. It’s a great place to be.More than 36 million booster doses or third doses have been administered in the UK so far. However, the rollout has stalled since the Christmas period. With this in mind, we would like to hear why people might be putting theirs off. Is there any reason you have so far avoided the booster? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.There is nothing that cannot be corrupted, nothing good that cannot be transformed into something bad. And there is no clearer example than the great climate land grab. We now know that it’s not enough to leave fossil fuels in the ground and decarbonise our economies. We’ve left it too late. To prevent no more than 1.5C of heating, we also need to draw down some of the carbon already in the atmosphere. By far the most effective means are “nature-based solutions”: using the restoration of living systems such as forests, salt marshes, peat bogs and the seafloor to extract carbon dioxide from the air and lock it up, mostly in trees or waterlogged soil and mud. Three years ago, a small group of us launched the Natural Climate Solutions campaign to draw attention to the vast potential for stalling climate breakdown and a sixth mass extinction through the mass revival of ecosystems. While it is hard to see either climate or ecological catastrophe being prevented without such large-scale rewilding, we warned that it should not be used as a substitute for decarbonising economic life, or to allow corporations to offset greenhouse gases that shouldn’t be produced in the first place. We found ourselves having to shed a large number of partner organisations because of their deals with offset companies. But our warnings, and those of many others, went unheeded. Something that should be a great force for good has turned into a corporate gold rush, trading in carbon credits. A carbon credit represents one tonne of greenhouse gases, deemed to have been avoided or removed from the atmosphere. Over the past few months, the market for these credits has boomed. There are two legitimate uses of nature-based solutions: removing historic carbon from the air, and counteracting a small residue of unavoidable emissions once we have decarbonised the rest of the economy. Instead, they are being widely used as an alternative for effective action. Rather than committing to leave fossil fuels in the ground, oil and gas firms continue to prospect for new reserves while claiming that the credits they buy have turned them “carbon neutral”. For example, Shell’s Drive Carbon Neutral scheme tells businesses that by buying fuel on its loyalty card, the “unavoidable” emissions from their fleets of vehicles can be offset “through Shell’s global portfolio of nature-based solutions projects”. It assures customers that, by joining the programme, “you don’t even have to change the way you work”. Similar claims by Shell in the Netherlands were struck down by the country’s advertising watchdog. The French company Total is hoping to develop new oilfields in the Republic of the Congo and off the coast of Suriname. It has sought to justify these projects with nature-based solutions: in Suriname by providing money to the government for protecting existing forests, and in Congo by planting an area of savannah with fast-growing trees. This project is extremely controversial. If the drilling goes ahead it will help to break open a region of extremely rich forests and wetlands that sits on top of the biggest peat deposit in the tropics, potentially threatening a huge natural carbon store. The rare savannah habitat the company wants to convert into plantations to produce timber and biomass has scarcely been explored by ecologists. It’s likely to harbour a far greater range of life than the exotic trees the oil company wants to plant. It is also likely to belong to local people though their customary rights, which are unrecognised in Congolese law, were not mentioned in Total’s press release about the deal. In other words, the offset project, far from compensating for the damage caused by oil drilling, could compound it. These are not the only issues. In all such cases, an extremely stable bank of carbon – the fossil fuels buried below geological strata – is being swapped for less secure stores: habitats on the Earth’s surface. Last year, forests being used as corporate offsets were incinerated by the wildfires raging across North America. It’s also hard in some cases to prove that offset money has made a real difference. For example, two of Shell’s projects have been criticised on the grounds that the forests they claim to defend may not be at risk. These schemes often rely on untestable counterfactuals: what would have happened if this money had not been spent? While there are international standards for how carbon should be counted, there is no accounting for the moral hazard of carbon offsets: the false assurance that persuades us we need not change the way we live. There is no accounting for the way companies use these projects to justify business as usual. There is no accounting for how they use this greenwashing to persuade governments not to regulate them. Nature-based solutions should help us to avoid systemic environmental collapse. Instead, they are helping to accelerate it. And then there’s a small issue of land. There is simply not enough land on Earth to soak up corporate greenhouse gas emissions. Oxfam estimates that the land required to meet carbon removal plans by businesses could amount to five times the size of India – more than the entire area of farmland on the planet. And much of it rightfully belongs to indigenous and other local people, who in many cases have not given their consent. This process has a name: carbon colonialism. During the Cop26 climate summit in November last year, the government of the Malaysian state of Sabah announced a carbon credits deal with foreign corporations covering an astonishing 2m hectares (5m acres) of forest. Indigenous people say they knew nothing about it. In Scotland, Shell is spending £5m extending the Glengarry forest. While Scotland needs more trees, it also needs a much better distribution of land. As big corporations and financiers pile into this market, land prices are rising so fast that local people, some of whom would like to run their own rewilding and reforestation projects, are being shut out. A better strategy would be to spend money on strengthening the land rights of indigenous people, who tend to be the most effective guardians of ecosystems and the carbon they contain. Where communities don’t own land, they should be funded to buy it back and restore its missing habitats. But none of these projects should be counted against the fossil fuels we should leave in the ground. Yes, we need to restore life on Earth. Yes, we need to draw down as much carbon as we can. But we cannot let this crucial tool be turned against us. George Monbiot is a Guardian columnistWriters often say that content dictates form. But it seems less than obvious that a bio-drama about Dennis Skinner, Labour MP for Bolsover from 1970 to 2019, would feature multiple numbers from music hall and Broadway songbooks, as if the Dennis being honoured were the Potter of Pennies from Heaven. Playwright Kevin Fegan’s rationale is Skinner’s comparison of the Palace of Westminster to a music hall variety venue, and this makes surprising sense. As a parliamentary sketch writer, I was struck that, beneath Skinner’s visceral ex-miner and working-class snarling at Thatcher and Heseltine, there was a twinkle, as if he relished double acts with another big name. Skinner, 90 next month, even earned a variety bill style nickname, The Beast of Bolsover, through defences of workers and the jobless and inventive heckling of the right wings of both his own party and the one opposite. The songs are just one of the imaginative ways in which Fegan and director Jimmy Fairhurst manage historical exposition. The 1980s are staged as a soap opera cart race (a Derby sporting challenge) between Gareth Williams’s Skinner and Lisa Allen’s Thatcher. Skinner’s Westminster endgame – he lost his “red wall” seat over Brexit (even though he supported it) and immigration (because he did) – is a joke-telling contest between Skinner and Jack Brown’s Boris Johnson. Left eloquently unsaid is that, whereas the member for Bolsover never sought more than bottom-of-the-bill of power, the other clown took over the tent. A medley of remarks that caused Skinner’s regular expulsions for “unparliamentary language” also has topical resonance when Speaker Lindsay Hoyle is enforcing verbal decorum, re-energising Skinner’s complaint that the Commons risks caring more about what members are called than calling them to account. Shows about local legends are often hagiographic but Fegan includes tragedies, dubious jokes, private and public misjudgements. The subject will surely enjoy that the actor who plays him was in the socialist pop group the Flying Pickets. Their biggest hit isn’t staged but many will leave thinking about Skinner, a true public servant who always had the lowest expenses and highest attendance rate in Westminster, “Only You.” The Palace of Varieties is at Derby theatre until 5 February.Damian Lewis has spoken publicly for the first time about the loss of his wife, Helen McCrory, who died last year from breast cancer aged 52. During an evening of poetry dedicated to McCrory at the National Theatre, Lewis paid tribute to the “one person whose thunder would absolutely not be stolen”. The show, called A Poet For Every Day Of The Year, was based on the poetry anthologist Allie Esiri’s latest book of the same name, and featured readings from some of McCrory’s colleagues and friends, including Simon Russell Beale, Lesley Sharp and Fay Ripley. “This evening is dedicated to her and it’s perfect, because Helen loved the National Theatre. One person whose thunder would absolutely not be stolen,” Lewis told the 900-person audience, which included the couple’s two teenage children. The actor read the evening’s final verse, the Irish poet Derek Mahon’s Everything Is Going to Be All Right. It included the lines: “There will be dying, but there is no need to go into that … The sun rises in spite of everything … Everything is going to be all right.” The event concluded with a video of McCrory reading Wild Geese by Mary Oliver at a previous year’s event, the Daily Mail reported. Other poems performed included comic verse such as Spike Milligan’s You Must Never Bath in An Irish Stew and the former poet laureate Carol Ann Duffy’s Mrs Icarus. Esiri told the audience that “learning from adversity is something many people have experienced over the past two years during the pandemic. My mantra during this difficult time has always been to tell myself ‘everything is going to be all right’.” She added: “We dedicated the evening to Helen, and Damian said a few words, but we just wanted to get on and do the show. It’s what she would have told us to do – ‘OK, enough already, get on with the show!’ She loved poetry and I think she would have been pleased to be kind of here with us. It felt right. “Damian and Helen really helped to get poetry out to people. When you are stuck at home with Covid but can’t quite take on a novel, a lot of people have been turning to poetry. Tonight we chose poems that will hopefully have chimed with people who have been going through a lot over the last two years.” As one of the UK’s leading actors, McCrory was known for her roles in Peaky Blinders, James Bond and Harry Potter. She was awarded an OBE in the 2017 new year honours for services to drama. She swore her friends to secrecy about her illness as she underwent treatment. Two days after her death in April, Lewis shared a tribute to his “beautiful and mighty wife”, recalling her “fearlessness, wit, curiosity, talent and beauty”. He wrote at the time: “She has exhorted us to be courageous and not afraid. As she said repeatedly to the children: ‘Don’t be sad, because even though I’m about to snuff it, I’ve lived the life I wanted to.’” He noted that the the funeral of Prince Philip had not eclipsed the grief for McCrory. “On a weekend when the papers, rightly, will be paying their respects to the Duke of Edinburgh, thousands of others around the world have been remembering m’duchess, my little one, royalty in her own right.”Russia does not currently have enough troops on the border with Ukraine to carry out a full-scale military invasion and occupation of the country, according to western experts and senior officials in Kyiv. They believe a Russian attack to capture most or all of Ukraine in the near future is unlikely, despite an unprecedented buildup of about 125,000 Russian soldiers, and military exercises due to take place next month in Belarus, within striking distance of the capital. In an article published on Monday, Ukraine’s former defence minister Andriy Zagorodnyuk said the Kremlin has not yet amassed the several hundred thousand troops necessary for a large-scale operation, on the border and in Russian territory behind the frontline. Several elements for an invasion were missing, he argued. These include completing the formation of battalion tactical groups including tank and airborne, setting up and testing a system of wartime administration, and deploying and staffing mobile hospitals. “If Russia was conducting preparations for a large-scale invasion, it would have been much more noticeable,” Zagorodnyuk said, in a paper written with colleagues from his Kyiv thinktank, the Centre for Defence Strategies. The analysis is supported by others. Konrad Muzyka, an open source intelligence specialist and president of Rochan Consulting, estimates that 66-67 Russian battalion tactical groups, the smallest operational unit in Moscow’s army, are in place near the border, including 11 battalions that have moved to Belarus. Nevertheless, the US has suggested a full invasion would require at least 100 battalion, and western analysts familiar with the difficulties in holding Iraq have suggested twice that number or more would be needed to fight any counterinsurgency. That larger force could be ready “if they maintain the current pace, in two to three weeks”, Muzyka said, particularly if airborne troops were brought up closer to the border. But Muzyka is sceptical that the battalions are full strength, with an average of 800 personnel. “Satellite imagery shows that there are too few tents,” he added. If the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, wanted to target Kyiv with a lightning attack, the most direct route would be from Belarus, although any attack on the capital with more than 3 million people would risk large numbers of civilian casualties. It would also be larger in scale than anything that Putin, or indeed Russia, has attempted since the second world war. Nick Reynolds, a land warfare analyst with the Rusi thinktank, believes it would stretch Russian logistics to their limit. “I question their ability to coordinate on this scale,” he said. Supply is a particular issue, Reynolds added. “Russian units tend to hold a large stock of supplies and ammunition, using them until they run out. It makes them dangerous at first, but as they push deeper into hostile territory, their effectiveness drops quickly,” he said. Fresh units have to come forward and take over, because there is no immediate supply capability. On the other hand, moving forces to Belarus, under the cover of the Allied Resolve joint exercises, also lengthens the territory Ukrainian forces have to defend and create openings for Russian tanks elsewhere. “They don’t have the manpower to cover it all,” Muzyka said. “It isn’t difficult to get to Kyiv. The problem is to hold territory. To control it Russia will need a lot of troops,” said Gen Sergey Krivonos, the former deputy secretary in Ukraine’s national security and defence council. He added: “Russian soldiers have been fed a lot of propaganda that doesn’t correspond to reality. They would quickly discover the population is deeply hostile. It’s an information failure.” In the face of such obstacles, military and western sources believe the Kremlin is more likely to launch a more focused attack in the east and the Donbas region, where a war between the Ukrainian army and Moscow-armed separatists has gone on for nearly eight years, with 14,000 people killed. This could be coupled with “hybrid” measures designed to demoralise the Ukrainian population such as cyber-shutdowns and attacks on critical infrastructure. The US has warned Russia is preparing a “false flag” operation inside separatist territory, which might be used as a pretext for war. A British defence minister, James Heappey, said on Tuesday that the UK had intelligence to suggest efforts were being made to prepare the ground for a possible Russian attack. “We are becoming aware of a significant number of individuals that are assessed to be associated with Russian military advance-force operations and currently located in Ukraine,” he said. The two sides face one another across a 155-mile (250km) “line of contact” around the rebel-held cities of Donetsk and Luhansk. Last week Ukrainian military intelligence agency said since the beginning of January Moscow has supplied the separatists with additional tanks, self-propelled artillery, mortars and more than 7,000 tons of fuel. Their numbers are roughly estimated at 34,000, but reliable figures are hard to come by. The Kremlin has been actively recruiting mercenaries at centres inside the Russian Federation, the agency added. These unofficial soldiers go through “intensive training courses” before being smuggled across the Russian border to occupied Donetsk and Luhansk, it said. Russia’s armed forces have been present covertly in separatist areas since 2014, according to the Ukrainian government. They could openly enter the conflict and then attempt to break through Ukrainian lines, amid a general intensification of hostilities. Speaking privately, Ukrainian government insiders concede Moscow could easily target the port of Mariupol, which is 15 miles away from the frontline. The city is economically prosperous and home to a large metallurgical factory, the Illich iron and steelworks, named after Lenin. Expanding territory controlled by the separatist Donetsk People’s Republic (DNR) would make the Russian-backed enclave more viable. Putin already effectively controls these areas and may take steps to recognise them legally or even annex them. “It would be extremely hard for Russian troops to seize major Ukrainian cities such as Kyiv, Kharkiv or Odessa. There would be enormous resistance,” one former senior Ukrainian government official said. The person added: “A takeover of Mariupol would be easier. You could do it in two days and provoke a political crisis in Kyiv.” A potential window for any offensive in the Donbas would be after 4 February, when Putin is due to attend the opening of the winter olympics in Beijing and to meet the Chinese president, Xi Jinping. The military exercises in Belarus are due to finish on 20 February, the most obvious moment for an offensive operation. Any push to seize Mariupol could be carried out under a DNR flag, allowing the Kremlin deniability. It could claim fighting was part of a “civil war” in which it was not involved. However, it also has the option of encircling the port, by landing tanks and soldiers from the Sea of Azov. Analysts agree that the situation is unpredictable, with many scenarios possible. But the consensus is Ukraine’s army consisting of 145,000 troops, according to the IISS thinktank, and 300,000 to 400,000 veterans with combat experience would offer significant resistance, even if outgunned by Russian forces with a superior air force and navy. Along the existing frontline, Ukraine has deployed surface-to-air missile systems, officials are keen to stress, and a range of anti-tank weapons, including portable US Javelins, with a range of 1.6 miles, Ukrainian-made Stugna, and thousands of NLAW (next generation light anti-tank weapons), delivered to Kyiv last week by Boris Johnson’s government. In the past week, Latvia and Lithuania, with the endorsement of the US, also dispatched Stinger anti-aircraft missiles. Germany, however, has so far declined to supply Ukraine with arms, holding up potential re-export of German-made artillery from the Baltic States. Russia can deploy several thousand battle tanks and fighting vehicles, if its often cautious commanders are willing to tolerate losses in battle. Yuriy Dumansky, the former deputy chief of Ukraine’s army staff, said soldiers were better prepared than in 2014, when they suffered humiliating military defeats, including in the eastern city of Ilovaisk. “They have learned how to fight. Psychologically they are much stronger,” he said. Dumansky said the Kremlin’s recently deployment of troops to Kazakhstan showed its ability to react to political events quickly and decisively. But he said he was sceptical Russia had “sufficient” soldiers for a large-scale Ukraine invasion and said a “low intensity” conflict was more probable. “It was Machiavelli who pointed out it was easy to seize territory but much harder to hold it,” he said.The court of appeal has ruled that the UK government acted unlawfully when it stripped a British woman of her citizenship without telling her. By a two to one majority, the justices upheld a high court ruling that the failure to notify the woman, known as D4, that her citizenship had been removed until the government was contacted by her lawyers nullified the decision. The home secretary had argued that notification had been given to D4, who has been detained in the Roj camp in Syria since January 2019, by simply placing a note on her Home Office file, relying on regulations introduced without parliamentary approval. However, the court of appeal said the British Nationality Act 1981 required written notice to be given to someone of a decision to strip them of their citizenship and only parliament could decide to alter that requirement. Lady Justice Whipple said: “The 1981 act does not confer powers of such breadth that the home secretary can deem notice to have been given where no step at all has been taken to communicate the notice to the person concerned and the order has simply been put on the person’s Home Office file. To permit that would be to permit the statute to be subverted by secondary legislation.” The court of appeal ruling, published on Wednesday, came as the government attempts, through clause 9 of the nationality and borders bill, to remove the requirement to give notice in a wide range of circumstances, including retrospectively. The clause has prompted heavy criticism and protests outside parliament. Whipple said the purpose for requirement to give notice in the 1981 act was that “the person needs to know that a decision has been made; the person is entitled to know the reasons for that decision; and the person is put on notice of their appeal rights”. Maya Foa, the director of Reprieve, said: “Today’s decision confirms that stripping a British national of their citizenship in secret is illegal. But the government is already cynically attempting to circumvent the courts by using clause 9 of the nationality and borders bill to render this ruling moot, making a mockery of the rule of law. Ministers should change course and recognise that depriving people of their citizenship without even telling them is an affront to British principles of justice and fairness.” D4 was born in the UK in 1967 and had British nationality from birth. She also has Pakistani nationality. The decision to strip her of British citizenship was made on 27 December 2019. However, her solicitors were only informed of the decision when they wrote to the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office in September 2020 asking for help in repatriating her. In a dissenting opinion, Sir Geoffrey Vos, master of the rolls, said: “There is, in my view, no substantive difference between a regulation that allows valid service of a notice by sending it to an address at which it is known the person will not receive it and serving it to file.” The Home Office said it intended to seek permission to appeal from the supreme court.Kayla Levering’s twin daughters just celebrated their first birthday, a momentous milestone for a family who just survived a challenging year involving long stays in the neonatal intensive care unit: two months for one daughter, five months for the other. It was a trying time, filled with surgeries and procedures and complications – and it was made more stressful by the pressure Levering felt to produce more breast milk for both babies. When a nutritionist finally mentioned donor milk, she felt as though a light had pierced the dark. “A godsend, really,” is Levering’s description of the donations she now receives from Mothers’ Milk Bank in Austin, Texas, where she lives. “For my girls and the rough start that they had and everything, it’s just been really great to have this option to give them the best nutritional value that I can.” Levering isn’t alone. Across North America, milk banks are seeing a rise in interest. Unfortunately, they’re also seeing a plunge in supply, which has them sounding the alarm that shortages are imminent. “Demand has been surging in hospitals, primarily,” said Lindsay Groff, the executive director for the Human Milk Banking Association of North America (HMBANA). “At the same time, supply has dipped.” At all 31 milk banks in the US and Canada associated with HMBANA, milk donations are declining, down as much as 20% in some places. Milk bank directors say they’re not at a crisis point yet, but they will be if shortages continue. “There’s no need to panic,” Groff said. But if “you feel compelled to help someone [by donating breast milk] – now is the time. Now, now, now, we need help now.” Donated breast milk can help medically fragile infants – those that are “too small and too soon and too sick”, as Kim Updegrove, executive director of Mothers’ Milk Bank at Austin, puts it – to overcome a range of potentially devastating conditions, from prematurity complications to heart and stomach problems. Necrotizing enterocolitis, an inflammation of the intestines, is a leading cause of death for premature babies, but breast milk can help prevent it. “Babies that are in the Nicu [neonatal intensive care unit] do so much better if they have human milk,” said Denise O’Connor, executive director of the Mid-Atlantic Mothers’ Milk Bank. “They have less infections, less sepsis, less risks for retinopathy of prematurity, which is a major cause of blindness in preterm babies.” Yet at the milk bank in Austin, for example, the number of donors dropped by 30% and the quantity of milk donated fell by 20% in 2021. “We are back to a number of milk donors that we haven’t seen here in Austin since 2015,” Updegrove said. “This comes after a year of tremendous expansion of both milk donors and milk volume donations, which happened in 2020 as the pandemic gained momentum.” Early in the pandemic, milk banks saw an “almost unprecedented” level of donations, Groff said. More working parents were spending time at home, allowing them to more easily nurse their children instead of giving them bottles. That helped them build their milk supply; some also kept pumping to save up milk for the return to childcare. Soon, facing full freezers, parents turned to donations. “Also, the pandemic really inspired people,” O’Connor said. “People want to be the helpers.” Now, many parents have headed back to work – and to once again saving up frozen milk for daycare. “Supply has also dipped because people are going back to work. There’s a tremendous amount of stress,” Groff said. Many workplaces are also unequipped to deal with the needs of breastfeeding parents. Many nursing parents are back to stealing away for a few minutes to pump in supply closets or empty offices. “We have the issues of employers not understanding how lactation happens and how intermittent the need to express your breast milk happens throughout the workday. And the separation of the mothers from their infants,” Updegrove said. “We’re back to ground zero, with moms back to work and us not budging the culture.” The length of the pandemic may also be wearing even on those with the best intentions. “As we enter, now, a third year of dealing with a pandemic, personal stress levels are high,” Updegrove said. “The difficulty of not knowing whether you’re going to the office tomorrow or whether school will be opened or whether daycare will be opened or whether you or your child or children will be exposed to Covid tomorrow or develop coughs for which you have to be suspicious – that’s all a really difficult way to live.” Meanwhile, the pandemic has increased the need for donor milk. Studies have shown that contracting Covid-19 during pregnancy when you’re not vaccinated increases the chance of having a premature baby, who might then benefit from donor milk. Parents who become very ill from Covid are often unable to care for their babies or to pump milk for them. Parents might also not be able to spend as much time in Nicu with their infants and with specialists because of safety precautions, making it more difficult to establish a habit of breastfeeding. “Giving birth in a pandemic is just one of the hardest, most isolating experiences. And when you’re having trouble breastfeeding your baby, it’s really hard to get access to resources that feel safe,” said Sara Muncey, parent of a 10-month-old baby. When Muncey’s daughter was born three weeks early, the Nicu team said donor milk might help her gain weight. “That was my very first time having ever heard that donor milk was a thing,” she said. Muncey was able to pump successfully, but she recalled those words months later when she faced a freezer full of extra milk, looked up her local milk bank and began donating regularly in September. “I know how hard it is to become a mom during this pandemic. I know how stressful it is to feed your baby,” Muncey said. “If I can sit here in my chair and pump for 45 minutes and have extra to give a Nicu mom just a little bit of a breath, like a sigh of relief, even for just a moment – of course I’m going to do that. It is my honor to be able to do that for somebody else.”Keir Starmer has called in parliament for Boris Johnson to resign immediately for misleading MPs over Downing Street parties, saying the prime minister’s continued attempts to save his career were causing “immense damage to public trust”. During a prime minister’s questions so unruly that at one point the Speaker, Lindsay Hoyle, warned shouting MPs that they may be removed from the Commons, Starmer said the decision of police to launch an investigation meant the weight of evidence about the parties was now clear. While Johnson refused to discuss either the police inquiry, or the imminent civil service report on the alleged lockdown-breaching gatherings, he agreed with Starmer’s question that under the ministerial code, if it were found he had misled parliament he should resign. “I think the prime minister said yes, he agrees the code does apply to him. Therefore, if he misled parliament, he must resign,” the Labour leader told MPs. Starmer reminded Johnson of statements in the Commons in December in which the PM said Covid guidance “was followed completely in No 10”, and that he had been “repeatedly assured” there were no parties. This was clearly untrue, Starmer said, adding: “Since he acknowledges the ministerial code applies to him, will he now resign?” The inquiry, led by the senior civil servant Sue Gray, is expected to be handed to Downing Street shortly, possibly on Wednesday, and will be published soon after. Challenged by Starmer to commit to publishing it in full, Johnson gave an ambiguous answer, saying he would “do exactly what I said”. The Met police announcement on Tuesday that they would look into the claims said this had happened because there was “little ambiguity” about the possibility that Covid regulations might have been broken, Starmer said. “The police had to take a decision as to whether what they had before them was the most serious and flagrant type of breach in the rules,” he told Johnson. “Does the prime minister really not understand the damage his behaviour is doing to our country?” Johnson replied by saying he had “got all the big calls right” on Covid, dismissing Starmer’s questioning as ignoring the main issues of the day, and repeating his name-calling of the Labour leader as “Captain Hindsight”. In response, Starmer noted Johnson’s apology to the Commons a fortnight before in which the prime minister had said he had attended an event in the No 10 garden in May 2020, but had believed at the time it was a work function: “This is the guy who said in hindsight he now appreciates it was a party. We’ve discovered the real Captain Hindsight, haven’t we?” Efforts to defend Johnson were doing “immense damage to public trust”, Starmer said, adding: “The police say the evidence meets the test. Frankly the public have made up their minds. They know he’s not fit for the job. How much damage are the prime minister and his cabinet prepared to do to save his skin?” Starmer continued: “We now have the shameful spectacle of the prime minister of the United Kingdom being subject to a police investigation – unable to lead the country, incapable of doing the right thing. And every day his cabinet fail to speak out, they become more and more complicit.” Johnson, who was cheered loudly by some of his backbenchers, repeated his charge that Starmer was ignoring more relevant issues, and added more personal abuse, calling him, “a lawyer, not a leader”.Name: Winter Olympics condoms. Age: 34. Status: Confusing. Why do they need condoms at the Winter Olympics? Don’t be so naive. Imagine for a moment that you are an Olympian. Wow, I’m suddenly so much sexier. That’s right. And during the Winter Olympics you’re going to live in a village populated by thousands of other sexy, hard-bodied human gods who have also spent half a decade denying themselves any pleasure at all in the pursuit of glory. Logically, how would you spend your free time there? Ah, OK, the condoms are a very good idea. Correction: they are usually a very good idea. Why not now? Oh my God, read the room. Oh, right. Covid. That’s right. The upcoming Beijing Winter Olympics will operate under some incredibly strict social distancing rules to prevent the Games from becoming an international super-spreader event. As such, athletes have been instructed to minimise hugs, high-fives and handshakes at all times. That sounds sensible. And yet journalists entering the Olympics bubble found five individually wrapped commemorative condoms in their hotel rooms. In fairness, most people can have sex without high-fiving each other. But all the other stuff that goes on, all those exchanged fluids. It’s basically a Covid breeding ground. This is an ethical nightmare. It is. Since the 1988 Seoul Games, the Olympics has made it a point of pride to promote safe sex to all visitors. The policy has become a fundamental part of the institution. But at the same time, it has a responsibility to keep people apart in the pandemic. It’s a tricky spot to be in. Luckily – or unluckily – these are not the first Olympics to be held during the Covid crisis. Last year’s delayed 2020 Games in Tokyo have already set a precedent for this exact scenario. Which was? It still dished out 160,000 free condoms to athletes, but at the same time warned them that breaching social distancing guidelines could result in disqualification or deportation. A-ha, so they were mementoes. Exactly. Everyone’s consignment of five condoms was reframed as a souvenir. That’s quite sweet. Unbelievably sweet. An athlete might not have returned home with a medal, but at least they would always have a tangible reminder of that time they could have had sex with several of the most perfect people alive, but didn’t. Isn’t that what memories are made of? I hope we never have to go through this again. Me too. Call me old-fashioned, but the Olympics simply aren’t the Olympics if none of the athletes get to cheat on their spouse with a Scandinavian triple-jumper. Do say: “Look honey, I’ve brought home a souvenir from the Olympics!” Don’t say: “Four commemorative condoms!”A man has been cleared of killing a suspected thief who died after he pinned him down and knelt on his back for nine minutes during a citizen’s arrest. Nathan Smith, 38, was accused of using “excessive force” as he restrained Craig Wiltshire, 43, but insisted he was only trying to hang on to him as he waited for the police to arrive. Smith told the jury at Bristol crown court that he thought Wiltshire was faking when he twice told him he could not breathe. As he left the dock, Smith thanked the jury, which took just over four hours to clear him of manslaughter, by making a prayer sign with his hands. Wiltshire was believed to have been behind a string of thefts and break-ins in the Bristol suburb where Smith was employed as a live-in carer. The court was told that despite repeated complaints to the police, there was no active police investigation into the break-ins. The jury was shown CCTV footage of the incident in the early hours of 20 November 2019, in which Wiltshire can be heard telling Smith: “I can’t breathe,” and his captor replies: “I don’t give a fuck.” Wiltshire died two weeks later, with a postmortem giving the cause of death as cardiorespiratory arrest and brain damage. The prosecution alleged that Smith used unlawful force on Wiltshire and wanted to punish him for crimes he believed he had committed in the neighbourhood. However, Prof Jason Payne-James, a leading expert on restraint techniques, said he believed the force used was “reasonable”, arguing that while police and prison officers would have known that detaining someone in a prone position could lead to positional asphyxia, an untrained person would not have realised this. Payne-James said he believed “a perfect storm” of conditions and factors contributed to Wiltshire’s death, including his small build, an existing heart condition, the presence of the heroin substitute methadone and the sedative diazepam in his bloodstream and the fact that he was struggling. Kimberly Lock, a neighbour, had told the court that the community had been “terrorised” by the break-ins, and had extra locks fitted to her house, including a sliding bolt for her bedroom. Smith’s employer, Michael Crooks, 51, is also seen in the CCTV footage adding his weight to Wiltshire for a few minutes, while his son Ben Crooks, 27, is seen kicking the prone man twice. They have admitted common assault and will be sentenced at a later date. The jury was told to assume that Wiltshire was the man suspected of committing burglaries in the neighbourhood over the previous weeks, and that the arrest was not a case of mistaken identity. Speaking after the verdict, Det Supt James Riccio, of Avon and Somerset police, said: “This has been an extremely complex and sensitive investigation into the death of a 43-year-old man. “Members of the jury have concluded Mr Smith is not guilty of manslaughter. We respect and accept the jury’s verdict. “We recognise these legal proceedings will greatly impact the affected community and we would urge anyone with worries or concerns to speak to their neighbourhood policing team.”The US investment bank Citigroup has embarked on an overhaul of its main tower in Canary Wharf that is expected to cost more than £100m. Citi will completely refurbish the 42-storey office block at 25 Canada Square in London Docklands over the next three years and create flexible work and collaboration spaces, alongside wellbeing zones for employees, to reflect the changing nature of work. At the moment, the bank is spread across 25 Canada Square and 33 Canada Square, where its trading floor is based. All of its 9,000 London staff will relocate temporarily to 33 Canada Square and another nearby building until the skyscraper refurbishment is complete in 2025. Citi said it had hired 1,000 people in London in the past two years, and a similar number in Belfast, taking its workforce there to 3,200. It will continue to recruit more bankers in London, as well as in mainland Europe, where it still has a bigger presence than in the UK. David Livingstone, Citi’s chief executive for Europe, Middle East and Africa (EMEA), said: “Our rejuvenated EMEA headquarters will be designed to maximise collaborative workspaces, supported by technology, to enable us to work flexibly and with maximum agility.” Citi bought the tower, one of the tallest in the UK, for more than £1bn in 2019, three years after the EU referendum, in what it said was a demonstration of its commitment to London as its EMEA headquarters, and a vital global hub for the bank. Last March, the bank’s chief executive, Jane Fraser, announced a permanent shift to hybrid working, involving “at least” three days a week in the office and up to two days at home. She also banned work video calls on Fridays to help employees break free from the “relentlessness of the pandemic workday”, designated 28 May as a company-wide holiday and encouraged staff to book more holidays or take 12-week sabbaticals. Citi decided to refurbish its Canary Wharf skyscraper, rather than demolishing it, because of the environmental impact, and believes others will follow suit. It is among the largest workplace refurbishment projects in Europe. The bank plans to add a promenade with a winter garden, more greenery, parents rooms, prayer and contemplation rooms, a wellness centre with a gym that offers health consultations, and a food court area and coffee bars. The project is a big boost to Canary Wharf, developed in the 1990s as an extension of the City of London’s financial district. It is heavily reliant on the 120,000 employees who work in the area but, as with the City, turned into a ghost town during Covid-19 lockdowns.That was an epic match – and credit is due to Auger-Aliassime, who dominated in almost all the statistics apart from three, second-serve points won, unforced errors made and break points won. The Canadian won only two of 11; Medvedev took three of five. His time will surely come, though. There is still a mixed doubles semi-final to come in Melbourne, featuring home hopes Jaimee Fourlis and Jason Kubler. It’s almost 1am, folks! I’m going to wrap this blog up now, though. We’ll post the match report from Medvedev’s epic win here shortly. Thanks for reading. Goodbye. Medvedev speaks: “I have no idea [how I hung in there]. I was not playing my best and Felix was playing unbelieveable. He was all over me and I do not know what to do. So I thought to myself – and some people won’t like this – what would Novak do?” Cue boos and cheers from the crowd (but probably mostly boos). “I just fight to the last point and manage to raise my level for the next game. I played better [when the roof was closed]. My hand was slippery [when the roof was open] so the roof closing helped my hand be less sweaty.” He faces Tsitsipas now, who he played in the semis last year, losing in three sets. “It’s the semi-final of a grand slam so even if if I am tired I am going to give it everything. Last year I managed to play pretty well. Let’s hope we can have a good match.” Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 5-7 4-6 Medvedev* What a match! It’s a strong start from the Canadian, who returns two blistering first serves to get to 0-30. Medvedev makes his opponent miss to get back to 15-30 but hits long and Auger Aliassime has two break points. Medvedev wins the first quite brilliantly but the No 9 seed gives him the second one with a stiff forehand that lands wide. Deuce. A huge smash brings up match point and then Medvedev roars with delight as Auger-Aliassime hits long. The No 2 seed survives after going two sets down. Incredible resilience against a hugely talented opponent. *Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 5-7 4-5 Medvedev There’s some brave tennis from Auger-Aliassime, here. He could easily sit back and try not to make mistakes but he goes after his shots and adds to the spectacle. A ill-thought drop shot allows Medvedev to get back into the game at 30-30 and then he outlasts the Russian with sumptuous hitting from deep at the back of the court to bring up game point at 40-30. He looks gassed after that last point, though, and can’t recover a stinging Medvedev forehand. Deuce. He serve-volleys to stave off the imminent threat of a Medvedev match-point but finds the net when he could put the game away. After a couple of bruising points, he finally gets there. Medvedev will have to serve for the match. Some news for you: Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 5-7 3-5 Medvedev* The Canadian does still have something left. He forces Medvedev to thrash a forehand long at 40-30 and gets a chance at deuce. The Russian feels the pressure, double-faulting to give Auger-Aliassime a break point. But the No 9 seed has no answer to a brilliant flat, wide serve from Medvedev. Another fine save. Some incredible defensive play when the Canadian was dominating the rally keeps Medvedev in it at deuce. He hangs in there and will make Auger-Aliassime serve to stay in the match. *Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 5-7 3-4 Medvedev Auger-Aliassime has struggled in the longer rallies and he does here again as his more experienced opponent takes the first point thanks to his better on-court craft. He still has that big first serve, though, and he uses it to great effect to get back to 15-15 and then he follows it up and dominates the next point from the net to get back in front at 30-15. Medvedev is superior in the next rally after jumping in on a second serve and then he hangs in there to force deuce. The Canadian still has enough in the tank to hold his serve but after another battling game has he got enough fuel left to attack Medvedev’s serve and break back? Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 5-7 2-4 Medvedev* The Canadian’s ankle is wrapped up nice and tight and we’re back under way at exactly midnight in Melbourne. It’s a rapid hold to love. Medvedev must fancy getting some sleep. It’s way past his bedtime. *Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 5-7 2-3 Medvedev Auger-Aliassime is struggling. He has a little wobble mid-game, finding the net with a weak backhand to allow Medvedev back into it at 30-15. The Canadian finds a big serve. 40-15. And then the Russian shows great craft as he wins a lengthy rally to recover to 40-30. Then the Canadian balloons a forehand towards Tasmania and we’re at deuce. Oh dear. He has enough in the tank to battle to game point and take it, though. An important hold. And then he calls for the trainer to get some more strapping applied to his ankle so we’ll have a little delay. Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 5-7 1-3 Medvedev* I’m no psychologist but I’d be feeling a bit crushed if I was Felix Auger-Aliassime. He’s played amazingly well today but is heading for defeat unless he breaks the Russian again. The youngster is barely in this game, with Medvedev racing through the gears to hold to 15. *Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 5-7 1-2 Medvedev What’s this? A rare double fault from Auger-Aliassime! 0-15. A big first serve gets him level at 15-15 very quickly though … but then he tries to be too cute at the net and jabs a backhand volley into the net. Medvedev hangs in there in the next point and waits for the Canadian to err with a wild forehand. 15-40 and two break points! Oh dear. A second double fault from Auger-Aliassime gives Medvedev a crucial – potentially match-winning – break. Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 5-7 1-1 Medvedev* It’s a tricky service game for the Russian. He struggles to get control in points and is very quickly facing two break points. He saves the first … and Auger-Aliassime tries but fails to dispatch a second serve to allow his opponent to get back to deuce. The Canadian is kicking himself after that but focuses his game again. Medvedev, meanwhile, misses an easy volley at the net to give the Canadian another break point. He saves this one with a huge first serve and then keeps his nerves in check to hold. Newcastle should consider signing Medvedev. He’s a great defender. *Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 5-7 1-0 Medvedev Surely you have to fancy Medvedev now. Momentum is a powerful thing in sport, but the Canadian has won three of his four five-setters. Medvedev has won just two of the nine he has played in his career. It’s a comfortable hold for the Canadian here. He lands his first serve three times in a row and whips an incredible backhand winner down the line to bring up game point at 40-0. Another first serve and the game is his. Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 5-7 Medvedev* The No 2 seed is full of beans now. Everything appears to be hitting the sweet spot until he double faults at 40-0. Maybe he’s feeling it too much because he fires a forehand long and then cedes ground to his opponent, with a weak return. Deuce! But then Medvedev wins an outrageous point – a volley that requires lightning quick reactions – and follows it up with an ace to take this incredible match to a fifth and final set. *Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 5-6 Medvedev Medvedev hangs in there on the first point and waits for Auger-Aliassime to get impatient and force a forehand long. 0-15. But then it is he who overjuices a forehand. 15-15. The 9th seed shows great craft as he pulls Medvedev around court before smashing home a volley winner to get his nose in front again. But Medvedev shows gumption again, getting back to 30-30 and then producing a lovely whipped backhand to bring up deuce. Auger-Aliassime errs again as he booms a forehand long to give Medvedev a break point. And the Russian takes it, showing great resilience and making the Canadian chase the point and hit wide. Medvedev will serve for the second set. Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 5-5 Medvedev* It’s not an ideal start for the Russian, as he misses with a forehand to give the Canadian a chance at 0-15. But he sticks in there and a fine forehand down the line gets the score back to 30-15. “Ooooh!” The tension in the crowd is palpable after Medvedev hits long to give Auger-Aliassime another chance at 30-30. And then he has match point as the Russian double-faults! Is the No 2 seed about to tumble out? Not a chance! He booms down three big serves and roars with relief after a huge hold. *Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 5-4 Medvedev Auger-Aliassime thrashes a tired forehand long to give his opponent a 0-15 lead but it’s soon 15-15 after a big first serve sets up a smash into empty court. Another error by the Canadian – a mishit into the net – gives Medvedev a sniff at 30-30. Auger-Aliassime hits wide wildly with a forehand and gives the Russian a break point. Is he feeling the strain? The first serve to bring up deuce suggests not. And another two thunderous serves take him a game away from the match. What a great show of character. Over to you Daniil. Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 4-4 Medvedev* Medvedev tries to take the initiative by coming to the net but a weak backhand volley allows Auger-Aliassime to fire at the Russian’s body and take the first point. But, as in the previous game, this only enlivens the server. Medvedev holds to 15. Are we heading for another tie-break? *Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 4-3 Medvedev Thanks John. After dropping the opening point, the Canadian gathers himself and blasts through to hold to 15. On we go. Time to join Gregg Bakowski for the conclusion of this match. Thanks for reading so far. Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 3-3 Medvedev* Medvedev showing signs of a malfunction? He’s lost a little of his verve but then holds to 15. They are racing through this set. *Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 3-2 Medvedev Auger-Aliassime serves with venom to go to 40-0, and then serves to love. Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 2-2 Medvedev* Backhand return winner, a rare one, starts off the Medvedev service game and then comes a double fault, his sixth. A big serve and then an overhead levels it at 30-30. Then the hold is on, and a big noise goes up from him. *Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 2-1 Medvedev The Auger-Aliassime serve and forehand is still working, but Medvedev is playing better if still finding it hard to break his opponent. The last Russian break came way back in the first set, and he can’t do it this time, sitting down and complaining about something or other. Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 1-1 Medvedev* Medvedev misses a winner down the line, feels a long time since that happened. He’s looking far better than before, that’s for sure. But Auger-Aliassime’s service return for 40-30 is brutal, only for Medvedev to hold and issue his own roar. *Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-7 1-0 Medvedev This feels like a whole new ball-game, and Medvedev’s eye is in, as he goes to 30-30 on his opponent’s serve. He almost pulls off the impossible in a thundering rally but ends up losing it. Auger-Aliassime roars as he holds. That was not good timing, but seems to have aided Medvedev who rushes to 4-1 up. Auger-Aliassime then makes a mess of a winner to go 5-1 down. Oh dear. The third set surely now heading to the Russian. A serve is delayed by a ringing phone, but Auger-Aliassime wins that one after a shot into the net. Auger-Aliassime misses a winner down the line for 2-6. The first one is taken as Auger-Aliassime crashes into the net. A break in play during the tie-breaker Auger-Aliassime makes an early error, hitting the ball out for 0-1. Then misses his first serve, only for Medvedev to overdo his baseline shot for 1-1. Then a slip from Auger-Aliassime and it’s 1-2, a mini break. There’s some rain falling, and the umpire demands the roof is closed. Medvedev is only too happy to go and sit down to wait it out while the roof goes on, and the court is mopped. *Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 6-6 Medvedev A tie-breaker it is. We arrive at 15-15, then a fine return from miles back from Medvedev opens the door at 15-30. An overhead levels it at 30-30. Then a timely serve that Medvedev spinnakers into the stand. Then the same is true of the next point. Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 5-6 Medvedev* Medvedev wins a close-quarters rally to get to 30-0, then it goes to 30-30 with the Russian being given a chasing around the court. Then a service return takes it to 40-30, and a hold on first service. Auger-Aliassime must serve to take it to a tie-break. *Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 5-5 Medvedev An unpromising beginning with a double fault is followed by the use of that forehand to win. Then that fails the Canadian to go to 15-30. Serve volleying then takes it to 30-30. Then he gets lucky with a net cord to drill a winner with Medvedev scrabbling. Then bullies home to save and hold. Now the pressure is back on Medvedev. Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 4-5 Medvedev* Medvedev continues to whinge at the ball kids. It’s their fault. And it goes to 0-30, the chance is on. But a good serve takes us to 15-30. And then it’s 30-30, the gap closed for now. And then Auger-Aliassime’s errors let back in Medvedev, who can get back into this with a break in the next. Auger-Aliassime* 7-6 6-3 4-4 Medvedev Medvedev is chatting to his coach as he makes a mess of a slight opening at 0-15. The coach, it seems, must take the blame. A huge smash from his opponent takes it to 30-15. Then some unlikely delicacy takes it to 40-15. The hold is duly completed. Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 3-4 Medvedev* It’s a battle of the Medvedev serve and the Auger-Aliassime forehand that will decide this set, and the match. The Canadian messes up another drop, giving his opponent a chance to save, and we career towards the moment of truth. *Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 3-3 Medvedev Medvedev can’t get through that serve but Auger-Aliassime makes a mess of a drop shot on game point. Still, he has two more, and a serve at 40-15 takes the cake. Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 2-3 Medvedev* The first point is a classic, and one where Medvedev gets to show off the pace around the court that was supposed to be his ticket to the semis. His speed wins it, a serve wins the second but then comes 30-15. Auger-Aliassime overdoes a return on second serve as it goes to 40-15. Medvedev holds once more. *Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 2-2 Medvedev Big, big serving to go 30-15, right on the line. Then 40-15, again taking the full 25 seconds to unleash his bow. And on second serve, he lands the service hold. Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 1-2 Medvedev* A steepled smash for 15-15 is followed by on overcooked forehand from Auger-Aliassime but 30-30 comes around too after a Medvedev miss. Then an amazing return sets up a break point. Medvedev goes for broke on his first serve and misses, but saves with a forehand winner. And then holds serve. A relief but all is not well in Club Med. *Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 1-1 Medvedev A second-serve saver takes Auger-Aliassime to 15-15 as he looks far more nervous, and is slowing down his delivery. Still, he goes to 30-15 with a cruncher. Then comes another for 40-15 down the line, and the game. Medvedev can’t get through. Auger-Aliassime 7-6 6-3 0-1 Medvedev* Medvedev has only fought back from two sets down once before, last year at Wimbledon against Cilic. He’s put off by some squawking seabirds as he rabbits to himself and complains about the quality of the balls. The bad workman is blaming his tools with wobbles aplenty on show. He is taken to deuce. Then Auger-Aliassime misses a slice, only for another Medvedev error, then the Canadian nets for advantage. Medvedev holds but he is unhappy with life. When serving for the set, a thunderous ace is a good place to start. Then comes another. Medvedev with no answer. Some serve-volleying and a blamming home of a winner gives him three set points. The first is taken as Medvedev wallops the ball way out of court Auger-Aliassime 7-6 5-3 Medvedev* Medvedev does seem to have recovered his serve, which may come in handy for a five-set recovery but he still has that forehand to contend with. Auger-Aliassime’s main weapon is proving a huge problem. A smash takes it to deuce, but the advantage falls to Medvedev, who then profits from a mishit. *Auger-Aliassime 7-6 5-2 Medvedev Some nerves for Auger-Aliassime? The forehand wobbles a little but he soon enough races to 40-15, and a massive serve takes him to within a game of a two-sets lead. Auger-Aliassime 7-6 4-2 Medvedev* A quick hold, and a welcome hold for Medvedev. *Auger-Aliassime 7-6 4-1 Medvedev Medvedev is not getting through, though does conjure an unlikely winner for 0-15. Auger-Aliassime is serving well, and confident enough to come forward while Medvedev is still sat so deep in the court. Auger-Aliassime 7-6 3-1 Medvedev* Not a good sign for Medvedev, who double faults again but at least he holds his serve this time. *Auger-Aliassime 7-6 3-0 Medvedev Now, to further drive home the advantage. And how. An ace will do for starters. But a low backhand goes into the net for 15-15. He chases down a forehand to go to 30-15. Then another ace. Then a whipped crosscourt winner takes it. Auger-Aliassime 7-6 2-0 Medvedev* A break! Auger-Aliassime has Medvedev’s measure, and goes to 0-15 with a forehand pass. Then a double fault again. All is not well, but a good serve takes it to 15-30. Then Auger-Aliassime chops a backhand out for 30-30. A good serve takes it to 40-30. Then a wild shot from Medvedev and he’s annoyed with himself, and even more annoyed with himself when he blows an advantage. He gets another. But blows that, too. The radar is malfunctioning. A second serve lands another. That’s blown. And suddenly Auger-Aliassime has a break point, that a missed shot hands to the Canadian. *Auger-Aliassime 7-6 1-0 Medvedev A comfortable hold for the Canadian, trying to drive home his advantage. He sees it out with an ace. Medvedev takes the first point after a lengthy rally. Then there’s a recovery of that booming forehand from the Canadian, and it’s 1-1 when Medvedev nets. Crashing forehand takes it to 2-1. An error takes it to 2-2, the mistakes creeping in. A double fault for 3-2 and a mini-break. “Let’s go Felix, let’s go” sing the rather annoying Canuck contingent. Fearsome forehands take it to 4-2, on the long ones he has too much power for the Russian, who is so far back he’s practically in the Yarra River. Medvedev then wins a point he has no right to win, only to double break to go 5-3 down. The errors are creeping in, and a fine return sets up three set points. The first is saved by a backhand winner. Then Medvedev goes long and it’s done after 61 minutes. *Auger-Aliassime 6-6 Medvedev Break back. Auger-Aliassime misses for 0-15. Then again for 0-30. Then again for 0-40. All on the forehand. A long rally is won by a crashing smash to save the first break point. But he misses the next one and it’s a tie-break. That’s a chance blown. Alfie Hewett and Gordon Reid have made tennis history by winning a ninth consecutive grand slam title. Auger-Aliassime 6-5 Medvedev* A break, a break. Nice footwork at 0-15 and Auger-Aliassime is playing confidently. He misses the next one. Then Medvedev nets to take it to 15-30. Auger-Aliassime then crashes off the net cord for 30-30. Then a forehand forces a first break point, it’s taken until the tenth game. A huge rally and it seems the Canadian has the upper hand, only for Medvedev to zip a winner and save the break. Then Medvedev, looking all at sea, saves himself with his speed and nous, and has an advantage. The umpire ended up catching the ball. Medvedev then misses the winner, and it’s back to deuce. Then he leaves the ball, misjudging it, and it’s another break point. A double fault, and the Canadian can serve this one out. *Auger-Aliassime 5-5 Medvedev The pressure is now on Auger-Aliassime and he deliberates over his serves. He goes to 30-0 after winning a long rally on his backhand side. An ace takes it, and a good, confident hold. Auger-Aliassime 4-5 Medvedev* Amazing rally for 0-15, both players trying drop shots and then Auger-Aliassime winning it with Medvedev chasing everything down. It then goes to 15-30 after some loose baseline hitting from Medvedev. A decent serve levels it. Then a loose shot from Auger-Aliassime takes it to 40-30. Medvedev skids around the court to take the game. *Auger-Aliassime 4-4 Medvedev Auger-Aliassime’s serve is holding up nicely, even when Medvedev is trying to find a way through. Both are serving well, and landing their first serves, too. That was a comfortable hold. Auger-Aliassime 3-4 Medvedev* The ground game of these two is very different, with Medvedev’s greater delicacy and variety getting the better of his opponent at the moment. Auger-Aliassime’s power is there but the radar off as he tries to get at the Medvedev service game. *Auger-Aliassime 3-3 Medvedev Medvedev is beginning to glimpse a way through himself but for the moment, the Auger-Aliassime service game is doing its job for now. Auger-Aliassime 2-3 Medvedev* Auger-Aliassime’s power is troubling Medvedev, but he makes a mess after a rally and nets when the Russian was scrabbling. Then Auger-Aliassime smashes a winner after a lax smash. There is a way through but the Russian is picking up other points rather too quickly at the moment. *Auger-Aliassime 2-2 Medvedev The games played on the Canadian’s serve really are slow, and there’s a double fault for 15-15. He seems a bit nervous about his massive serve. But for 30-30 he engineers a forehand winner, and then a skidding serve forces game point. Then a deep winner brushes the line, and despite Medvedev’s complaints, a service hold. Auger-Aliassime 1-2 Medvedev* Auger-Aliassime’s noises suggest he is being made to work by the Russian, who is serving well and making his opponent chase all over the court. A blasted ace takes the game. *Auger-Aliassime 1-1 Medvedev Auger-Aliassime starts with two crashing, winning serves, delivered with a hefty grunt and eventually holds. He is taking the full 25 seconds over each serve, and that doesn’t bode well. Medvedev’s complaints about needing a court with room are borne out by his taking to the back of the ranch. Auger-Aliassime 0-1 Medvedev* We begin with a service game to love from the Russian, the one blip being him needing a second service on 40-0 that leads to a long-ish rally. That looks like FAA’s route into this game. Before we begin, a certain someone is planning his comeback trail. The toss is done, with Auger-Aliassime choosing to receive ahead of the knock-up. The players take to the court, with Auger-Aliassime looking a bit nervous. There’s a pounding sound to greet him, that rather disturbingly sounds like that Numan advert for men’s things. Medvedev looks calmer. It’s rained outside and the roof is being opened, and it looks hot out there. Looks lively down at Flinders Park. Seems like Nick Kyrios has been doing Nick Kyrios things. Some quotes from Tsitsipas in post-match. I am very, very happy with the way I served today and used my tactics. Having the crowd support, it is truly unbelievable. It is part of the game. You never know what to expect from the weather. I knew I was heading towards the right direction. The conditions might have changed a little bit - slightly faster, not as bouncy - so my mind did. I tried to adapt and it just worked. I’m pretty sure my doctor is watching right now. We both didn’t expect for me to be here, it was not pat of our plan. He told me he didn’t see me playing in Australia but I proved him wrong. He’s a big tennis enthusiast and I am happy I found the right person to bring me back even stronger. News from the women’s singles, Danielle Collins enjoyed a 7-5 6-1 win over France’s Alize Cornet, and Iga Swiatek, beat veteran Kaia Kanepi 4-6 7-6 (7-2) 6-3 to set up Thursday’s semi-finals. Stefanos Tsitsipas has just sped into the quarter-finals, making very short work of Jannick Sinner, to join Nadal, Berretini and the winner of this match, where Medvedev, perhaps the best player left in the tournament is favoured to join them. The Russian, second-seeded, yet actually top-seeded after all that Djokovic woe, has dropped just two sets to get here while the Canadian has dropped four, and beat Marin Cilic in four sets in the last round. Medvedev ended up apologising for his on-court behaviour in beating Maxime Cressy, saying: ““I was quite mad today because of a few things. I’m working on myself, and that’s why I managed to win and still kept my composure, as much as I could, because sometimes I go much more crazier than I did today.” One of his main gripes was not playing that match on the Rod Laver Court but he gets his wish today. With all that laid out for him can he live up to the expectation?The Netherlands has lifted its toughest Covid controls, Denmark is to remove all restrictions within days and France will begin easing curbs next week, as many – but not all – EU countries opt to reopen despite record infection numbers. The moves come as data shows hospital and intensive care admissions are not surging in line with cases, and after the World Health Organization suggested the Omicron variant – which studies show is more contagious but usually less severe for vaccinated people – may signal a new, more manageable phase in the pandemic. Dutch bars, restaurants and museums were allowed to reopen on Wednesday after the prime minister, Mark Rutte, said the government was “consciously looking for the limits of what is possible” as case numbers continued to hit new daily highs. Intensive care admissions and deaths, however, have been falling in the Netherlands, and the health minister, Ernst Kuipers, said a decision to prolong restrictive measures would have risked “harming our health and our society”. Cafes, bars and restaurants closed since mid-December can now reopen with reduced capacity and until 10pm as long as customers have a Covid pass, with cinemas, theatres, museums and sports events also allowed to welcome the public back. The Danish government, which two weeks ago allowed cinemas and music venues to reopen after a month’s closure, also announced on Wednesday plans to scrap remaining domestic coronavirus controls from 1 February. The move – which must be approved by parliament – will allow nightclubs to reopen, restaurants to serve alcohol after 10pm, and shops to lift limits on customer numbers. Vaccine passes will no longer be needed, and commuters may travel without wearing masks. Like the Netherlands, Denmark has set successive recent daily infection records. But while coronavirus-related hospitalisations have risen, health authorities say 30%-40% of patients with a positive test are in hospital for reasons other than Covid. “There has been a decoupling in the trend earlier in the epidemic, between increasing infection and increase in Covid hospitalisations,” the government’s expert advisory panel said. The number of Covid patients in intensive care has nearly halved since early January. Belgium last week announced a slight easing of its restrictions from Friday despite record infections, with bars and restaurants allowed to stay open until midnight and indoor activities such as play areas and bowling alleys to reopen. The country’s current Omicron wave is not expected to peak for a fortnight, but hospital admissions are rising at a far slower rate than infections and the number of patients in intensive care is falling. “The situation is manageable,” said the virologist Steven Van Gucht. France on Tuesday reported a new daily record of 501,635 new cases but, again, while hospital admissions have risen, only about half as many patients are in intensive care as during previous waves, and the number has been falling since 12 January. The health minister, Olivier Véran, said the peak of the current coronavirus wave should be reached within the next few days, while the prime minister, Jean Castex, last week announced a timetable for lifting Covid restrictions from 2 February. Castex said France’s vaccine pass, required since Monday to enter restaurants, cinemas and other public venues, would allow audience capacity limits for concert halls and sports and other events to be lifted, with working from home also no longer mandatory for many employees and face masks not needed outside. Some countries, however, are not yet ready to relax restrictions. Sweden’s health minister, Lena Hallengren, on Wednesday extended pandemic curbs by another two weeks because of “an extremely high level of spread”, meaning bars and restaurants must continue to close at 11pm. In Germany, which on Wednesday reported a new 24-hour record of 164,000 infections, MPs are preparing to debate proposals to either require or strongly encourage vaccination. About 74% of the population has received at least one dose, less than in France, Italy or Spain, but the government is divided over a possible vaccine mandate. Options include requiring all adult residents to be vaccinated against Covid, only those above 50, or merely to mandate counselling for unvaccinated people. The WHO’s Europe director, Hans Kluge, said on Sunday it was “plausible” the region was “moving towards a kind of pandemic endgame” and that Omicron could have infected 60% of the continent’s inhabitants by March. Once the current surge is over, immunity through infection or vaccination should last “quite some weeks and months”, Kluge told Agence-France Presse, adding that Covid may come back at the end of the year but not necessarily as a pandemic. He cautioned, however, that it was still too early to consider Covid endemic. “There is a lot of talk about endemic but endemic means it is possible to predict what’s going to happen. This virus has surprised us more than once,” he said, adding that other variants could still emerge.Pioneering Australian photographer and film-maker Frank Hurley was the official witness to Sir Ernest Shackleton’s gruelling expedition attempting to cross the Antarctic landmass, which lasted three years from 1914 to 1917. For most of the time the crew were utterly cut off from news of the outside world and the expedition became an epic ordeal when, on the way there, their ship (aptly named Endurance) was crushed and sunk by pack ice. Shackleton and his men were forced to journey onwards in a lifeboat in the desolate cold, finally to South Georgia, then rescued and brought by a Chilean vessel to the harbour in Valparaíso where they were accorded a hero’s welcome. This 1919 silent movie is Hurley’s filmed record of Shackleton’s voyage and what is startling about it is its weird tonal obtuseness: so often it feels like a home-movie travelogue in which the mood is bafflingly jaunty. Towards the end of the film, just at the point when their lives have been saved and disaster averted, the film spends about 10 minutes on the adorable behaviour of the penguins. This is at the moment when Shackleton’s victory was said to consist simply in his heroic survival, the expedition itself having, of course, been a failure, but the film simply sets aside the obvious poignant or tragic dimension. Perhaps this merely reflects the insistent stiff-upper-lip optimism and breeziness that the crew (including Hurley) had internalised in order to survive. Certainly, the first world war, which was happening at the same time, and which Shackleton’s fierce self-sacrifice and terrifying hardship could be said to mimic, is not mentioned. Probably the most sensational part of the entire film comes at the very beginning with Hurley’s glorious close-up portraits of his leading players, most prominently Shackleton. The sheer vividness of these personalities scorches out of the screen. • South is released on 28 January in cinemas.For almost as long as it’s existed, heavy metal has been used as protest music. On Black Sabbath’s Paranoid, the first thing you’re barraged with is War Pigs: a seven-minute savaging of the politicians who instigated the Vietnam war. Iron Maiden once had their mascot, Eddie, murder Margaret Thatcher on a single’s artwork; Metallica and Megadeth spent the 1980s lambasting cold war superpowers that didn’t know whether to shake hands or nuke each other. Nikan Khosravi, singer and guitarist of Iranian/Norwegian thrashers Confess, views his band as another protest act in the metal lineage. “I’m the kid who told the emperor: ‘You’re naked!’” he exclaims with pride and excitement on a call from Norway. However, the five-piece don’t write their brutish tracks about some faraway conflict, or satirise a government certain to ignore them. In late 2015, Khosravi and his Confess bandmate, Arash Ilkhani, were arrested in their native Iran. Their crime was writing anti-establishment metal music, for which they were charged with blasphemy and propaganda against the state and taken to Tehran’s notorious Evin prison. They endured 18 months of incarceration while awaiting trial before making bail and, following a guilty verdict that sentenced them to six years in prison, sought asylum in Norway. Revenge at All Costs, Confess’s first album since the hellish ordeal, documents the last seven years, with Khosravi and Ilkhani now flanked by a trio of Norwegian members. “It’s a storytelling record,” Khosravi states, before comparing it to 2Pac’s All Eyez on Me and Eminem’s Recovery, with a snigger. “It’s a personal take on the stuff that happened. We wanted to make the statement that you cannot keep someone from their dreams. Our second album was called In Pursuit of Dreams, and we were arrested two weeks after releasing it. We were pursuing our dreams and, for our dreams, we went to jail.” Much like Khosravi himself, Revenge … is loud, confident and outspoken. The song Evin booms with immense chords (produced by Lamb of God and Clutch collaborator Gene “Machine” Freeman) and Phoenix Rises follows in a flurry of athletic guitar leads, as Khosravi growls lyrics that taunt his former jailers: “You thought I’m surely dead / but you’re not gonna see me quiet until my motherfucking body goes red”. “When I moved to Norway, I released that song and I guess they [the Iranian government] got fucking upset,” the frontman says. “They were like, ‘OK, your six years are turning into 12-and-a-half years and 74 lashes.’ What the fuck? It’s the 21st century – 74 lashes?!” Khosravi was born to a middle-class family in 1993 in Tehran, his mother a teacher and his father an accountant. He characterises it as a liberal household, enamoured with the arts, in a conservative neighbourhood. After hearing his dad play old Pink Floyd records growing up, he discovered heavier bands such as Slayer and Slipknot when he was 13 years old. At 15, he co-founded Confess. The band debuted in 2012 with the album Beginning of Dominion. It zeroed in on religion, critiquing it in a country whose official census claims 99.5% of the population are Muslim. By the time Confess released follow-up In Pursuit of Dreams in October 2015, the frontman was being heavily monitored by the Iranian government. He grew convinced that his phone had been bugged, as he heard inexplicable buzzing and echoes whenever he was on a call. Later, when he was out with his then-girlfriend in Tehran, he noticed a man following them for “four or five hours”, taking photos of them. “Dumb as I am, I went and confronted this guy,” he says. “I was convinced he was a government agent, but I just went for it: ‘Why the fuck are you following us?!’ He was like, ‘Whatever,’ but I knew what was going on. “That same day, someone had stolen my girlfriend’s phone,” he adds. “So my theory is that someone used the GPS or read our texts about meeting up and, from there, they followed us.” The release of In Pursuit of Dreams gave the Iranian government all the ammo it needed to finally strike. The song Thorn Within, which questioned the existence of God, became the backbone of the musician’s blasphemy charge. Meanwhile, the lyrics of Teh-Hell-Ran – which include “This town is not a place to live / In here you must kill to not die” – were a cornerstone of allegations of propaganda against the state. “They are planning on making an empire in the Middle East, so they need to go out and invest in propaganda,” Khosravi says. “It doesn’t surprise me that they arrested me because, without knowing, I was standing in front of their billion-dollar propaganda system. We were singing a different narrative, and young kids are more driven to another young guy that’s telling them that.” Khosravi was arrested in his family home in November 2015. He watched for two hours – “the longest two hours of my life” – as the Revolutionary Guard tore up his room to confiscate evidence before he was dragged away. “My mum asked, ‘Where are you taking my son?’ They said, ‘You can ask after him at Evin prison.’” Ilkhani was taken into custody simultaneously. “It was like Fast &amp; Furious,” Khosravi claims. “There were cars and sirens because they thought he was running away, but he was just driving home.” Khosravi was placed in solitary confinement for three months. “They put you in a cell, close the door and then you wait for the interrogations to start. They become kind of fun, because you just want to get out of that fucking cell, but the interrogations only lasted for two weeks – so for two months and two weeks, I was in a cell 23 hours a day without seeing anyone. “There is just a wall in front of you with a big door, and silence – an indescribable silence. The light in your room is on 24/7, because that’s another way they can put you under pressure. On top of that, just imagine, at your last interrogation, the guy, when he’s leaving the room, is like, ‘I don’t think I’m gonna write a good report on you,’ and then he just leaves. You start thinking; you cannot go to sleep. There’s no clock in your room, there’s no mirror. You’re basically taken out of society.” Released from solitary, he stayed in prison for a further 15 months, with he and Ilkhani only getting out by posting an $80,000 bail. The trauma and stress caused by the incarceration ended Khosravi’s relationship with his girlfriend. Plus, out of fear of being considered guilty by association, none of his friends saw him once he was freed. “I didn’t meet a person that I knew for eight years,” he says. “When I got handed my six-year [prison sentence], my mum told me, ‘You’ve gotta leave,’” Khosravi continues. “She convinced me, along with my dad: ‘We’d rather see you leave than see you go to jail.’” So, he fled. Khosravi crossed the Iran/Turkey border without a passport (it’s the only part of his story he doesn’t want to go into detail about), before being offered asylum in Norway. There, at long last, he reunited with Ilkhani and reactivated Confess. “Now, nobody’s gonna come to the door,” Khosravi says, the relief in his voice audible. “Now, I have so much potential to cause damage from far away.” When asked if Revenge at All Costs represents victory for him, Khosravi says yes, but subsequently seems torn. On the one hand, every step he takes and word he speaks as a free man defies his one-time captors; on the other, he is still full of hatred. “We are making the statement that you cannot do this to a human,” he declares. “Thousands would quit or turn the other cheek, but now you have someone coming after you with the only weapons that he has: a pen and a guitar.” Revenge at All Costs is out now on Rexius Records.The thing about governments in crisis is that they have little time for governing. Boris Johnson – once king of the world, now lame duck – is a prime minister consumed with his own survival. Insiders say Johnson is motivated to hang on to power not to deliver a pressing policy agenda but to beat former Bullingdon Club chum, David Cameron: “He won’t accept the last Etonian PM having survived longer than him.” Meanwhile, in the real world, British families are about to endure the worst cost of living crisis for 30 years, and are left waiting for anyone in power to notice. For many, the money going out is about to soar, causing that coming in to shrink in real terms. Inflation rose to 5.4% last month, driven by pricier food and clothes. Energy tariffs are escalating and tax bills are set to go up too. At the same time, the £20 universal credit uplift has been cut and unemployment benefits are about to hit their lowest real value in more than three decades, a rate that experts call “only slightly more than destitution”. Ministers can claim work is the solution but it is good jobs, not any job, that is a reprieve; the majority of people living in poverty in the UK last year were in working households. The official line may be that the pandemic is over, but this too is still hitting personal finances – just ask the clinically vulnerable pensioner shielding in a cold home. The result of all this is clear enough: simply getting by is increasingly going to become a luxury. The release of today’s report by the commission on social security – the result of a two-year initiative to outline proposals for a better benefits system led by claimants themselves – outlines the sort of ideas that could make a real difference right now. After a decade of pernicious and reduced welfare support, the report makes some useful proposals. It suggests scrapping universal credit and replacing it with a “guaranteed decent income for all”, set at 50% of the minimum wage (£163.50 a week); the end of benefit sanctions; and an end to using social security as a sticking plaster for failures elsewhere by abolishing zero-hour contracts and introducing free early child education and care. The concern here is not that Boris Johnson would never introduce such solutions – that’s hardly a surprise – but that his government is barely even engaged with the problem. Ask a minister what is the most pressing issue facing “families who are struggling to make ends meet”, and it’s not a threadbare benefits system, energy bills, rising food prices, or insecure work – it’s the BBC licence fee. That those on low incomes will be spending on average 18% of that income (after housing costs) on energy bills from April is seen by this government not as a looming threat, but an inconsequential sideshow. The crisis facing British people right now is not only that millions can’t afford the basics, it is that their leaders have no intention of helping them. Or even keeping up the pretence they will. This is a remarkable state of affairs once you really start to ponder it, though it is hardly new. People in this country have been skipping meals and wearing coats in their front rooms for some time, and no one has been paying attention to this either. The difference now, perhaps, is that such events will not be confined to the working class. Middle-class families who were previously managing could soon be tipped into financial hardship, while those who were already struggling will fall into abject poverty. Politics is often viewed through the prism of Westminster drama, a spectacle never clearer than the latest Conservative jostle for power. We are led to believe this is all that is important, that it is normal to dedicate more attention to what wine No 10 staff put in a suitcase than the fact many parents can’t afford to put food in the cupboard. Johnson clearly believes this himself to a large degree, seeing power as a game and the rest of us pawns. But politics – real politics – is not defined by the showy manoeuvres of a few at the top; it is defined by the ordinary matter of whether a teacher can afford to put the heating on in the winter. It is these mundane issues that appear to simply bore Johnson and the public school alumni around him. That staples such as eggs, butter and milk are seeing price rises may not be glamorous facts to ponder, but they are going to be part of the single most important issue facing this country in the coming months. That neither the labour market nor the social security system are fit for purpose to weather the storm is not only a deep concern for the future but a stark lesson in mistakes of the past. The way out of this will not be found through a different Tory sitting in Downing Street, nor perhaps even a change of party. What it requires above anything is a recognition that this country is crying out for dramatic change, and that playing by the same old economic rules will not get us there. This means shifting power out of Westminster and into communities, a rejuvenated modern welfare state, and a media willing to hold charlatans to account, rather than help them get elected. Until then, millions of people in Britain are going to find themselves falling below the breadline. The cost of living with Boris Johnson as prime minister is all too high. Frances Ryan is a Guardian columnist and author of Crippled: Austerity and the Demonisation of Disabled PeopleFor two long hours, Daniil Medvedev’s shoulders were bitterly slouched during the grand slam quarter-final he had entered as the heavy favourite. He struggled with his serve, double faulting on key points, and as his frustration boiled over he even spent long periods mimicking Félix Auger-Aliassime’s prolonged, breathy grunt during exchanges. As his opponent started brilliantly, it looked at times like he would rather be anywhere else in the world than the Rod Laver Arena. But even then, as he fell down two sets to Auger-Aliassime and his presence in the tournament was moments from being snuffed out, such is the aura he has built for himself over the past year, it never looked to be over. As the clocks in Melbourne ticked past midnight, Medvedev completed his recovery from two sets down and saved a match point as he defeated Auger-Aliassime 6-7 (4), 3-6, 7-6 (2) 7-5, 6-4 in four hours, 42 minutes to reach the Australian Open semi-final. It is only the second time in Medvedev’s life, in a career spanning eight years, that he has recovered from two sets down to win a grand slam match. The consequence of Medvedev’s recovery is that he will rekindle an old rivalry in the semi-final with Stefanos Tsitsipas, the fourth seed, after Tsitsipas played a sublime match to defeat Jannik Sinner 6-3, 6-4, 6-2 earlier. In the immediate aftermath of his match, as Medvedev was asked how on earth he managed to win, he could only shrug. “I have no idea,” he said. “Are you talking about the match point? I managed to serve well. If it would be a second serve, we never know what would happen. Talking about the [whole] match, you know, it’s funny. This Lacoste bag, I usually come with a lot of clothes. Just in case [I have] six T-shirts, two shoes, whatever. It’s full, it’s tough to even zip it. Now, it’s empty. That’s how this match was.” Afterwards, Medvedev said that he drew inspiration for his comeback from an unlikely source: “I don’t really know what to do, so I was like, actually, I don’t know if people are going to like it but I told myself: ‘what Novak would do?’” he said. As sections of the crowd booed at the mention of the No 1, Medvedev noted his intentions of making life as difficult as possible for his opponent until the end. Standing before Medvedev, Auger-Aliassime has spoken often of his increased maturity and the confidence flowing through him and he attacked the match in precisely that manner. From the beginning, the 21-year-old Canadian was so sharp and focused. He served extremely well and attacked his forehand behind it, but he also played a far more considered match than he would have in the past. In the first two sets, he surprisingly won most medium and long rallies as he established a two-set lead. But with defeat a step away, Medvedev slowly became the most focused and dangerous version of himself in the third set. He improved his returning, he cut errors from his game and finally began to impose himself on Auger-Aliassime’s service games. Auger-Aliassime served excellently just to reach the tie-break, but after a rain delay and a pause for the roof, he went cold upon the restart. As he sprayed forehand errors, Medvedev pulled back a set. By the fourth set, Medvedev was forcing errors from his opponent almost every time the rallies extended past four points while Auger-Aliassime became reliant on the quality of his serve. In the fifth set Auger-Aliassime had his chances, particularly after generating double break point and then missing a second serve return in his opening game. Medvedev served well whenever he truly needed to and he dragged out one of the grittiest wins of his young career. Medvedev said that as he attempts to recover and be in optimal shape for his semi-final, he is also thinking of the legends before him. “If we look at the best, they were able to do it somehow. I don’t know how. But they were able to do it. So if I want to be a part of this group, even if I’m really far [from them] right now, I want to try to make it happen.” As Medvedev looked on, Auger-Aliassime was left to process a bitter defeat. His performance was a reminder of his resilience and the steady improvements he continues to make. He faced up to the reality of his loss with typical maturity: “I wish I could go back and change it, but I can’t. So, you know, I have accepted it already. It is what it is. I look at it in a very positive way.”The president of Fifa, Gianni Infantino, has said his plans for a World Cup every two years could stop African migrants from finding “death in the sea”, in an extraordinary address to European politicians. Speaking at a session of the parliamentary assembly of the Council of Europe, a trans-national body dedicated to the support of human rights, Infantino said that countries outside Europe needed greater access to national football competitions to prevent drastic consequences. Infantino was discussing his strategy known as the Future of Football, which to this point has concentrated on doubling the frequency of Fifa’s flagship competition. He later issued a clarification on his remarks which he said “appear to have been misinterpreted and taken out of context”. He told the assembly: “This topic is not about whether we want a World Cup every two years, but about what do we want to do for the future of football. “If we think about rest of world,” he continued, “and the vast majority of Europe, then we have to think about what football brings. Football is about opportunity, about hope, about the national teams. We cannot say to the rest of world give us your money, but watch us on TV. We need to include them. “We need to find ways to include the whole world to give hope to Africans so that they don’t need to cross the Mediterranean in order to find maybe a better life but, more probably, death in the sea. “We need to give opportunities, to give dignity. Not by charity but by allowing the rest of the world to participate. Maybe the World Cup every two years is not the answer. We discuss it.” The Future of Football project, led by the former Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger, has been widely rejected by European football and its political organisations. Infantino was speaking after the British politician Lord Foulkes had presented a report on football reform, which specifically questioned “the advisability” of the biennial World Cup plan. Infantino’s remarks provoked immediate outrage. Ronan Evain, the chief executive of Football Supporters Europe, tweeted: “How low can Infantino go? Instrumentalising death in the Mediterranean to sell his megalomaniac plan is beyond words.” Kick It Out’s chief executive, Tony Burnett, said: “Fifa is a multibillion profit-making organisation. They already have the funds to invest in creating and inspiring opportunity for disadvantaged people around the world. It is therefore completely unacceptable to suggest that a biennial World Cup, predominantly set up to drive further profits for Fifa, could be a solution for migrants who risk their lives, sometimes fleeing war-torn countries, to seek a better life.” Infantino later said his remarks had been intended to show that “everyone in a decision-making position has a responsibility to help improve the situation of people around the world”. He added: “If there are more opportunities available, including in Africa, but certainly not limited to that continent, this should allow people to take these opportunities in their own countries. This was a general comment, which was not directly related to the possibility of playing a Fifa World Cup every two years.” The meeting also saw the assembly resolve to support Foulkes’s report on “Football governance: business and values”. Although the report warned against both a biennial World Cup and the return of the European Super League project, it was broadly supportive of Fifa’s reforms for the transfer system and recommended a new system of solidarity for smaller European leagues and clubs. The adoption of the report was welcomed by various European football bodies, including Uefa, whose president, Aleksander Ceferin, said: “It’s ‘No’ to selfish super leagues and ‘No’ to extravagant World Cup proposals. But ‘Yes, yes, yes’ to working together to protect and strengthen our model that works in the interest of European football and society.”A man charged with the murder of Irish schoolteacher Ashling Murphy has appeared in court and been remanded in custody for a further two weeks. Jozef Puska, 31, of Mucklagh in Co Offaly, appeared before Cloverhill district court in Dublin, on Wednesday via video link. He is accused of killing the 23-year-old, who was attacked while out running along a canal near Tullamore two weeks ago. Puska confirmed his name to the court through a Slovakian interpreter during his second hearing. He removed his mask and spoke to confirm he could hear and see the court. Judge Victor Blake asked if the director of public prosecution’s directions were available. Garda Sergeant Olwyn Murphy said they were not. Blake adjourned the case for two weeks, remanding Puska into continuing custody until a further hearing at the same court on 9 February “for formal DPP directions”. The court also heard that the DPP had to complete its book of evidence, which will include results of forensic searches of the alleged crime scene. Last week, large crowds gathered in the village of Mountbolus, Co Offaly, and outside St Brigid’s Church, where her funeral was held. Mourners included the Irish president, Michael D Higgins, and the taoiseach, Micheál Martin. Vigils have been held across Ireland and the world to remember Murphy, and to call for a change in tackling gender-based violence. Press Association contributed to this reportVisiting the Barbican estate in London is like entering a slightly different version of reality. Few places open to the general public feel as hermetic as the estate created by architects Chamberlin, Powell and Bon. If you visit to mark the Barbican Centre’s 40th anniversary next month, make sure you take it all in. Singular vision is also celebrated in Helsinki this month with an art show celebrating modern Finnish female artists. These remarkable women helped change European art in the early 20th century, and deserve more recognition. Read this month’s news to find out more about them. For more news on architecture, sustainable living, art, fashion and new ideas, sign up for our monthly newsletter here Celebrating outstanding craft The shortlist for the Brookfield Properties Craft Award has been revealed. The final winner will be announced during the Collect Craft Fair in London at the end of February. The five artists shortlisted for the prize have been judged to have made a significant contribution to contemporary craft and making in the UK. They stand to win £60,000, have a solo British show in summer 2022 and one of their works will be purchased for the UK’s Crafts Council’s prestigious collection. From the shortlist, Anthony Amoako-Attah and Dawn Bendick both work with glass, though Amoako-Attah uses powered glass to produce pieces that look like fabric and Bendick’s dichroic glass sculptures play with light and colour. Two other finalists work with textiles. Cecilia Charlton’s embroideries are inspired by feminism, the history of textiles and time; Christian Ovonlen’s silk hangings reference Ballets Russes and theatre productions from the 19th and 20th century. The remaining finalist is Irina Razumovskaya, a Russian-Israeli ceramic sculptor whose architectural works have an innovative, glazed finish. “The shortlist reflects a shared appetite of the Crafts Council and Brookfield Properties for the exciting diversity of craft being made today,” said Rosy Greenlees, executive director of the Crafts Council. “I look forward to the winner being announced.” Self-taught Ghanian artist Amoako-Attah had a particularly charming response to the news he’d been shortlisted. “To win this award would be a massive step in my life, as my source of happiness is making work in the studio. Being part of the shortlist signals that the future is bright when determination, love, dedication, and creativity fuel our dreams.” The winner will be announced on 24 February at Somerset House, London, the venue for the Crafts Council’s Collect 2022 art fair Forever in blue jeans Most of us appreciate the appeal of a vintage pair of jeans. Now, thanks to Levi’s, second-hand takes on a new meaning as the American denim giant launches a new version of its most iconic product, 501 jeans, made with organic cotton and ‘post-consumer, recycled denim. The new circular 501s build on a 2020 collaboration with Renewcell, a Swedish textile recycling company. The jeans use a mix of Renewcell sustainably sourced viscose made in part from recycled denim and organic cotton. This combination means the jeans’ production uses fewer natural resources and fewer chemicals. “We’re hoping to show ourselves and the industry that we can deliver more sustainable product that looks great, and meets the highest quality standards,” says Paul Dillinger, Levi’s VP of design innovation. Each year fashion brands manufacture approximately six billion pairs of jeans at enormous cost the planet, using millions of gallons of water, creating chemical waste and chucking greenhouse gasses into the environment. A new line of circular 501s isn’t going to reverse that. But leading by example can help. As more household brands take the environment seriously, buying brand new will become one thing every fashion brand fears. Unfashionable. Finland’s modern women Finland has been named the happiest place in the world four years running, and the second best place in the world to be a woman. The country has long been a trailblazer in gender parity and women’s rights, and a new art show at Ateneum, the national gallery in Helsinki, looks at the impact this has had on Finland’s female artists. The Modern Woman looks at the work of 12 Finnish female artists from around the turn of the 20th century. Finland was one of the first countries to give women the right to vote, back in 1906. These women could enrol in art school, travel independently. They still encountered the sexism endured by women, but with better opportunities to focus on their careers. The show includes work by Ellen Thesleff who cofounded Finland’s Septem group in 1909. This association of French-influenced artists advocated the use of pure colours and introduced Impressionism to Finland. There are also bronze sculptures by Hilda Flodin on show. She trained as Rodin’s assistant and was one of Finland’s first and finest etchers. Living in a time when women were fighting for emancipation, these artists often chose women as subjects in their art. Helene Schjerfbeck is renowned for self-portraits but other modern women are also commemorated throughout this show. The Modern Woman gives a unique insight into the work and lives of these exceptional artists. Talented women who, like so many in the history of art, haven’t received the recognition they deserve. The Modern Woman is at the Ateneum gallery in Helsinki from 10 February Tiles get a fashion makeover Greek fashion designer Mary Katrantzou is best known for her kaleidoscopic bejewelled print dresses, fabulously OTT creations that have been worn by Beyoncé and Adele among others. On first appearances, then, her latest collaboration may seem like a curveball. She’s designed a collection of bathroom tiles. The line, in partnership with venerable ceramicists Villeroy &amp; Boch, features butterflies and elements of postage stamp design and is intended to bring “the natural world into the living environment”. In fact Katrantzou has form with designs for the home. Her mother was an interior designer and, before transferring to Central Saint Martins to get her degree in fashion, she studied architecture at the Rhode Island School of Design. Her dresses have previously taken inspiration from the Bauhaus movement, Olivetti typewriters and Minoan artifacts. In 2019 she launched a range of rugs. “This collection allowed me to look at patterns outside the female figures and be guided instead by the power of interiors,” Katrantzou says of the tile collection, named ‘Victorian’ after the era that inspired them. Each colourful butterfly design is offset with gold, black or perforated boarders, while the tiles can be set either straight-on or at a 45-degree angle. Or, presumably, fashioned into a catwalk if you wanted to complete the connection. Tiles are available to order from March at Villeroy &amp; Boch For regular news on architecture, design and sustainable living, sign up for the Design Review newsletter Happy birthday, Barbican The Barbican estate was conceived as part of a utopian vision to revive east London after it was destroyed in air raids during the second world war and the Barbican Centre – a Brutalist masterpiece which took over a decade to complete – was declared ‘one of the modern wonders of the world’ by the Queen when she opened it in 1982. The arts centre has become an institution - a resource for local communities and an inspiration for artists. The Barbican Centre marks its 40th anniversary next month. Planned events include performances by the Barbican’s resident orchestra, the London Symphony Orchestra. There’ll be a major new exhibition Postwar Modern: New Art in Britain 1945-1965, reassessing art produced in Britain during the 20 years after the war. The nearby Bishopsgate Institute will take over The Curve gallery with a show of 40 key moments in the LGBTQ+ history of London. Bishopsgate holds one of the most extensive collections of LGBTQ+ history, memorabilia and culture in the UK. “To mark our 40th birthday, we have an exciting programme that offers something for everyone,” says Will Gompertz, the artistic director of Barbican. “As we look ahead, with a new artistic vision, our ambition is to ensure that we continue to be an international beacon for the arts where everyone feels welcome.” The Barbican Centre celebrates its 40th anniversary over the long weekend from 3-6 MarchMuch like the Hollywood star herself, Ava: The Secret Conversations is a visually striking and enigmatic affair. It’s written by and stars Elizabeth McGovern and is based on Peter Evans’s biography, which Ava Gardner collaborated on, but wouldn’t allow to be published in her lifetime. McGovern is best known for her starring role in Downton Abbey but it’s her experience as a lyricist that tells in a production that feels more like an album than a play; poetic and playful and rippling with elegant riffs on Ava’s life and the men who framed it. Director Gaby Dellal has worked largely in film and, alongside projection specialists 59 Productions, has created a show that splices film and theatre together with finesse. The play unfolds in Ava’s London flat, where Peter and Ava meet to discuss her life. As the two hit upon important moments and men (including Mickey Rooney, Artie Shaw and Frank Sinatra), the flat’s walls slide, shuffle or drop away completely, and projected film reels and atmospheric backdrops transport us to a flurry of memorable times and places, many of which shimmer with a mysterious (sometimes threatening) sort of glamour. Lots of the scenes are enclosed by big black frames that drop down in front of the stage and create small picture-box spaces, as if we’re peering through a camera lens. When powerful men speak (such as Peter’s agent, who keeps calling for stories of Sinatra’s penis), we often don’t see them – but only hear their voices booming from somewhere off stage. All this creates the powerful impression of omnipresent men lingering in the wings, picking and choosing how we view Ava’s story. McGovern gradually grows in magnetism, starting out rather depleted (thanks to a number of strokes in Ava’s later life) but gradually beginning to straighten up and sparkle. The chemistry between McGovern and Anatol Yusef, who plays all the male roles, never quite burns and when their big fallout happens, it feels manufactured. But this is still a thoughtful and classy show, which shows a woman who remained resolutely herself (but always kept something back) as the men in her life looked for themselves – and lost themselves – in her dazzling glow. Ava: The Secret Conversations is at the Riverside Studios, London, until 16 April.I was born in London but I’ve also lived and taken photographs in Wales, France and the US. I’ve now been based in St Leonards-on-Sea, on the south coast of Britain, for 33 years, which is the longest I’ve lived anywhere. This picture was taken in 2006, on the seafront half a mile from my house. I’d just come out of the shop on the left of the picture when I saw these two. The guy was standing in the sun with his companion on his shoulder, as if they were both basking. I don’t remember spotting them on the way in, it was as if they’d just materialised. He looked quite forbidding, but I assumed anyone walking around with an exotic pet is going to expect some attention and comments. I just said: “I like your lizard.” He told me it was a bearded dragon and was happy to move around a bit until I had the lizard’s head where I wanted it. Other than that, I don’t remember us talking very much and as soon as I had the shot I was after I thanked him and left him still standing there. I like that I’m reflected in the mirror shades and you can see I’m shooting up close, and I like that you can’t tell for sure whether or not he’s naked. There are other details that amuse me, such as the long shadow cast by his nipple. I’m not sure which particular Hastings Pier Shock is being referred to in the newspaper billboard, but you can see the pier in the background if you look closely. It burned down in 2010 and remained derelict for years. I’ve been documenting the people around me since the 1960s, and have never been short of subjects. This town is rich in weird events and striking characters, but then if you carry a camera everywhere, as I do, and stay alert, that’s true of anywhere. I’ll sometimes drive past people or situations I would love to photograph and I have to backtrack. Or I’ll spot the same interesting-looking person a number of times before the right opportunity arises to photograph them. Another of my St Leonard’s photographs has a quite fierce-looking girl being towed down the street by an enormous dog. I’d seen them before and thought they were interesting but it wasn’t until I found myself right in their path one day that I took the chance. The girl, the dog and a kid on a bike are all making direct eye contact, but none of us said anything, we just all continued on our way. Often I’ll strike up a conversation with subjects and ask their permission, but while shooting on the London Underground in the 1980s I learned to take photographs discreetly. I’d work in plain sight but in a manner that didn’t attract attention. I suppose it helps that people don’t seem to find me threatening. I never spotted the guy with his lizard again, but some years after I took it, the photograph was included in an exhibition of my work in town. I went in one day and the guy at the front desk pointed at the image and said: “Bob, that man was in here earlier looking for you.” He hadn’t left a name or contact details and he never found me. In 2020, however, I spent 12 days in hospital and shared a ward with a guy who I’m almost sure was the bearded dragon man. I’ve compared photos I took on my phone, and he looks exactly the same, just older. It seems odd now that I never asked, but he had become really pally with another patient who’d been bitten on the arse by a dog – they had a lovely rapport and I enjoyed just shooting the breeze with them and didn’t want to risk somehow spoiling the sense of camaraderie. Anyway, he did mention he lives just outside town. A book of my work came out a couple of years ago with that photograph on the cover, so if I ever track him down perhaps I’ll leave a couple of copies hanging from his door handle. Bob Mazzer’s CV Born: London hospital, Whitechapel, London, 1948. Trained: Hornsey College of Art, London. Influences: “Irving Penn, Cartier-Bresson, Robert Frank, Lee Friedlander, Enzo Ragazzini, Tony Ray Jones, Josef Koudelka, Don McCullin, Diane Arbus.” High point: “My current exhibition.” Low point: “Selling my black chrome Hasselblad.” Top tip: “Shoot first, ask questions later, stay out of hospital.” • Bob Mazzer in Camera: A Retrospective is at Hastings Art Gallery and Museum until 17 April. Two books of Mazzer’s work, Tube (Silverhill Press) and In Sussex (Unicorn), are available now.China’s ambitious low-carbon goals will not be realised easily and should not come at the expense of energy and food security or the “normal life” of ordinary people, its president, Xi Jinping, has said, signalling a more cautious approach to the climate emergency as the economy slows. China, the world’s biggest source of greenhouse gas emissions, has been under pressure to “enhance ambition” and take more drastic action to tackle global heating. In the past two years, Beijing has also made a number of pledges to show its commitment. But as the economy slows, China is worried about the risk to jobs and growth. The concern is particularly serious as Beijing prepares to hold a Communist party meeting that is expected to extend Xi’s rule later this year. Late on Monday, Xi told Communist party leaders that China needed to “overcome the notion of rapid success” and proceed gradually. “Reducing emissions is not about reducing productivity, and it is not about not emitting at all, either,” he was quoted as saying by the state news agency Xinhua. “We must stick to the overall planning and ensure energy security, industrial supply chain security and food security at the same time as cutting carbon emissions,” Xi said. Xi also cautioned against a campaign-style decarbonisation but advocated for coordinated national measures. “[We should] consider the reality of the regional resources and industry distribution … avoid uniform steps and one-size-fits-all,” he added. The cautious tone, according to Yan Qin, a lead analyst at Refinitiv financial analysis in Norway, has emerged since late last year, whenChina experienced a sudden power shortage that affected millions of households. “This in practice means less restrictions on fossil fuel. For example the policy goal in the 14th five-year plan is only to limit growth in coal consumption.” But Qin said the cautious approach did not mean Beijing was reneging on its promises. “The fact that this topic was discussed at the first study session of the year at the politburo indicates the top leadership is holding on to the pledges,” she said. “In short, Xi’s message was: it is still important, but let’s be sturdy and not to rush for results.” Since a national economic work meeting at the end of last year, policymakers have repeatedly emphasised China would “prioritise stability” in 2022. This showed the extent of the ruling elite’s concern for the economy, the world’s second-largest. The approach has already started to feed into policymaking, with Zhang Bo, chief engineer of the ministry of ecology and environment, telling reporters earlier this week that China would not impose strict water quality targets on local governments, and would instead encourage them to “consolidate” previous gains. With energy supplies still a big concern after a wave of shortages hit manufacturers last year, Xi also told party leaders that “the gradual withdrawal of traditional energy must be based on the safe and reliable replacement by new energy”. China has promised to accelerate the shift to renewables, but will only start to reduce coal consumption – a main source of CO2 – after 2025. Its state planning agency also said in December that it would loosen blanket restrictions on energy consumption to ensure environmental targets did not erode growth. In November at the Cop26 summit, China and the US announced a surprise plan to work together on cutting greenhouse gas emissions in the crucial next decade. The world’s two biggest emitters unveiled a joint declaration that would see them cooperating closely on the emissions cuts scientists say are needed in the next 10 years to stay within 1.5C. China and the US said they would work together on some specific areas, such as cutting methane – a powerful greenhouse gas – and emissions from transport, energy and industry. With ReutersWhat is the Normandy format? The Normandy format is an informal forum that was set up by French, German, Russian and Ukrainian diplomats in 2014, after Russia kickstarted a separatist conflict in Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region. It takes its name from the Normandy landings in the second world war. The first meeting took place in Normandy on the margins of the ceremony to mark the 70th anniversary of the allied landings. What has the format achieved? Not much. The Minsk protocol – a 2014 agreement reached in the Belarusian capital that sought to end the war in Ukraine – was mediated by France and Germany under the Normandy format. But it failed to stop the fighting, and a new package of measures – known as Minsk II – was signed in February 2015, after a fraught 16 hours of negotiations. This also did not end the fighting, though the Normandy format parties agreed that it was the basis for any future resolution to the conflict. Russia’s insistence that it is not a party to the conflict, and therefore is not bound by the terms of the Minsk agreements, has impeded progress. What was the gist of the Minsk protocols? The protocols were seen as complicated and fragile attempts to bring peace to eastern Ukraine, but at their heart they tried to reconcile Ukraine’s demand for full sovereignty over its territory with Russia’s insistence that the Russian-speaking people of eastern Ukraine required autonomy. They called for a ceasefire, the withdrawal of heavy weaponry from the battle zone, amnesties on both sides and exchanges of prisoners and hostages. What was done to end the impasse? Two schemes – the Morel plan and the Steinmeier formula – were floated in 2015 and 2016. Both proposed a “special status” law for the Donbas region that would come into force on the day of elections, if they were deemed free and fair by the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). Neither proposal was accepted by Kyiv, since Russian troops would remain during the elections. What happened in 2019? After a three-year pause, leaders of the Normandy format met in Paris in December 2019. It was the first meeting between Vladimir Putin and Volodymyr Zelenskiy, who had been elected as president of Ukraine in a landslide victory in April. Zelenskiy had made ending the war one of his campaign promises. Tentative agreements on prisoner exchanges and a total ceasefire were reached, but there was no political breakthrough to the now five-year-old conflict. The outcome was described as a draw. Why aren’t the UK and US involved? In his autobiography, David Cameron admitted it looked as if the UK had been carved out of the diplomatic effort in 2014, but maintained that he and Barack Obama did not want to grant Putin a large-scale meeting that could overshadow the commemorations of the liberation of France. “I was quite happy for the UK and the US to watch from a distance,” he wrote. Others, including his deputy, Nick Clegg, said it was a big strategic mistake for which the UK has since paid.Terry Pratchett’s estate has authorised Jack Monroe to use the “Vimes Boots Index” as the name of her new price index, which is intended to document the “insidiously creeping prices” of basic food products. The author’s daughter, writer Rhianna Pratchett, said her father would have been proud to see his work used in this way by the anti-poverty campaigner. Monroe was prompted to create her index after inflation jumped to 5.4% last week, and she found herself “infuriate[d]” that the index (the consumer price index or CPI) used for this calculation “grossly underestimates the real cost of inflation as it happens to people with the least”. She laid out how the prices of “value” product ranges in supermarkets had soared over the last decade – rice in her local supermarket had increased in price from 45p for a kilogram bag last year, to £1 for 500g, a 344% increase – and how the number of value products has shrunk. She was soon working with economists, charities and analysts to compile her own index. “One,” she wrote in the Observer, “that will document the disappearance of the budget lines and the insidiously creeping prices of the most basic versions of essential items at the supermarket” and “serve as an irrefutable snapshot of the reality experienced by millions of people”. In a tweet on Wednesday, Monroe announced that the index is already starting to make a difference, as the Office for National Statistics has admitted that “one inflation rate doesn’t fit all”. She wrote: “Delighted to be able to tell you that the @ONS have just announced that they are going to be changing the way they collect and report on the cost of food prices and inflation to take into consideration a wider range of income levels and household circumstances”, using the hashtag #VimesBootsIndex. The index, Monroe said, is named in honour of Pratchett’s creation Sam Vimes, who in the Discworld novel Men at Arms lays out the “Sam Vimes ‘Boots’ theory of socio-economic unfairness”. “The reason that the rich were so rich, Vimes reasoned, was because they managed to spend less money,” wrote Pratchett. “Take boots, for example. He earned thirty-eight dollars a month plus allowances. A really good pair of leather boots cost fifty dollars. But an affordable pair of boots, which were sort of okay for a season or two and then leaked like hell when the cardboard gave out, cost about ten dollars. Those were the kind of boots Vimes always bought, and wore until the soles were so thin that he could tell where he was in Ankh-Morpork on a foggy night by the feel of the cobbles. But the thing was that good boots lasted for years and years. A man who could afford fifty dollars had a pair of boots that’d still be keeping his feet dry in ten years’ time, while a poor man who could only afford cheap boots would have spent a hundred dollars on boots in the same time and would still have wet feet.” The Pratchett estate has authorised the use of the name, tweeting its own Pratchett quote in support of Monroe’s campaign. “Sometimes it’s better to light a flamethrower than curse the darkness,” wrote the late Discworld author in Men at Arms. Rhianna Pratchett said: “My father used his anger about inequality, classism, xenophobia and bigotry to help power the moral core of his work. One of his most famous lightning-rods for this was Commander Vimes of the Ankh-Morpork City Watch - a cynical, but likable, man who attempts to better himself whilst railing against the injustices around him. Some of which he’s had a hand in perpetrating in the past. “Vimes’s musing on how expensive it is to be poor via the cost of boots was a razor-sharp evaluation of socio-economic unfairness. And one that’s all too pertinent today, where our most vulnerable so often bear the brunt of austerity measures and are cast adrift from protection and empathy. Whilst we don’t have Vimes any more, we do have Jack and Dad would be proud to see his work used in such a way.”When harmonica legend Lee Oskar was seven years old and about to enter a new school, his mother gave him a stern warning. “‘If anybody asks what school you’re in, say it’s a religious school,’” Oskar recalled. “Never say ‘Jewish school’. There was always this intense fear about telling anyone I was Jewish.” Her warning came in 1955, a full decade after the defeat of the Nazis, when Oskar’s family was living in Copenhagen, one of the most accepting cities in Europe. But, as the musician says, “that didn’t matter. The fear never goes away.” That’s especially true for families like Oskar’s. His mother and aunt are Holocaust survivors who experienced a litany of terrors as unimaginable as they are undeniable. And, as Oskar says, “those experiences don’t end with the people who survived them. It continues in their children and in future generations.” For Oskar, that meant a constant thrum of dread “that, at any moment, someone could come to my door and shoot me”. The feeling of ambient distress persisted even as Oskar grew to become a key member of one of the most successful and influential bands of the 70s, War. Their hits, from Low Rider to Cisco Kid to The World is a Ghetto, proved so rhythmically inventive and culturally resonant they remain touchstones of pop as well as lodestones of hip-hop sampling. While elements of Oskar’s family history subtly informed his work throughout his career, only now, at 73, has he created an album wholly focused on both the private processing, and the public preservation, of that legacy. An all-instrumental collection titled Never Forget, the album serves as what the musician calls “my musical memoir”. It features a wide palate of sound, from sweeping classical orchestrations and haunting klezmer interludes to intimate sections centered on an oud, a flamenco guitar and Oskar’s own supple harmonica. It’s his first solo work in 25 years, and the one he felt most compelled to create. “If I went to my grave and never expressed the fears and humiliations that have always been in me I would be ashamed of myself,” Oskar says during a Zoom interview from his home near Seattle. “I have a fiduciary responsibility to my art, to humanity and to my family to acknowledge that this happened.” To flesh the story out, pictures of his mother and aunt appear throughout the set’s elaborate packaging. But the full horror, as well as the surprising inspiration, embedded in their story can only be found in a riveting 1999 documentary about his aunt, Judy Meisel, titled Tak for Alt (Danish for “thanks for everything”). The mere outlines of the sisters’ horrific saga include being confined and starved as teenagers in the Kovno ghetto in their native Lithuania, before being sent to the Stutthof concentration camp in Poland where, upon arrival, a female SS officer tore every tuft of hair out of Meisel’s head by hand. At the camp, their mother was murdered in the gas chamber, a fate the sisters escaped by a fluke. From there, the young women endured a death march out of the camp while bombs exploded all around them, as well as a vexing time hiding under assumed names in a nunnery, before making their way to a boat bound for Denmark, which was torpedoed along the way. Oskar’s aunt Judy dedicated her life to speaking out about the sisters’ experiences, in schools, public lectures and for historical projects. She also made sure to connect their story to the American civil rights movement. But Oskar’s mother, Rachel, could never talk about it. “She was too devastated,” he says. “Because she was older than my aunt and so acted like a mother to her, it affected her differently.” At the same time, his mother had a non-verbal way of preserving her story. “She would write over and over again on little scraps of paper the timeline of her life, in Yiddish and Danish and English,” Oskar says. “She wanted people to know ‘I was in this killing camp.’” The experience kept her on perpetual edge. “Even when we watched a cowboy movie as kids, the sight of a gun would trigger her.” The intensity in the family affected Oskar deeply growing up. “There was no joy at home. I don’t think anything in their lives could be embraced the way they should have been.” Oskar began to find his own joy through music, though his parents never encouraged it. “I remember coming home at eight years old with a guitar and bongos we made at school. I was so excited. But it wasn’t like, ‘Oh, sweetheart, that’s nice.’ It was more like ‘What is this? You’re wasting your time.’” Harmonica entered his life as a child. “Every kid got one. The next year, it was the hula-hoop and then it was the yo-yo. But I kept playing harmonica.” The heaviness Oskar felt at home, as well as his ambitions to design a radically different life for himself, prompted him to leave not only his family but his country at 18. First, he came to New York and busked on the streets, before migrating to Los Angeles, where he met the other musicians who would comprise War. He also met Eric Burdon, who was seeking fresh artistic inspiration after the breakup of the Animals in 1969. By that time, Oskar had already changed his birth name, Oskar Levitin, to Lee Oskar, a decision partially driven by the desire to mask his Jewish identity. War released two albums with Burdon, marked by the Latin-tinged pop hit Spill the Wine as well as a growing reputation as an exceptional live act. In September 1970, a headline in NME labelled them “the best live band we’ve ever seen”. The performance that inspired that accolade later became historic for a jam between War and Jimi Hendrix that turned out to be the final performance by the guitarist, who died the next day. “Jimi wasn’t in good shape,” Oskar recalls. “He said to me, ‘Lee, am I playing OK?’” Yet he still managed to deliver some exemplary solos. After Burdon left the band, it looked to some observers like War itself might die. But Oskar says he never doubted a bright future for them given the chemistry between the players, the rarity of their image, and the singular breadth of their sound. Comprising Black, Latin and white members, War drew on R&amp;B, soul, Latin music, rock, pop and jazz. While they racked up a long list of smash singles, their full albums offered a far more expansive sound, rife with elaborate solos and complex rhythms. “If you just heard the singles, you really missed the boat,” says Oskar. A unique factor in War’s sound was the decision to place Oskar’s harmonica in the context of a horn section along with saxophonist Charles Miller. The two players created the 12-note call-and-response in Low Rider that remains one of music’s most recognizable, and coolest, hooks. “We loved to create those counter-melodies,” Oskar says. War’s approach to vocals also stood out, both as a sound and as a symbol. Various members often sang in unison, giving the music the feel of a community in conversation, clamorous but convivial. The effect communicated a message of unity that made War’s sound and sensibility the opposite of its namesake. While still with the band, Oskar began releasing solo albums in 1975 with a self-titled work. By the next year, he was voted the top instrumental artist by Billboard. In 1980, the title track of his album My Road, Our Road, explored some of the themes that would finally come to fruition more than 40 years later on Never Forget. A very different version of the old track My Road serves as the new album’s finale, which is Oskar’s way of extending his relatives’ path through his own. Another song on the new album, Miracle Children, borrows a phrase his aunt Judy often used to describe Oskar, as well as his siblings and cousins, for being the offspring his mother and aunt never expected to have. Though the album uses no words to convey its message, Oskar feels “the music isn’t missing anything. I’m singing with my harmonica.” For Oskar, the creation of the album has had a liberating effect, exorcizing what had haunted and inspired him for so long. Sadly, both his mother and his aunt died before they could hear the final music; Judy Meisel died just this last year at 91. Throughout their lives after the war, the sisters remained alert to the successive waves of Holocaust deniers, and alarmed by the lure of authoritarian regimes, some of which are, again, on the rise in the very areas they escaped 70 years ago. “The horrific things that humanity has done to each other keep repeating,” Oskar says. “No matter how many generations come along, you can never totally overcome it.” Never Forget is released on 28 JanuaryOfficial modelling efforts have been subjected to barrages of criticism throughout the pandemic, from across the political spectrum. No doubt some of that criticism has appeared justified – the result of highly publicised projections that never came to pass. In July 2021, for instance, the newly installed health secretary, Sajid Javid, warned that cases could soon rise above 100,000 a day. His figure was based on modelling from the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, known as SPI-M. One influential SPI-M member, Prof Neil Ferguson, went further and suggested that, following the “freedom day” relaxation of restrictions on 19 July, the 100,000 figure was “almost inevitable” and that 200,000 cases a day was possible. Cases topped out at an average of about 50,000 a day just before “freedom day”, before falling and plateauing between 25,000 and 45,000 for the next four months. It is incredibly easy to criticise a projection that didn’t come true. It’s harder, however, to find out which were the assumptions that made the projection wrong. And, of course, it’s harder still to do that before the projection has been shown to be incorrect. But that is what we ask our modellers to do, and we are quick to complain when their projections do not match reality. Much of the criticism they have received, however, has been misplaced, born out of fundamental misunderstandings of the purpose of mathematical modelling, what it is capable of – and how its results should be interpreted. Mathematical models are predicated on assumptions – how effective the vaccine is, how severe a variant is, what the impact of imposing or lifting whole rafts of mitigations will be. In trying to put a number on even these few unknowns, let alone the tens or even hundreds of others needed to represent reality, modellers are often searching in the dark with weak torches. That is why broad ranges of scenarios are modelled, and why strict caveats about the uncertainty in the potential outcomes typically accompany modelling reports. Mathematicians will be the first to tell you that the output of their models are “projections” predicated on their assumptions, not “predictions” to be viewed with certainty. To be fair to him, when Ferguson suggested the figure of 200,000 cases a day, he placed it in the context of the substantial uncertainty surrounding the projection. “And that’s where the crystal ball starts to fail,” he said, “… it’s much less certain.” Unfortunately, such caveats often get lost when modelling is simplified and turned into attention-grabbing headlines. One accusation levelled at UK modelling is that projections are often presented in the media with insufficient accompanying context. While it isn’t always possible to expect modellers who are working flat-out to find time to do media rounds, the resulting communication vacuum can leave results open to misinterpretation or exploitation by bad-faith actors. Critics of modelling also fail to acknowledge that highly publicised projections can become self-defeating prophecies. Top of the list of the Spectator’s “The ten worst Covid data failures” in the autumn of 2020 was “Overstating of the number of people who are going to die”. The article referred to the fact that Imperial College modellers’ infamous projection – that the UK would see 250,000 deaths in the absence of tighter measures – never came to pass. The Imperial model is widely credited with causing people to change their behaviour and with eventually ushering in the first UK lockdown a week later, thus averting its own alarming projections. Given that the UK has already passed 175,000 Covid deaths, it isn’t hard to imagine that upwards of 250,000 could have died as the result of an unmitigated epidemic wave. There have been scenarios in which modellers have taken missteps. Modellers often attempt to answer questions about subjects on which they are not experts. They need to collaborate closely with individuals and organisations who have relevant expertise. When considering care homes in the first wave of the pandemic, for instance, a number of salient risk factors – including the role of agency staff covering multiple care homes – were known to industry practitioners but were not anticipated by the mathematicians. These considerations meant that recommendations based on the modelling may have been unsound. There were more than 27,000 excess deaths in care homes during the first wave of the pandemic in England and Wales. Data sharing between modelling groups has also been identified as an area that needs improvement. Early on in the pandemic, unequal access to data and poor communication were implicated in modelling results that suggested the UK’s epidemic trajectory was further behind Italy than it was, possibly contributing to a delay in our first lockdown. In these respects the pandemic has been a very public learning process for mathematicians. Every time someone interprets data – from professional mathematicians and politicians to the general public – they are using a model, whether they acknowledge it or not. The difference is that good modellers are upfront about the assumptions that influence their outcomes. If you don’t agree with the underlying assumptions then you should feel free to take issue with the projections – but dismissing conclusions because they don’t fit a worldview is naive, at best. Despite these reservations, modelling remains the best tool we have to predict the future. It provides a framework to formalise our assumptions about the scenarios we are trying to represent and to suggest what might happen under different policy options. It is always a better option than relying on the gut feelings, “common sense” or plain old wishful thinking that would replace it. Kit Yates is director of the Centre for Mathematical Biology at the University of Bath and author of The Maths of Life and DeathPolice said the family of a five-year-old boy who was killed in Coventry are “devastated”, as a 49-year-old woman who was known to them was arrested on suspicion of murder. Police were called to the Earlsdon area of the city just after 5pm on Tuesday where the boy, who was just short of his sixth birthday, was found with “significant injuries”. Officers confirmed that the woman they had arrested was known to the family. Supt Ronan Tyrer, from West Midlands police, said that despite extensive efforts from police officers and paramedics, “unfortunately nothing could be done to save him”. “The boy’s parents are being supported by family liaison officers during this heartbreaking time,” he said. He added that officers were called to a local Co-op shop as part of the incident. Police said the 49-year-old woman remained in custody, and that they were not looking for anyone else. Tyrer asked the public to show consideration for the family of the boy, who were “clearly devastated”, and asked people to “consider the impact images shared on social media can have” and not to share posts containing speculation about the death. The incident took place on Poplar Road in Coventry, which runs parallel to the street where an armed man barricaded himself in his home with his eight-year-old son earlier this month. “This is the second incident is as many weeks, unfortunately,” Tyrer said. “The two incidents are completely unrelated, and a significant police presence will remain in the area.”Trevor Noah Late-night hosts assessed a hot mic moment for Joe Biden on Monday, in which the president insulted a Fox News reporter. At the tail end of a press conference, Fox News’s White House correspondent, Peter Doocy, asked whether Biden viewed inflation as a potential political liability ahead of the midterms this year. His rostrum microphone still on, Biden was heard responding, sarcastically, “that’s a great asset. More inflation. What a stupid son of a bitch.” “This is what happens when you’ve been on Zoom calls for two years,” said Trevor Noah on Tuesday’s Daily Show. “You forget that real life doesn’t have a mute button. “Now a lot of people are asking if Biden even knew that the microphone was on, but guys please, come on. He’s sitting there talking into a giant microphone, so there’s at least a 50-50 chance he knew it was there.” As for people online dunking on Doocy for asking a stupid question – “they’re right,” said Noah. “‘Do you think inflation is a political liability?’ is a very stupid question. I mean, what’s Biden supposed to say? ‘No, I think people like spending more money to buy the same shit!’ “I mean, if you get to ask the president a question, you should ask him real questions, like ‘why can’t the CDC get its messaging straight on Covid?’ Or ‘can you ask your dog to stop chewing my arm?’” Noah also addressed people who have used the moment to compare Biden’s contempt for Doocy to Donald Trump’s well-established animosity toward the press. “I’m sorry, guys, no. I can’t accept that. I cannot believe that someone would even say something so disrespectful about my man Donald Jiujitsu Trump,” he joked. “Biden dropped one off-handed diss on a reporter, he’s no legend. Attacking the press was Donald Trump’s thing. Shit, you can’t compare these two, it’s like comparing Steph Curry to a random guy who makes one half-court shot during halftime. Show some respect!” Stephen Colbert On The Late Show, Stephen Colbert also commented on Biden’s frustration with Doocy. “The media has described this moment as a ‘hot mic’, but I’m not sure how it’s a hot mic when he’s at a press conference in front of a bunch of reporters talking into the same microphone he’s been using the entire time. “That’s like a celebrity walking the red carpet, poppin’ open their shirt and going, ‘Oops! Nip slip.’ “It’s never appropriate for the president of the United States to have a potty mouth, but it’s especially egregious to call Peter Doocy a son of a bitch,” Colbert joked, as Doocy is the son of the Fox &amp; Friends host Steve Doocy. “So if anything, he’s a son of a Dooce. A real Dooce-bag, if you will. “On the other hand, he has tested positive for stupid in the past,” he added, pointing to a 2017 clip in which Senator John McCain responded to one of Doocy’s questions with: “Why would you ask something that stupid? Why would you ask something that dumb?” Jimmy Kimmel And in Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel checked in on “the unfortunate punching bag when it comes to Covid”, AKA the White House infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci. Last week, the New York Post, “looking for anything that they can sink their teeth into”, posted several tweets calling the White House infectious disease expert a “narcissist.” “This is what they do when they want to say something but they don’t want to say it – they post tweets that say it,” Kimmel said. As evidence, the paper cited a photo of Fauci’s home office, which includes a self-portrait and bobblehead of himself. “If having a bunch of pictures and bobbleheads of yourself makes you a narcissist, then buckle up, New York Post, because you are not going to like what we found out about this guy,” Kimmel said, pointing to a picture of Donald Trump’s Donald Trump-adorned office. In other disappointing news for the former president, Kimmel pointed to a new analysis of social media impressions by Axios, which found that the most talked about politician online was the Texas senator Ted Cruz, followed by congresswomen Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Marjorie Taylor Greene and Rashida Tlaib. Trump was seventh on the list, behind Nancy Pelosi. “Wow, good thing Trump doesn’t care about polls and publicity and ratings and stuff like that,” Kimmel joked. “He’s six spots behind Ted Cruz. He’s six spots behind a snowman made of mayonnaise.”It’s been long enough since 2016’s Uncharted 4: A Thief’s End came out that I kind of missed Nathan Drake, the breezy, globetrotting, treasure-hunting star of the Uncharted series. In contrast to developer Naughty Dog’s other PlayStation series The Last of Us, a rather harrowing post-apocalyptic meditation on human darkness, Uncharted is a straightforwardly fun and light-hearted action-movie story. You never have to think too hard about what you’re doing or why, and as long as you can surrender your will to the game – for there is little room for improvisation in these climbing puzzles, shootouts and well-acted story scenes – you’ll have a good time. Back then I was ready to see the back of Nathan Drake. His quips had started to feel predictable, the Indiana Jones setpieces of his global adventures – collapsing ledges, trap-filled tombs, cursed treasure – even more so. This game is a farewell to him, wringing a surprising amount of pathos from the cast and their relationships to each other (particularly Nathan and his wife, Elena, who share an adorable scene in front of a PlayStation in their front room in the opening hours that still hits just as well now). This series had run out of road, with no further far-flung corners of the world or secret character backstories to explore, and in retrospect it is easier to appreciate this as a victory tour for a developer that really mastered the blockbuster cinematic action game. Then there’s 2017’s Uncharted: The Lost Legacy, also a part of this re-release package, a spin-off starring two of the series’ female characters that really became its own thing: a kind of high-octane buddy movie carried brilliantly by its stars Chloe (Claudia Black) and Nadine (Laura Bailey). The action might be largely the same, but it showed what new stars can bring to a series as character-driven as this. The premise is still a twisty-turny treasure hunt, but the action is exhilarating and the whole thing is over in six to eight or so hours; a snappier playtime that actually serves the story better. Playing it again, I actually wanted more. The improvements that this rerelease brings to the two games feel minor. You can feel the impact of gunshots and cliff-grabs through the PS5’s superlative controller rumble; I played around with the framerate and resolution, switching between different performance modes on a giant TV, and though the difference was noticeable, it was not transformational. They always were gorgeous games. Given that Uncharted 4 is already available on PlayStation 5 as part of a wee free collection of PlayStation classics for all PlayStation Plus subscribers, it’s hard to argue that this is an essential purchase for anyone who’s played these games before. If they passed you by at the time, though, this is the best way to experience two different spins on the same bombastic action game – adventures that remind us why characters such as Nathan Drake (and his spiritual predecessor Lara Croft) suit video games so well. Uncharted: Legacy of Thieves Collection is out on 28 January on PlayStation 5; £42.99. A PC version will arrive later this year.DRAW A CURTAIN OVER IT This current transfer window hasn’t been particularly interesting, has it? There’s been such a lack of real drama that it’s less likely to slam shut next Monday evening than gently mist over, whereupon The Fiver will grasp the opportunity to draw a peepee and balls on it with its finger, as well as maybe some rude words starting with the letters eff and jeff, and yes we are an arm of one of the world’s leading broadsheet newspapers, but what else are you gonna do when presented with a steamy pane of glass? Peepee and balls, that’s right. Hey, we don’t write these rules, we just live our lives. To be fair to Newcastle United, they’re trying their best to whip up some action. From the get-go this January, they pimped their shopping trolley real good, priming it for a supermarket sweep of talent, with square wheels that squeak when they turn, a horn that blasts glitter when you honk it, the works. They’ve already landed a crossing specialist who couldn’t register an assist against Cambridge United, and Chris Wood, and now they’re closing in on a deal for Brighton defender Dan Burn, whose Robert Wadlowesque stature should make things a little easier for poor old Kieran, if nothing else. The Toon are also on the verge of completing the transfer from Lyon of defensive midfielder Bruno Guimarães, a third clean sheet of the season suddenly much less of a pipe dream. However it’s not all good news, as their hope of signing Manchester United’s Jesse Lingard and Sevilla centre-back Diego Carlos have hit the skids, both clubs in question eyeing Newcastle’s bulging wallet and requesting the moon on a stick. Still, with five days to go before the mist finally descends, anything may yet happen. Rumours that Eddie Howe is preparing a £864m bid for one of John Terry’s deeply suspicious non-fungible apes, gaslighting that makes The Fiver’s window-based art look positively intellectual, have not to date been denied. QUOTE OF THE DAY “We need to find ways to include the whole world to give hope to Africans so that they don’t need to cross the Mediterranean in order to find maybe a better life but, more probably, death in the sea” – yes, it’s Fifa president and moral vacuum Gianni Infantino giving his lowest reason yet why there should be biennial World Cups. FIVER LETTERS “I was standing at Turf Moor in 1956. I watched players on a living wage win the First Division trophy. I watched classmates grieve when their team was wiped out in the Munich air disaster. And for years, like millions of others, I invested time, soul and money following my heroes. However, after moving to Australia I began to view English football through a telescope and saw organisations run by old men with no imagination punishing fans with punitive points deductions, before returning to their coffins in a Stephen King graveyard, bony hands poking up into the moonlight, clutching phones with last messages to the elite clubs: ‘That’s fine, you go ahead.’ Not much reward for this soul’s investment. The glossed-over stench is palpable planet-wide” – Bruce Ellis. “Hate to be a pedant. In your rundown of Watford managers (yesterday’s Fiver), did The Fiver omit Morris Dancing Fiver?” – Steve Mintz. “Statisticians have worked out that, by the year 2035, one in three of us will have managed Watford” – John Myles. “I slept for 12 hours last night, was I Watford manager for a time?” – Brendan Donnelly. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Bruce Ellis. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS The Zimbabwe FA (Zifa) and Fifa have been accused of “going silent” over allegations that female referees were sexually harassed by Zifa officials. Serge Mombo, a leading football official in Gabon, has been arrested after being accused of sexually abusing young players and demanding sex as a condition of them securing places in national teams. Liverpool forward Sadio Mané suffered a concussion scare while helping Senegal book their place in the quarter-finals of the Africa Cup of Nations with a 2-0 win over nine-man Cape Verde, prompting a fresh warning from brain injury charity Headway. The Premier League’s rules have been tweaked again so clubs must have at least four Covid-19 cases in their squad to apply for a postponement. Arsenal striker Vivianne Miedema has got her chat on with PSG and Barcelona over a potential transfer when her contract ends in the summer. Spray paint sales in Liverpool have gone up after Vítor Pereira emerged as Farhad Moshiri’s favoured choice to oversee the fun and games of a survival fight with Everton. Ipswich co-owner Brett Johnson celebrated the 2-0 win over Wimbledon so hard that he left himself looking like a poundshop Terry Butcher. “Let’s just say it was worth the three points and didn’t take away from the joy of my celebration,” grinned Johnson, before heading off to hospital to get stitched up. And trust Big Website to jinx it for Eastleigh. After going almost a year without a win, Dover Athletic only went and beat them 1-0. “We said it might be our night … we might need to win ugly and we did,” growled boss Andy Hessenthaler. “We have deserved to win at least one of the games over this period. My mate said the other day ‘Do you think you will ever win a game?’ and I couldn’t say positively that we would. We can’t get carried away … but I’ll have a couple of beers and sleep well tonight.” STILL WANT MORE? “Why did people have to die?” Supporters and survivors talk of the chaotic scenes that left eight dead after a crush outside the Olembe Stadium. Ivory Coast v Egypt has a climactic feel but don’t expect the goals of their Afcon match of 2008, writes Jonathan Wilson. “Forget Big Ron or Big Sam. It is Big Roy that a struggling club needs.” Dave Hytner on why Watford persuaded the oldest Premier League manager in history to swap his dressing gown for a big padded coat. Barney Ronay on why we need to look down for the real drama in the Premier League this season. What is the best goal difference of a team not promoted? The Knowledge knows. Ten stories to follow into the wind-down of this transfer window, from Ben McAleer. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! EIGHT YEARS AGO TODAY: OH JOSÉThis assiduous survey of the life and career of the actor Boris Karloff gracefully acknowledges that he will always be welded in the public imagination to his role as the monster in the classic 1931 adaptation of Frankenstein. However, this documentary has a lot more to say about his long and quite fascinating acting career, which he began in the silent era as a handsome action man (“a French-Canadian trapper type,” the voiceover calls him, like that’s a thing) and saw him become a considerable box-office draw for the many horror films he made in the 1930s and 40s. By the end, he was a sweetly self-spoofing TV host and icon happy to do cameo roles in cheerful horror schlock despite his increasing physical frailty, and made an indelible impression on many generations with his deep, velvety voice as the title character of the 1966 animated version of How the Grinch Stole Christmas. In addition to offering a solid biographical survey that traces Karloff, born William Henry Pratt, back to his troubled childhood as the son of Anglo-Indian parents, director Thomas Hamilton has assembled an impressive roster of interviewees with smart, perceptive things to say about Karloff’s work and the context of the times. The canniest comments come from film directors who either worked with him (including the very recently deceased Peter Bogdanovich, who directed him in one of his last films, Targets, in 1968) or deeply understand the nature of horror films, such as Guillermo del Toro, Joe Dante, and John Landis. In addition, Karloff’s daughter Sara remembers her father fondly, and a deep bench of film scholars (illustrious silent film expert Kevin Brownlow, walking film encyclopaedia Leonard Maltin) are on hand to dispense acute observations and trivia. Altogether this is one huge knowledge bomb, and given the depth of research and rich store of archive material, it’s a shame that the original parts of the documentary are so shonky – too many green screens, for example, behind interviewees for no discernible gain. Visually, it feels very much like a cable-channel schedule filler, or a DVD box-set extra, which is possibly exactly what it was meant to be. • Boris Karloff: The Man Behind the Monster is available on 27 January on Shudder.Astronomers have discovered a mysterious object emitting a radio wave beam that pulsed every 20 minutes. The team behind the discovery believe the object could be a new class of slowly rotating neutron star with an ultra-powerful magnetic field. The repeating signals were detected during the first three months of 2018, but then disappeared, suggesting they were linked to a dramatic, one-off event, such as a starquake. “It was kind of spooky for an astronomer because there’s nothing known in the sky that does that,” said Dr Natasha Hurley-Walker, from the Curtin University node of the International Centre for Radio Astronomy Research, who led the team that made the discovery. Despite the unusual nature of the signal, the team believe the source is likely to be a spinning object rather than a technologically advanced civilisation reaching out across the cosmos. “It’s definitely not aliens,” said Hurley-Walker. The team briefly considered this possibility, but ruled it out after determining that the signal – one of the brightest radio sources in the sky – was detectable across a broad spectrum of frequencies, meaning that an immense amount of energy would have been required to produce it. The object, believed to be about 4,000 light years away in the plane of the Milky Way, also matches a predicted astronomical object called an “ultra-long period magnetar”, a class of neutron star with the most powerful magnetic field of any known object in the universe. “It’s a type of slowly spinning neutron star that has been predicted to exist, theoretically,” said Hurley-Walker. “But nobody expected to directly detect one like this because we didn’t expect them to be so bright.” A neutron star is the dark, dense remnant left behind after a supermassive star casts off its outer material in a supernova and undergoes gravitational collapse. Reduced to the size of a small city, neutron stars initially spin incredibly quickly – just as a figure skater accelerates in a spin as they pull their arms in to be more compact. Fast-spinning neutron stars are detectable as pulsars that flash on and off within milliseconds or seconds. Over time, the neutron star would lose energy and slow down. “But as they slow down you’d expect them to fade away,” said Prof Andrew Norton, an astrophysicist at Open University. “Once they drop below a theoretical calculation known as the death line, you shouldn’t be able to see them.” Astronomers are perplexed as to why the newly found object – if it is a magnetar – was still emitting enough energy to be detectable when it was observed between January and March 2018. “Somehow it’s converting magnetic energy to radio waves much more effectively than anything we’ve seen before,” said Hurley-Walker. Another question is why the signal then vanished. One possibility is that the signals are linked to a transient event such as a starquake, in which the neutron star’s incredibly dense crust undergoes a sudden adjustment releasing a large blast of energy into space and, potentially, repeated pulses of radio waves after the event. The findings are published in the journal Nature.Coronavirus has stopped us in our tracks and forced us to rethink our position as the rulers of the world. You could say it has done us a favour. An invisible enemy has challenged our treatment of the non-human world and the planet we share. For about 2,000 years most humans have imagined themselves to be the Earth’s “apex predators” – smarter, faster and more deadly than any other creature with which we share the planet. An article in a 2018 special issue of Scientific American praised our species for “the richness of our subjective experience” and “better cognitive skills and bigger brains” – although elephants have bigger brains and no one has worked out how to measure the “subjective experience” of non-human animals. Our species has not always been so conceited. If we go back 200,000 years, we would find the earliest Homo sapiens acting more like rabbits than lions – shivering at the sound of rustling in the tall grass and huddling at the sight of a pack of hyenas. How much of our existence as a species was spent battling and dodging more dangerous animals we do not know, but the (usually) men who conquered the marauding beasts were often memorialised in myth. Humans did not rise from their beleaguered status to anything resembling global dominance in a single leap. For many centuries, “civilised” or urban states embraced religions in which humans and non-human animals appeared to be more or less equals. At least in myth, they could speak to and understand each other, mate and quarrel with each other and, most clearly in the case of the Roman and Greek gods, behave like the lead stars in a reality show. Only with the arrival of monotheism, roughly between 1200BC and AD700, did the unique gods of each polity acquire names and something like personalities – Jaweh, Jesus and Allah. As these monotheistic super-gods grew and incorporated the attributes once spread among the many gods of polytheistic religions, they became more abstract and removed from the material world – to the point where that material world began to seem inferior and even disgusting, as illustrated by a bishop who educated his congregation by pulling out every feather, one by one, from a sparrow to punish it for being a “devil”, ie a non-human, a bird. Hinduism was far more tolerant, making no spiritual distinction between human beings and other life forms. The Covid pandemic presents us with a particularly sharp difference between two of the species populating Earth: on the one hand, the complexity of the human species, with its overgrown brain and its mobile limbs; and on the other hand, the simplicity of a microbe or sub-microbial particle such as a virus, which has evolved to prey on creatures larger than itself. In the late 19th century, humans, who had fought megafauna as predators and prey and had gone on to fight each other, confronted for the first time the invisible enemies that frequently attacked them and their children. Leading European scientists, notably Louis Pasteur, proved that diseases could be spread from one vessel to another, while the Dutch microbiologist Martinus Beijerinck identified infectious agents he called viruses. Over the course of millennia, a pyramid of antagonistic creatures had arisen on our planet, ranging in size from viruses to bacteria to the cells that comprise whole living bodies. Humans have learned to make use of some of these tiny beings, for example in food production and medicine, but now we find ourselves in a less powerful position. We must, belatedly, come to an accommodation. This will involve rethinking the idea of our supremacy. There is hope for a more equitable arrangement between the Earth’s species. In 2012, an international conference in Cambridge, Consciousness in Human and Non-Human Animals, issued a “formal acknowledgment that many non-human animals, including mammals, birds and cephalopods, also possess ‘the neurological substrates that generate consciousness’”. This was, in its own way, a thunderous shift in human consciousness, which had so far given no quarter to the idea that non-human animals are capable of imagination, curiosity and other human-like traits. It raised a multitude of questions about humanity’s position in the world. What did the conference-goers mean by “consciousness”? And why were scientists only now discovering animal consciousness, after generations of putting animals to work in their laboratories as sources of tissues and cells? What are the ethics of using animals, and who should decide? Perhaps the philosophical questions are the easiest to answer, and they are not easy at all. The practical questions are harder. Can we share the Earth with our fellow earthlings? What happens to the non-human animals incarcerated in feedlots and abattoirs? How will humans subsist if large chunks of the planet are “rewilded” for optimal animal life? We may be on the verge of making peace with our planet-mates, we may finally see the moral as well as practical reasons for doing so, but can we work out how? The burden of initiating “peace talks” between humans and non-humans no doubt lies with us. It is our kind that emptied the once crowded rivers and plains, who silenced the chatter of the forests and ploughed the grassy fields. We have a lot to learn from each other – assuming of course that the non-humans among us are still willing to make contact with creatures as bloody-minded as we have proved to be. And the first thing we humans will have to learn – the foundation of everything else – is humility. Barbara Ehrenreich is the founding editor of the Economic Hardship Reporting ProjectI had an unpleasant experience on Saturday afternoon, just a fleeting moment with a nasty aftertaste I can’t shake off. I had parked in a municipal pay-and-display car park in Smethwick near West Brom’s ground. I was trying to make sense of the rules, regulations, charges, methods of payment etc, when a woman of south Asian heritage puzzling over the same things asked me in a strong Black Country accent if I had any change. I said I was afraid I didn’t. I busied myself on my phone looking for the correct app with which to pay the correct amount for the correct parking location. As I was doing so, the woman approached me again with a question. She asked if you had to pay for the parking before you did your shopping, or afterwards. She had thought it was the latter, so had just bought a ticket that showed an exit time an hour away. I told her she had probably made a mistake. She said to me she was an idiot. I told her not to be hard on herself. She said I should use her ticket. I said I’d pay for it. She said there was no need. I insisted, then found a pound coin deep in my pocket, which was a mite embarrassing, given I’d just told her I didn’t have any change. She didn’t seem to make the connection. I gave her the pound and thanked her. She said she’d give me some change. I said there was no need, but she insisted. She gave me some change. We both laughed. I said that if all this went on much longer, I would miss kick-off. And off we went in the direction of the rest of our lives. So far, so perfectly nice. Then, as I set out for the ground, the window of a car came down to reveal an old, genial-looking white man wearing a West Brom scarf. In his Black Country accent, he said to me: “You want to be careful you don’t catch something from her; they’re not vaccinated around here, that lot.” There is so much that is casually horrible going on there that I don’t know where to start. The words “catch something” and “that lot” are probably key. And there’s also the distressing truth that, although he was apparently familiar with my work on radio and television, he had concluded I’d be open to such talk. Or perhaps I am overthinking this: maybe simply being the same colour as him was green light enough for this gentleman to share his thoughts with me. After all, the colour of this nice woman’s skin had been as much information about her as he felt he needed to help himself to whatever assumptions he fancied. All I felt I knew for sure about her was that paying for parking wasn’t her strongest suit. I called an old friend of mine, a brilliant woman who works in community relations in the area. She sighed a sigh she’d sighed many a time before, by the sound of it. “None of that surprises me,” she said. “There’s stuff in the papers and it’s just more fuel on the fire for people who want to be divided. That’s not to say there isn’t a problem with vaccine takeup in some communities but none of this helps. The point is, he’s looked at her and decided what he’s decided and, worryingly, has felt able to voice it. It’s a nonsense. For all he knew, she was triple-vaccinated and working as a doctor or nurse or whatever.” So what did I do? Not much, I’m afraid. I was as shocked as my friend had been wearily unsurprised. When he recognised me and started to speak, I half-smiled, which I turned into a non-smile when I heard what he had to say. And I just walked away. I said nothing. I wish I’d had a quiet word. Adrian Chiles is a broadcaster, writer and Guardian columnistVaccination could reduce the risk of long Covid, research by the Office for National Statistics suggests. The study, of more than 6,000 adults, found those who were double-vaccinated had a 41% lower likelihood of self-reporting Covid symptoms 12 weeks after first testing positive. Overall, 9.5% of the double-vaccinated group reported experiencing long Covid, defined as symptoms lasting more than four weeks, compared with 14.6% of a socio-demographically matched group who were unvaccinated. Dr David Strain, a clinical senior lecturer at the University of Exeter medical school and the British Medical Association’s lead on long Covid, said the ONS findings fitted with research published this week that showed low levels of certain antibodies were more common in those who developed long Covid than in patients who swiftly recovered. “We know that the vaccines trigger these immune responses,” he said. “If you approach a Covid infection with higher levels of these immunoglobulins, it’s less likely to [become long Covid].” Strain added that it was reassuring that vaccination appeared to mitigate the risk of long Covid. A limitation of the study was that, because of the timing of the vaccination programme, the double-vaccinated participants were sampled at a later time point – 238 days on average – than those in the unvaccinated group. So changes in dominant Covid variants in circulation and other factors that varied over the course of the pandemic could have influenced the results. The study was also observational and, while the two groups were matched for age and other socio-economic factors, there may have been other differences between the groups, meaning the study could not conclusively prove that vaccination caused the different rates of illness. Separately, the ONS found that differences in death rates between people from different ethnic backgrounds have persisted since the start of the vaccination programme, with the rate of death involving Covid highest for the Bangladeshi group (five times greater than the white British group for males, and 4.5 greater for females), followed by the Pakistani group (3.1 for males, 2.6 for females) and black Africans (2.4 for males, 1.7 for females). In most cases, the different rates were explained by where people lived, social disadvantage, occupation, overall health and vaccination status. However, the Bangladeshi group and Pakistani men remained at higher risk than average even after adjusting for these factors. Previous research highlighted a gene, more common in south Asian populations, that could place this group at higher risk from Covid. Vahé Nafilyan, of the ONS, said: “Today’s analysis shows that since the vaccination programme began, the risk of Covid-19 death has continued to be higher in most ethnic minority groups than in the white British group. For the first time, we show that the lower vaccination coverage in some ethnic groups also contributes to the elevated risk of Covid-19 death, particularly in the black African and black Caribbean groups.” The latest data from the ONS, based on swabs collected from randomly selected households, suggests that Covid infection levels fell in England, Wales and Scotland last week, although the trend was unclear in Northern Ireland. The estimates suggest about 2,629,400 people, or about 1 in 20, in England had Covid in the week ending 22 January. The study also shows that while infection levels are falling in most age groups, they are rising in school-age children. Similar findings have been reported in other research, including the React-1 study, the latest results of which were released on Wednesday by Imperial College London. According to ONS figures for the week ending 22 January, the percentage of those testing positive for Covid increased in England among children between the age of two and school year 6, as well as for those in school year 7-11, with almost 12% of the former and more than 6% of the latter testing positive. While some scientists have called for renewed efforts to vaccinate adolescents and expand the programme to all children aged five and above, others have emphasised that Covid is generally a mild infection for the age group and that there is a tight risk-benefit involved.Federal prosecutors have launched an investigation into the attempt by Republicans in seven presidential battleground states won by Joe Biden in 2020 to subvert the election result by sending bogus slates of Donald Trump electors to Congress. The ploy was one of the central tactics used by Trump loyalists as part of the “big lie” that he had defeated his Democratic challenger. The fake slates of electors were forwarded to congressional leaders, who then came under pressure to delay certification of Biden’s victory on 6 January 2021, the day of the Capitol insurrection. In an interview on CNN, the deputy attorney general, Lisa Monaco, revealed that the justice department has begun an investigation into what she called the “fraudulent elector certifications”. She said the department had received referrals on the matter and “our prosecutors are looking at those”. Monaco added: “We are going to follow the facts and the law wherever they lead to address conduct of any kind and at any level that is part of an assault on our democracy.” Fake slates of Trump electors were sent to Congress from seven states in fact won by Biden – Arizona, Georgia, Michigan, New Mexico, Nevada, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. Of those, two – New Mexico and Pennsylvania – added the caveat that the Trump electors should only be counted in the event of a disputed election. The other five states sent signed statements to Washington giving the appearance that Trump had won despite clear and verified counts placing Biden on top. Under America’s arcane presidential election system, US presidents are not chosen directly by voters but indirectly through electoral college votes meted out state by state. Official certificates naming the electors for the winning candidate in each state are then sent to Washington to be certified, in this case on 6 January, when hundreds of violent Trump supporters stormed the Capitol building in an attempt to disrupt the process. Earlier this month the pro-democracy group American Oversight obtained under freedom of information laws the bogus certificates from all seven states in which Republicans attempted to overturn the election result. The certificate from Georgia, one of the most hotly contested states in 2020, reads: “We, the undersigned, being the duly elected and qualified electors for president and vice president of the United States of America from the state of Georgia …” The fake statement then carries the names and signatures of 16 fake electors who claimed falsely to have cast their electoral college votes for Trump when in fact they had no legal standing to do so. The move was in direct contravention to the actual vote in Georgia, confirmed in multiple counts, which Biden won by 11,779 votes. Democratic attorneys general in at least two of the seven states – New Mexico and Michigan – have now asked federal prosecutors to examine whether drawing up the bogus certificates amounted to a crime. Their referrals appear to have triggered the DoJ’s investigation. The fact that Republicans left a paper trail by sending their phony certificates to both Congress and the National Archives suggest that they may now face legal peril. The House committee investigating the January 6 insurrection has also recently begun to focus on the fake Trump electors, and particularly those who organized the plot. A figure of special interest is Rudy Giuliani, who acted as a lawyer for the Trump campaign and who has been reported to have spearheaded the fake elector strategy. The January 6 committee sent Giuliani a subpoena letter earlier this month specifically referring to his efforts instigating the ploy. Another area of intense interest is the draft letter prepared in December 2020 by Jeffrey Clark, a relatively lowly justice department official, who tried to persuade Georgia and six other states won by Biden to call back their electors from Congress and consider replacing them with Trump electors. The letter was never officially sent after the acting US attorney general, Jeffrey Rosen, refused to play ball. The fake electors tactic was also central to the election subversion strategy laid out for Trump by the conservative lawyer John Eastman. In a now notorious two-page memo handed to Trump and the then vice-president, Mike Pence, in the Oval Office, Eastman argued that Pence could block the certification of Biden’s victory on 6 January. Pence had the constitutional role of presiding over the joint session of Congress that would certify the election results – a process usually considered purely ceremonial. But Eastman advised him that when he opened the electoral college ballot from Arizona he should announce that “he has multiple slates of electors, and so is going to defer decision on that”. By “multiple slates”, Eastman was referring to the official slate of electors returned by Arizona in favor of Biden who won the state by 10,457 votes and the fake slate of Trump electors that is now under federal investigation.Following the amazing dental surgery performed on Goldie the pufferfish on Monday, we would like to hear from vets and pet owners about unusual surgery on pets. Did an extraordinary operation save your pet’s life? How are they faring now? How much did the operation cost? And if you’re a vet we’d like to hear about any remarkable operations that you may have carried out. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.“I think it’s real,” Curtin University student Tyrone O’Doherty told his supervisors when he spotted the anomaly. And it was real, as it turns out. The object beaming out from space was also “spooky”, and “in our galactic back yard”. An Australian team studying the universe’s radio waves has discovered a new type of beam that comes and goes, one of the brightest radio sources in the sky. The details of the discovery were published in Nature on Thursday. When something in space switches on and off it’s called a “transient”. It might come from a pulsar, which flashes on and off in milliseconds or seconds. Or a supernova that might appear for a few days before disappearing again. “What we found, though, is something that switches on and off every 20 minutes,” astrophysicist Dr Natasha Hurley-Walker said. “It was kind of spooky for an astronomer because there’s nothing known in the sky that does that. And it’s really quite close to us – about 4,000 light years away. It’s in our galactic backyard.” Hurley-Walker is from the International Centre for Radio Astronomy Research’s Curtin University node. She was also O’Doherty’s supervisor, and the lead author on the Nature article. She uses the Murchison Widefield Array in outback Western Australia, a radio telescope, to survey the sky. For his honours thesis, O’Doherty joined her team and had created some coding software to search through data for transients. “He found something,” she said. Pictures from the array show the Milky Way, with a bright dot marking the location of the object. “Just to the right, there’s a source that is a supermassive black hole, throwing jets of radio waves into space at nearly the speed of light. “Admittedly, it’s further away. But this radio transient that we saw is about as bright as that. So that’s really extreme. And we did not expect to find anything so bright.” Using the frequencies of the radio waves, she worked out the object is not very far away – as space goes. Its behaviour matches something that has been predicted to exist, but never observed – an “ultra-long period magnetar”, a type of slowly spinning neutron star. Or it could be that a collapsed star became a white dwarf pulsar, but that is very unlikely. Whatever it is, it’s “really extreme physics”, Hurley-Walker said. “And, of course, it could be something that we’ve never even thought of.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning For O’Doherty, creating the software was the thesis – actually using it to find the object was a bonus. “In the closing weeks of the project I was going through them to see if I had anything real … I found this one candidate that looked real at first,” said O’Doherty, who is now doing his PhD. “I kept doing more and more tests and it kept continuing to appear real, which was awesome. Then I detected it again. I 100% confirmed it was real and not just a one-off thing.” Hurley-Walker said the mission was now to try to find more of the objects. Meanwhile, the world’s largest radio telescope is being built, with the low-frequency part of it destined for the WA desert. That will mean far more data and more discoveries. “We will be making new discoveries, things we didn’t predict, all the time,” Hurley-Walker said. “The universe is full of wonders.”Subsidence from an underground coalmine is leading to extensive surface cracking in a supposedly protected region of New South Wales, stoking locals’ fears that rare rock formations could end up as rubble. Centennial Coal officials are scheduled to meet government regulators on Thursday to discuss remediation for the extensive fracturing of stunning weathered sandstone shapes and cliffs within the 3,650 hectare Mugii Murum-Ban state conservation area, near Capertee, north-west of Sydney. The miner concedes the cracks exceed permitted levels. Repairing the damage “is very hard”, said Mary Thirlwall, a resident involved in landcare who has helped raise the alarm. “You can’t jack up a mountain, you know, or fill in the cracks really that easily.” Whether Centennial receives any penalty for breaching the terms of its planning approval for the Mount Airly mine is being watched closely by conservation groups. Its many unusual rocks have been described as the “three hundred sisters”, echoing the more famous “three sisters” at Katoomba in the Blue Mountains. The nearby Gardens of Stone, a larger area of the remarkable, pagoda-like structures, was granted similar state conservation status last November. It too has had coalmining underneath and faces other development threats if tourism projects take off. Centennial has been approved to mine in the Mount Airly region out to 2037. The next stage within the Mugii Murum-Ban area would be to extract coal under the adjacent Genowlan mesa, an even larger rocky landscape that could be more vulnerable to cliff collapses if there is similar fracturing as that at Mount Airly, according to Thirlwall. “Airly and Genowlan are just iconic mesas,” she said. “It’s just a very special area.” A visit last weekend to explore for fractures found extensive fresh cracks, many of them marked out by equipment set up to monitor subsidence impacts after coal had been removed from seams about 300m below. Some of the fractures extended dozens if not 100m or more, splitting huge boulders and also more delicate rock features. “It’s scary how high we are above the mine, and it’s still cracking,” said Yuri Bolotin, a leading Blue Mountains and Wollemi conservationist and author of many guides, including a newly published one on Mugii Murum-Ban, A Bushwalking Paradise. “This whole thing could come down, and become a pile of rubble,” he said, standing in front of extensive cracks that had working their way up an entire cliff. Bolotin had stumbled across some of the cracks in early January during a regular bushwalk with friends to take in the beautiful scenery. “Here’s a crack that wasn’t on my agenda,” he said, finding a new one during last weekend’s visit. “Imagine if we spent a whole day here.” Walking trails were signposted but there were no warning signs alerting walkers of the dangers of fractured rocks or the potential for more sinkholes forming. Two areas off one fire track were fenced off with orange plastic mesh. These spots contained deep, long sinkholes, one of them apparently at least four metres deep. A single paper sign, found on the ground near the main track, stated that the Airly Subsidence Monitoring Program was collecting “adequate pre-mining baseline data”, as well as ongoing measuring of changes. Centennial itself has not disputed the cracks were caused by its longwall mining to remove panels of coal in the 1.8m tonne a year operation. It also accepts the fractures far exceed the consent condition that requires surface subsidence be limited to 125mm. Cracking damage associated with the above mine subsidence has been measured as up to 700mm wide and 3m deep, according to the Blue Mountains Conservation Society. “Centennial became aware of an exceedance at its Airly mine in January 2020 and subsequently notified all stakeholders, including the New South Wales National Parks and Wildlife Service (NPWS) and the Department of Planning, Industry and Environment (DPIE),” a spokesperson for Centennial said. “Centennial’s Airly Community Consultative Committee (CCC) has been briefed on this issue and has been kept updated throughout.” That committee, though, is not scheduled to meet until April, one member said. “Centennial has undertaken a review of Airly’s mine design and installed a 60-metre wide maingate pillar to prevent future subsidence incidents,” the official said. “Moving forward, Airly mine designs will be based on assessments undertaken by SCT Operations, an independent specialist geotechnology consultancy.” A spokesperson for the parks service said the division would work with the NSW resources regulator and the company “with a view to ensuring all appropriate measures are taken to prevent and remediate damage in accordance with conditions of approval”. Guardian Australia approached the new environment minister, James Griffin, and the resource minister and deputy premier, Paul Toole, for comment. In a letter to the government earlier this month, the Blue Mountains Conservation Society appealed for greater protection of an area that contains hundreds of pagoda rock formations and is home to rare and threatened species. The Planning Assessment Committee (PAC) in its 2016 approval for Airly mine extension recognised the area as having “spectacular geodiversity with majestic cliffs and rock formations that are considered highly significant and delight the local community and visitors alike”, the letter noted. A repeat of the damage to Genowlan could be devastating for its pagoda-studded ridge lines and the fact it contains the only known population of the critically endangered Genowlan Point subspecies of Pultanaea, with just 15 known plants, it cited the committee as saying. “Alteration of habitat following subsidence due to longwall mining … [is] a key threat to the species,” the approval consent noted. The NSW independent MP Justin Field said it was time to consider whether mining could coexist with state conservation areas. “Time and again we see mining conditions are breached or are found to be inadequate after the damage is done to sensitive landscapes and waterways,” Field said. “It raises serious questions about the ability of the planning system to identify and manage mining risks in state conservation areas.”“Get out of my way, it’s a code brown.” “What’s a code brown?” “You can smell it.” Doctors of my generation grew up with a code brown that signalled an unfortunate case of faecal incontinence. The odour from the patient’s soiled clothes would engulf the ward only to be swiftly overpowered by the pungent hospital grade “air freshener”. The hassled nurse scurried in with glove and gown while doctors continued their rounds. Out of respect for the poor patient, everyone acted completely unbothered. Last week, those same doctors and nurses witnessed the arrival of a real code brown in Victoria, an emergency alert usually reserved for mass casualties. In the face of rising Covid cases, the announcement aims to ease the burden on health services by streamlining systems and redeploying staff to serve the most critical patients. When the code takes effect, I am in clinic, doing what I have done for the last 20 years – seeing cancer patients. The past two years have been a nervous time, but some things have stayed the same. New discoveries have worked at keeping more people well for longer. Important surgeries have eased suffering. Vulnerable patients have defied prediction and lived to see another day. Gratitude and resilience haven’t receded from fashion. Most of all, healthcare workers, from cleaner to consultant, have regarded their work as a mission and kept going. But with an enduring pandemic now underlined with a code brown, the mood has changed. Physical exhaustion is remediable with rest but moral distress clings to you. I receive an email “just letting you know” that a chemotherapy patient is still awaiting an urgent appointment. The details of one high-risk patient blur with another, my heart falters. In quick succession, my anxiety switches from the patient and the relatives to my duty of care and the nurse who needs my help to do her job safely. I squeeze in that patient but what about all the others? Who is advocating for them? What if they die from avoidable causes? It’s enough to lose sleep over. Patients’ calls for help are increasingly desperate. When can they see a doctor? Will that doctor know their history? Does it matter that their scan is delayed? These questions aren’t new but after two years of interrupted care, they have taken on a new urgency. And with thousands of professionals away, no one is making bold commitments about timely or ideal patient care. Where once we pulled strings for our neediest patients, we are now reduced to worrying with them and apologising for our impotence. For doctors who have long harnessed their privileged position in the healthcare system for public good, this new lack of agency is an especially bitter pill to swallow. A code brown entails moving staff at short notice. Taking a cue from another oncologist, I try preparing one of my oldest patients. “Listen, if you come back next month and I am not here, don’t worry because our discussions are on the computer, and you can use a phone interpreter.” Some years ago, I told her she had months to live. Then she responded to a new drug but is convinced that I personally vanquished her disease. “If you go, I will follow you.” “It doesn’t work like that.” “I will empty my bank account to see you,” pleads her husband. “It’s not about money,” I say, embarrassed. “Then what are you hiding?” I am hiding nothing – indeed, our dilemma is in plain sight. We see patients not knowing when we might get sick, furloughed or redeployed. Overnight, we discover that a ward has been closed or a theatre list cancelled. We are encouraging patients to stay at home, suspecting that it may not be the best place for them but hoping that home beats being in a tense hospital with limited staff and no visitors. In the grip of a code brown, the wheels of healthcare continue to turn but every turn feels unsettling. We know that the true cost of the pandemic cannot be counted only by lives lost or dollars spent. For providers, the true cost includes the countless calls we made that didn’t feel quite right, the ethical dilemmas we grappled with, and the nagging thought that in a chain of decisions, the one we took personally helped or harmed someone. This daily moral reckoning we share with our colleagues around the world is the hardest work of all. And still, amid the gloom there are embers of optimism because those who serve patients are generally committed and resilient and already thinking about the next challenge. The code might have brought us to our knees, but it is also a chance to rethink medicine. Aspects of the healthcare system struggled because they were never robust – and while it is easy to invoke a lack of funding for every problem, we must also consider a failure of vision and planning. The pandemic may have been unforeseen but not so an ageing nation, a highly multicultural population with mixed needs, poor health literacy, scientifically naive politicians, hierarchies that allow managers to overrule clinicians, and most importantly, a chronically poor nexus between community and hospital-based care. If we didn’t anticipate all these problems coming to a head together, we must never have an excuse again. The big picture of healthcare demands constant attention and background planning that is not the stuff of headlines but vital to good outcomes. Case numbers may have peaked and this emergency will eventually expire. One day in the future, a seasoned nurse will announce a code brown and a young doctor will grow pale at the memory of disturbance and dislocation. Someone will smile and say, “No, it’s not that kind of code brown.” We will relax, hold our noses, and keep going.The Morrison government has tipped an extra $2bn into the Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility (Naif) with critics concerned the funds could be spent supporting fossil fuel projects. The northern Australia minister, David Littleproud, when announcing the $2bn cash injection on Tuesday did not rule out Naif using it for the development of the Beetaloo gas basin. The Greens and the Australia Institute have called for rule changes to prevent the Naif being used for fossil fuel projects. Labor has criticised the fund’s track record of having spent less than 10% of its initial $5bn but has not supported changing the rules. Littleproud said $3.2bn had already been committed to projects and the extra $2bn would continue investment “across all sectors, from mining and agriculture to renewable energy, education and tourism”. The Naif has come under fire over its governance arrangements which include a ministerial veto on projects, controversially used in May to nix a $280m windfarm and battery project in northern Queensland. Rod Campbell, the research director at the Australia Institute, said “the idea of more money to develop northern Australia isn’t a bad idea” but Naif “hasn’t really demonstrated that they have a capacity to put this money to good use in the past five years or so”. “Naif has shown itself to be very supportive of fossil industries,” he said, citing $300m for the Darwin ship lift and $16.8m for the Onslow marine support base, both of which support the oil and gas industries. Littleproud gained responsibility for Naif in a July 2021 reshuffle but before that it was overseen by Keith Pitt, who is still the resources minister and has called for a $250bn loan facility to underwrite fossil fuel financing and insurance. The Greens senator Larissa Waters said the Naif was “little more than a slush fund for coal and gas corporations”. “The last thing northern Australia or the rest of the country needs is the government stuffing another $2bn into the pockets of multinational climate-wreckers,” she told Guardian Australia. “There are incredible opportunities to fund sustainable, job-creating projects in northern Australia, but Morrison never misses an opportunity to give public money to his fossil fuel mates.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Waters took aim at Labor and the Coalition for blocking the Greens’ attempt to stop Naif being used for coal and gas – suggesting this would be a key demand if her party held the balance of power after the election. Labor’s shadow minister for northern Australia, Murray Watt, said that “while funding has been ‘committed’ for a raft of projects, the most recent government figures show that only $427.6m has hit the ground to create jobs and build projects across our north”. “It’s no wonder the Naif is better known as the ‘No Actual Infrastructure Fund’ in the north,” Watt said. “How can we believe the government will spend $2bn more when it’s spent less than a quarter of that in seven years?” On Tuesday, Littleproud explained that less had been spent than committed because applicants must “use their own money first before they use Australian taxpayers’” money. “These are big projects that are not your garden-variety corner store and they take a long time to build,” he told ABC Radio. “So we’ve committed that $3.2bn but we’re now at a stage where, with the pipeline of investment that’s coming forward through to the Naif, that we’ll exhaust the $5bn probably within 12 months.” Asked if the funds could be spent on developing the Beetaloo gas basin, Littleproud said it would “invest in any infrastructure project that’s good for the economy”. He also noted the four “corridors of growth” identified by the government were mining, agriculture, tourism and defence. Littleproud said there would be no “discriminating” about which states projects were located in because “Naif will not make a decision predicated on an election because it’s independent of the government”.Three Coalition senators have joined growing calls from the crossbench and Labor to hold a royal commission or similar inquiry into Australia’s Covid pandemic response. Nationals Matt Canavan and Sam McMahon and Liberal Gerard Rennick – three of the five Coalition senators who crossed the floor to vote against vaccination mandates – have backed the idea, which also received in-principle support from the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese. Last week the independent senator Rex Patrick wrote to the prime minister asking him to consider establishing a commission before he calls the 2022 election and to set aside money for it in the budget. The independent MP Zali Steggall is already working on draft terms of reference. Patrick and Steggall’s call for the work to begin pre-election puts them ahead of the curve, but support across the political spectrum is broad, including Labor, Coalition dissidents, independents and One Nation. Canavan told Guardian Australia “we need a full and comprehensive inquiry but I think that needs to wait until the pandemic is over”. Canavan said he was “not fussed” about the form of inquiry “providing it has the appropriate power to take evidence from all levels of government, not just the commonwealth, given how involved the states have been with the coronavirus response”. Rennick, who has vowed to continue to withhold support for government legislation over the pandemic response, told Guardian Australia there “definitely needs to be a review into the way everything happened”. He cited his concerns about the compensation scheme for vaccine injuries and the approval process for children’s vaccines, which health authorities have said are both safe and effective. “It needs to look at the roles and responsibilities of state and federal government as well – the blame game needs to end,” Rennick said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A spokesman for McMahon, who lost her preselection to Liberal Jacinta Price and has been approached to defect to the Liberal Democrats, confirmed she also backed a royal commission. On Tuesday Albanese said “an assessment” of the Covid response would be appropriate after “the heat of the pandemic” had passed. “Whether that be a royal commission or some form of inquiry, that will need to happen,” he told the National Press Club. Labor’s Katy Gallagher, who chairs the Senate’s Covid committee and has accused the government of obstructing its access to information, said on Wednesday “at the right point in time … there will have to be some assessment of all of the decisions taken”, including $337bn in spending. On 19 January, Patrick wrote to Scott Morrison arguing it would be “extraordinary” if a royal commission weren’t called, asking him to consult Labor, the states and territories on terms of reference. He noted that despite the successes of the pandemic response, there had been extensive criticism of the “implementation of border controls and quarantine measures, the procurement and distribution of vaccines, the extent and duration of economic support measures, implementation of support for the aged care sector, and the acquisition and availability of rapid antigen tests”. Steggall told Guardian Australia she “strongly supports” calls for a royal commission and was working with healthcare experts on proposed terms of reference to include medical research, assessment of critical supplies and health system risk assessments. “[We] need an interim report within 12 months to ensure we are better prepared for future variations,” Steggall said. Independent MP Helen Haines said the next parliament should “ensure an independent and thorough inquiry”. She noted that in 2020 she and other crossbenchers had pushed for a joint select committee which, unlike the Senate committee, would have been able to compel ministers from the lower house to appear. Pauline Hanson voiced her support for a royal commission at the Prayer and Pushback event earlier in January, claiming without evidence that Australians had been “lied to with the number of deaths” caused by Covid-19. The Labor MPs Julian Hill, Anika Wells, Patrick Gorman and Anne Aly went public with their support for a royal commission in August. Hill told Guardian Australia “clearly there will need to be a properly constituted thoughtful inquiry – not as a political witch-hunt – but to learn the lessons of this pandemic for future generations”. “It could start to be thought about over the next few months but it’s still premature still to kick it off – it can be dealt with after the election.” The independent senator Jacqui Lambie was open to the idea but agreed it was too soon. “You don’t read the entrails while the chicken’s still clucking,” she said. Patrick said the date of the election had “no relevance” to when a royal commission was called and that some elements of the pandemic response had “by and large concluded” and can be studied now – such as business support, and the international border controls. “We don’t know when the pandemic will end,” he said, suggesting that there were lessons that could be learned now that “may be useful moving forward”, such as how to handle outbreaks in aged care. In August when asked about the former Liberal prime minister Tony Abbott’s call for a Covid royal commission, Morrison said he would not be “drawn into those things” because “we’re managing the pandemic right now, and this pandemic still has quite a long way to go”. “So I’m sure at some time in the future there’ll be a time to talk about those reviews or whatever form they might take,” he said.There’s something about that red dot. The ping. That little shudder of your phone. All those tiny, quiet gestures which together, form a cacophony, making your phone screech: “Something happened. Look at me! Right now! And then again! And sometime later! But still soon! Really soon! OK? OK?” Australians in 2020 spent, on average, an hour and 46 minutes a day on social media. That, according to my rudimentary calculations, is equivalent to more than 26 days a year on Facebook, Instagram, YouTube, et al. This, I’d suggest, is too many days. I say this from a place of experience, not judgment. The ease of opening up Instagram’s mottled icon or Facebook’s austere blue square was beyond my ability to resist. And after spending time on the apps, I’d leave no wiser, healthier or happier. I gained nothing from this time. I lost too many days. Yet I’d return, again and again. Research last year showed that half of Australians had gone off social media at some point – possibly due to its time-sucking joylessness. But also possibly for the myriad other problems social media use is associated with that we keep finding more of every year. Going off social media, however, a was not an option for me. Facebook in particular is where birthday parties are organised (and cancelled), or where friends announce they’ve got Covid. It is how I keep track of who has procreated. Some friends occasionally share beautiful updates on Instagram that I enjoy. The problem wasn’t social media necessarily, but how and when I used it. The vast bulk of traffic to social media sites comes from our mobile phones – from our couches, our bedsides, our commutes, when we have them. So, I figured, what if I removed the convenience? Would my social media use become less frequent? Less mindless? Less … compulsive? Yes. I took social media apps off my phone, and took back precious minutes, hours, days of my life. It takes almost no effort – just hover over the app and press ‘uninstall’. Then – blip! – it’s gone. No more red dots, no more pings. For a more thorough cleanse, you might want to log out of your browser version of the sites too, so every compulsive check triggers an annoying log-in process. I still access Facebook perhaps twice a week on a laptop, but leave quickly, caught up and surprised at how little I missed between days. I’ll sign into Instagram on my phone about the same amount. Before logging on, which takes relatively more effort, I have to ask myself a critical question: “Why am I doing this?” Which, in the end, is not a bad place to start.The latest Australian inflation figures showing strong prices growth in the past six months have once again put interest rate rises into the frame. A rate rise during a May election campaign is raised as a possibility, but the Reserve Bank might be a lot less willing to move than speculators believe. This year, inflation has been all the economic rage. In America, questions about it led to US president Biden referring to a Fox News journalist as a “dumb son of a bitch” while here in Australia we are at a point where, if the market is to be believed, a rate rise could occur by May. Tuesday’s consumer price index figures showed prices grew by 1.3% in the last three months of 2021, and 3.5% through the whole year. Underlying inflation – which the Reserve Bank is more concerned about when it comes to setting interest rates – at 2.6% was nicely within the RBA’s target band of 2%-3%: If the graph does not display please click here As a result, the market now expects the Reserve Bank to raise the cash rate to 0.25% by May and up to 1% by the end of the year: If the graph does not display please click here But whether the Reserve Bank will actually increase rates is something a bit more complicated than just hoping money market speculators have got it right. Mostly it comes down to whether inflation needs to be tempered, and whether raising interest rates will do anything to temper that inflation. You can see why economists around the world are rather fixated on inflation at the moment. In the US prices rose in 2021 by 6.7% – and US prices often lead the rest of the world, including Australia: If the graph does not display please click here A key reason is items such as oil. Petrol prices were a major contributor to overall inflation. Since the start of the pandemic, petrol prices have risen around 70%: If the graph does not display please click here That is overwhelmingly driven by the world oil price: If the graph does not display please click here Nothing the RBA does with the cash rate will affect how much we pay for petrol. But then there are house prices. These were also a big contributor to price rises both in the December quarter and throughout 2021: If the graph does not display please click here Here the Reserve Bank can definitely influence prices. But as I noted earlier this month, housing finance has already come off the boil. It might be the case that raising the cash rate now would do little to influence house prices given the withdrawal of stimulus measures designed to prop up the housing market, such as the homebuilder program, is already doing that. And while house prices do need to be tempered, the RBA has more tools at its disposal than just interest rates. Together with the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (Apra) it can further tighten lending standards, it can end its bond buying program and it can also give guidance about a change in approach that can attempt to “talk down” the market. Because, while house prices have gone mad, rather interestingly the annual growth of “non-tradable” items (those items not influenced by international prices) actually fell in the December quarter from 3.2% to 2.8%. They are now well down on the June 2021 quarter peak of 4%: If the graph does not display please click here This matters because since 2000, the Reserve Bank has only once raised the cash rate in a period when non-tradable items rose by less than 3% – and that was straight after the GFC. Given the price growth of these items is actually falling, that suggests there is little need for the RBA to hit the brakes. Similarly, out of the 88 sub-groups in the CPI basket, only around 30% are growing by more than 3% annually – that is well below the level we saw before the GFC when the RBA was hiking rates: If the graph does not display please click here But all of this ignores the big factor that is driving inflation: supply blockages. Anyone who has bought something from overseas, tried to buy a new car, or even hoped to buy meat at a supermarket, knows what I am talking about. Inflation is driven by two things: increased demand – more people wanting to buy something – and reduced supply – less availability of a thing the people want to buy. If overly strong demand is the problem, then raising interest rates makes sense; if it is a lack of supply, then raising interest rates might just reduce a demand that is not actually all that strong. For this a better guide is not prices but wages. And here we would be well served to actually listen to what the RBA says. In the minutes of its December board meeting, the board concluded it “will not increase the cash rate until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3% target range. This will require the labour market to be tight enough to generate wages growth that is materially higher than it is currently.” “This,” the board concluded, “is likely to take some time and the board is prepared to be patient.” Until wages are growing by at least at 3% we probably should not get too excited about possible rate rises.Pharmacies are losing up to $7.50 on each rapid antigen test under the federal government’s concession cardholder scheme due to a shortage of stock. Under the program 6.6m concession cardholders in Australia can access up to 10 free RATs over a three month period, but the Pharmacy Guild of Australia has told the Guardian the scheme leads to a loss for individual chemists. The shortage of tests across the country has driven up wholesale prices. The tests currently cost the pharmacies up to $17.50 each but the government is providing only a $10 reimbursement, the guild said. Prof Trent Twomey, the national president of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia, said while wholesale prices have increased, there hasn’t been a subsequent adjustment to the reimbursement. “The reimbursed price set by the government has clearly been calculated on the wholesale cost of the tests around early December. The wholesale prices have gone up because of the demand, and distributors are chartering jets to bring the product in, and then employing staff at weekends and on overtime to process orders which are dispatched by express courier services. “They are also competing with overseas markets for the product,” he said. “All of these factors come at a cost which is passed along in wholesale prices to pharmacists.” Twomey said some pharmacies have struggled to afford tests under the concession scheme. “If the government wants to improve accessibility they can improve the timeframe they reimburse pharmacies. At the moment the government won’t be making the first payments until the end of February.” “Many small pharmacies can’t afford to wait this long.” The guild has established a Rapid Antigen Test finder for concession card holders which lists local pharmacies that have tests in stock. The site initially struggled under the demand, but Twomey said it has since stabilised and is available to use. Ian Yates, the chief executive of the charity Council on the Ageing Australia (COTA Australia), said that pensioners had found access to the tests a “mixed bag”. “What we are seeing is that some people have been able to obtain the RATs without difficulty and others are having trouble. It varies from area to area. “We understand both from the government and the pharmacy guild that some areas have reasonable supplies and others are struggling and waiting on supplies,” he said. “We do have an overall concern that there’s not enough RATs for aged care, and at-home care, and the concession scheme, but we know they’re coming.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The federal government has previously indicated that testing supplies will improve in the coming weeks, with 16m tests expected to arrive at pharmacies before the end of January. But Dr Cassandra Goldie, the CEO of the Australian Council of Social Service, said she was “deeply concerned” at the current state of stock. “People are telling us that getting RATs continues to be a massive problem – free or paid,” she said. “The biggest problem is that chemists are out of stock. We haven’t heard directly from anyone who was able to get a free rapid antigen testing kit; mostly people’s experience is that the chemists near them have signs out saying they are sold out. “This is consistent with what pharmacies are reporting – and only 900 out of 6,000 pharmacies signed up to the program.” Goldie says the shortage of tests and the lack of access has resulted in many concession card holders – some of the most vulnerable people in the country – having to remain isolated at home. “People on $45/day can’t waste money travelling around looking farther afield for chemists. They can’t afford to run a car or go through their precious petrol. “People tell us they are feeling forgotten and fed up. The lack of accessible and free RATs is forcing people to stay home and stay isolated.” The tests provide a means for vulnerable communities to ensure their safety, as well as those of their families and carers, allowing people to protect their incomes. Acoss is calling on the government to establish a Covid Rapid Response Group that would include unions, businesses and public health experts to help coordinate the pandemic response. “The federal government must acknowledge that supply is an ongoing problem and ensure there are enough free RATs readily available for people with concession cards so that people can easily access tests,” Goldie said.A world-first shipment of liquid hydrogen from Australia was declared momentous – a pivotal moment as the world clambers for clean liquid fuels to bring global greenhouse gas emissions to zero. Prime minister Scott Morrison said the consignment – loaded on to a purpose-built Japanese ship at the Port of Hastings in Victoria – marked the beginning of a new clean energy export industry for Australia. Despite the celebratory fanfare and two government ministers at the port for a photo-op, the reality is something different. Experts say the climate credentials of the technology being used to produce the hydrogen – using brown coal – are highly questionable. “The project’s current configuration is not clean. In fact, it is incredibly dirty,” said Kobad Bhavnagri, head of industrial decarbonisation at Bloomberg NEF. So what is actually happening? The Hydrogen Energy Supply Chain (HESC) project is a $500m pilot that launched in 2018. The Australian government has given $57m to the project so far. This week the Suiso Frontier will depart Victoria with the first load of super-cooled liquid hydrogen ever to be transported by sea. Temperature Check asked how much hydrogen was loaded, but HESC didn’t respond. A fact sheet has said the pilot phase would produce up to three tonnes (global demand for hydrogen is currently about 90 million tonnes). Energy minister Angus Taylor said the shipment demonstrated the project could be “a major source of clean energy”. Both the government and HESC said a commercial phase of the project would produce 225,000 tonnes of “carbon neutral” hydrogen a year. Even if the project backers decide to move to a commercial phase (and that is a huge if), studies show hydrogen produced using the same method would be dirtier than if it was produced from gas and much dirtier than making hydrogen from renewables. The HESC consortium of five Japanese companies, together with AGL, won’t decide to go ahead with a commercial scale operation until an assessment of the pilot phase, expected to be complete next year. To bring emissions down, HESC says a commercial operation would capture CO2 released during one of the stages of production (the gasification phase carried out in the Latrobe Valley) and then use the Victorian government’s CarbonNet project to store the CO2. But the CarbonNet project – which is targeting potential geological formations off the Victorian coast – doesn’t yet exist and, if it does go ahead, the Victorian government says it won’t start operating until the end of this decade. All of this raises the prospect of coal-based hydrogen – which the Morrison government is happy to describe as “clean” – hitting a global market at a time when some analysts believe it will be already priced out by zero-emissions hydrogen derived from renewable energy. Bhavnagri told Temperature Check he doubts using coal to make hydrogen could have any commercial success. He said assuming the project could capture and store a significant amount of CO2, the carbon footprint of the hydrogen would still be higher than producing hydrogen from gas with CCS and “much higher than producing it from renewables”. “If it’s more complex and more costly and more polluting than making hydrogen from renewables, why would you do it?” Hydrogen 101 A quick hydrogen production 101 might help here. There are broadly three ways hydrogen is being produced. One uses steam to separate hydrogen from “natural” gas. Another uses oxygen and coal under high pressures. A third passes electricity through water in an electrolyser, producing hydrogen and “waste” oxygen. The first two methods generate high levels of CO2 – more than if you just burned the fossil fuel. But that pollution can potentially be lowered if the CO2 can be captured and stored. The electrolysis method can produce genuinely clean hydrogen with almost no emissions if the electricity comes from renewables. The HESC pilot used the coal gasification method and is proposing to add carbon capture and storage if moved to a commercial scale. A pilot coal gasification and refining plant has been built at Loy Yang and a demonstration plant to cool the hydrogen was built at the port. Could this hydrogen ever be clean? Dr Fiona Beck, an expert on the nascent hydrogen industry as a way to cut emissions, says there is no agreed definition for “clean” hydrogen. But she says turning fossil fuels into hydrogen is always going to be dirtier than using renewable energy. In a study published late last year, Beck and colleagues at the Australian National University compared the amount of CO2 released when hydrogen is produced using different methods. Using the same approach as is proposed for the HESC project, hydrogen from brown coal would release 40kg of CO2 for each unit of energy (a gigajoule). Beck says hydrogen with those levels of emissions would be too dirty to be considered “low carbon” under a Europe-based certification scheme for hydrogen. Crucially, that level of emissions also presumes 90% of the CO2 released from the brown coal during the gasification phase can be captured and permanently stored. Beck says: “That’s very ambitious and while it’s theoretically possible, there is no large-scale commercial plant to have demonstrated anywhere near that sort of capture rate.” She says one positive aspect of the trial is the development of a ship that can carry liquid hydrogen. “It’s important to get the ship and also the port facilities working, even on a pilot scale,” she said. The ship is also a trial version, with a tank installed that can carry 1,250 cubic metres of hydrogen that’s cooled to -253C. Cooling the gas turns it into a liquid that is then one 800th of its original volume. Kawasaki Heavy Industries has said a commercial-size ship it wants to build would have a 160,000 cubic metre capacity – about 120 times bigger than the ship that docked at Port of Hastings. Is that it? Among this sea of uncertainty around the project was one statistic repeated in the government’s media release and from the project itself. If the HESC project did move to a commercial phase, it could produce 225,000 tonnes of “carbon neutral liquefied hydrogen” annually that would “help reduce global emissions by around 1.8 million tonnes per year.” Greenhouse gas emissions from producing hydrogen from coal are generated all the way along the supply chain – from the mining of the coal, to gasification, trucking, liquifaction and shipping. Temperature Check asked HESC to explain how the hydrogen would be “carbon neutral” and which steps in the supply chain would be included, but details were not provided. This column also asked the office of Angus Taylor what the estimated savings were based on, but did not receive a response before publishing. But in any case, should we be impressed by an annual saving of 1.8m tonnes of CO2? The gasification of the coal and the refining of the hydrogen is taking place at a facility next door to AGL’s Loy Yang coal power station in the Latrobe Valley. According to the Clean Energy Regulator, that power station is currently emitting 16.9m tonnes of CO2 a year. So the power station emits more than nine times as much CO2 as the HESC project says it might save each year if it goes ahead. A HESC statement said using Latrobe Valley coal with CCS at scale and improvements to the liquefaction process, “should have a significant cost and scale advantage over hydrogen produced with electrolysis.” The statement said “biomass” was blended with coal to increase the purity of the hydrogen, but when asked, HESC did not say what that biomass was. “The HESC pilot has furthered Australia’s knowledge of hydrogen production, liquefaction, storage and transport. This technical knowledge, and the infrastructure from a commercial scale HESC project, paves the way for future hydrogen projects of all types as part of Australia’s transition to lower emissions. “The next phase for the project is to examine in detail all elements of the HESC pilot. This analysis will determine a potential path to commercialisation and is anticipated to continue through to mid 2023.” No alternative? In an editorial, the Australian Financial Review declared the hydrogen shipment an “important milestone” and an occasion that “may prove as important” to the country’s prosperity as its first shipment of iron ore in the 1960s. But the newspaper made a declaration that making hydrogen from coal or gas with the emissions either captured or offset “is currently the only technological [sic] possible and cost-effective method of hydrogen production.” Really? Hydrogen is already being produced using electrolysers powered by renewable energy. Remembering the HESC plan for “clean hydrogen” relies on a CCS project that doesn’t yet exist and may not start operations until 2030, the International Energy Agency says right now electrolysers “have reached enough maturity to scale up manufacturing and deployment to significantly reduce costs”. There was record deployments of electrolysers in 2018, 2019 and 2020. The IEA has put the current cost per kg of hydrogen using coal with CCS at between US$2.13 and $2.63. Using electrolysers, the IEA has put current costs in a range between US$2.35 and $6.38. Analysis from BNEF predicts that by 2030, the cost of hydrogen from renewables could be as low as $1 per kg.Sitting third in Group B, one point off second-place as the third phase of AFC World Cup qualification enters the home straight, the Socceroos find themselves walking a tightrope as they prepare for pivotal games against Vietnam and Oman. Not helping their precarious position is the absence of Graham Arnold who will miss at least the first of four crucial upcoming fixtures that will likely come to define perceptions of his coaching career. Wins against Vietnam in Melbourne on Thursday night and Oman next week, along with victories over Japan and Saudi Arabia in the next international window, would guarantee the Socceroos an automatic qualification slot for Qatar 2022 and avoid a sudden-death playoff against a South American nation. Alternatively, as unpalatable such a playoff is, a win over Oman, even in the event that wins over Japan and/or Saudi Arabia are not forthcoming in March, would go a long way to ensuring that the Socceroos would not suffer the ignominy of falling into fourth and missing out entirely. Unfortunate as it is, Arnold’s diagnosis is nonetheless an apropos twist in the tale of this qualification cycle, which will be forever framed as the Covid campaign – the most logistically challenging any Australian side has ever been handed. Numerous players and staff have contracted the virus, rendering them both unavailable for individual windows and, for some players, left them with lingering effects that have hampered their fitness and form. With Australia’s borders shut and other nations introducing arduous quarantine requirements, the external effects of Covid have also led to various players at A-League Men clubs and figures such as Aaron Mooy withdrawing from consideration for selection. The border situation has also meant the Socceroos have been forced to stage all but one of their last 10 qualifiers outside Australia, robbing them of one of Asia’s strongest home-field advantages. Further, thanks to the side’s reliance on commercial airlines during a time of mass-flight cancellations and disrupted services, the team have often had little time together to train and prepare for games as a unit. A lack of flights from Qatar to Japan forced them to split into two separate travelling parties that arrived on separate days in between their 3-1 win over Oman and 2-1 loss to Japan. It has been a management nightmare. These are all mitigating factors that must be acknowledged, yet they do not fully explain the precipitous state in which the Socceroos find themselves. The off-field aspects do not help, but there are undeniable on-field foibles – aspects that Arnold as coach retains significant influence over – that have put the side at this crossroads. Whereas Australia have consistently seen more of the ball than almost every other AFC side in qualifying, their ability to consistently create high-quality, rather than simply high-volume, chances has remained a vexatious problem. An increasingly blunt attack has relied heavily upon the likes of Tom Rogić and Ajdin Hrustić to provide a creative spark and in the absence of immediate breakthroughs or moments of magic from that duo, conservatism in approach and an over-reliance on speculative crosses and set pieces have come to the fore. In the Socceroos’ last fixture – an arduous 1-1 draw against China – Arnold’s side had 65% of possession but could only muster the same amount of shots and had fewer attempted dribbles than their foes. They did, however, cross the ball 34 times. These issues have been present since they returned to action but, given that most were exhibited during an 11-game winning streak largely against weaker opposition, there was a prevailing lack of appetite amongst the Australian footballing zeitgeist to properly confront them. The motivations not to look a gift horse in the mouth or not judge the national team too hard in a time of hardship are obvious. But there is now the possibility that reality may bite at the most crucial of junctures. In recent months, as concerns have grown, Arnold has, not unfairly, consistently pointed to the challenges his side have been forced to overcome on the road Qatar. He proclaims his side will still qualify, but there is an air that the under-pressure coach’s famed veneer of impervious belief is wearing thin. He has also been quick to clarify his view that his career will not be defined by what happens in the coming months, and has spoken of the developmental aspects of his role as both Socceroos and Olyroos coach. Yet, now in his second stint as Socceroos boss, his legacy in the eyes of many rests on the upcoming games. The 58-year-old has been working with a handicap, but any Australia coach’s tenure will always be defined by their ability to deliver World Cup qualification. For Arnold, be it via Zoom or in person, this starts again with Vietnam on Thursday.Fish grow slower when exposed to higher temperatures and a common chemical in plastic, according to new research. It suggests that a combination of plastic pollution and global heating could have a concerning impact on marine populations. Scientists at the University of Sydney have found that fish exposed to the industrial chemical bisphenol A – commonly known as BPA – require more energy to grow in high-temperature waters. BPA is a common chemical used in plastics manufacturing and is known to disrupt hormone signalling, with impacts in marine animals on metabolism and growth. In humans, it has also been linked to reproductive and developmental dysfunction. Millions of tonnes of the compound are produced globally each year. The researchers exposed zebrafish to a level of BPA commonly found in waterways. They discovered that the chemical decreased the amount of energy the fish needed to grow at 24C, but hampered growth for those in 30C water – a temperature the animals would be likely to experience more often in their natural habitat under global heating. The study’s corresponding author, Frank Seebacher, a professor of biology at the University of Sydney, said the finding urgently highlighted the need for both climate change mitigation and plastic waste reduction. “The combination of high temperatures and BPA increases the energetic cost of growth – how much food animals have to eat to produce a given amount of biomass,” he said, adding the problem would be more pronounced for larger fish and predator species. “Because there’s a trophic cascade … [higher up the food chain] you’d expect to find fewer and smaller animals,” he said. “There’s a potential problem for sustainability in catch rates, if that combination [of warming and BPA] results in reduced stock.” Seebacher said BPA was released into the marine environment from manufacturing effluent as well as from plastics breaking down. “Wherever you have lots of manufacturing plants, lots of plastic pollution, you will find reasonably high levels of BPA,” he said, estimating such concentrations to be four to five times higher than the level used in their study. The researchers also modelled the risk of warming and plastic pollution in coastal areas in combination with current fishing intensity. Their analysis predicted that south-east Asia had the highest risk of decreased fish biomass as a result of warming and pollution. “Southern North America and northern South America [are also] going to be really affected,” Seebacher said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning One limitation of their findings is that the team conducted the study in zebrafish, a small freshwater species commonly used as a model organism in scientific research. Seebacher said he expected the findings to be similar in other fish species, although more research would be needed to determine this for certain. “All the endocrine systems … are highly conserved amongst vertebrates, so it’s unlikely that you’d have a massive divergence among vertebrates in how they respond [to BPA], but the possibility exists and has to be verified,” he said. The study was published in the peer-reviewed journal Proceedings of the Royal Society B.“What do you like on your pancakes?” Mum asks. It’s our first day working from Mum’s house and she’s made morning tea. My kids’ preferred condiment is strawberry jam and Mum’s face drops: “We’ve got none,” she says. In my peripheral vision I spy Dad lacing up his shoes and scurrying off to the local shops to find some. As Omicron numbers spiralled, my partner and I decided that sending the kids to childcare was too much of a risk. But our relief at deciding to pull them out was tempered by the knowledge we’d have to work from home with kids. Having scraped through the last two years of lockdowns – working till midnight, peering at spreadsheets through bloodshot eyes while trying to stop two small children from hurling themselves off the dining table – we braced for the next push. Then my mum suggested we work from their place instead. She and my dad could look after our children. We gratefully accepted. What could go wrong with three generations going about their business under one roof? As Dad onboarded us with the wifi password and Mum explained where the pens were, things were going swimmingly. The girls were capering about the garden looking for tomatoes; getting tennis lessons with their grandpa. Reflecting that this was the stuff of work-from-home dreams, I took a call. Suddenly there came an almighty clanging. Peering into the kitchen, I saw Dad, in a powder-blue floral apron, beating the heck out of the wok as he prepared lunch. “What” [CLANG] “is that?!” [CLANG] my caller asked, alarmed. “Oh, renovations next door,” I lied. Having both retired some years back, in ye olde days when meetings were done in person, Mum and Dad were unaware of Zoom etiquette. Halfway through a weekly catchup with my manager, Mum materialised from my blurred background to serve me a smoothie in a 70s punch glass. Later, I spent an entire stakeholder engagement meeting on edge. I knew she’d just poached a chicken in rice wine and there was a chance the fowl would make an appearance at any moment. Those quirks aside, the WFM’s (Work From Mum’s, that is) arrangement is paying dividends. We’re spending quality time together – something that felt impossible for long stretches of the past two years. During the day I see the girls whizzing outside on their bikes, with Dad patiently clomping after them. I catch snatches of conversations as they enjoy ice-creams on the patio, gaze out at the lettuce patch and discuss their favourite animals. Dad, a retired accountant, has taken every opportunity to shoehorn in a maths lesson. No matter how long the girls take to get the right answer, he’ll exclaim, “Top of the class!” or “You’re no slow coach!” The catering is outstanding, a world away from a hastily ripped-open tin of tuna. Dad’s speciality is stir-fried tomato prawns and spring rolls, while Mum will have baked a slab of zucchini slice or 50 sausage rolls. At 3pm, knowing that the mid-afternoon slump is upon us, Dad will be jiggling tea bags in cups. “Biscuit?” he’ll ask, thrusting Scotch Fingers our way. At the end of the day we back out of the driveway in a shiny car (yes, Dad throws a car wash into the deal) with two clean girls and enough snacks for a village. Countless people have struggled in this pandemic. Many have no friends or family whose help can be enlisted. I know how lucky I am. The devotion and patience my parents show their grandchildren is legendary, and I salute them and all the grandparents who have stepped up to help their families get through this time. Back to that jar of strawberry jam – the girls refused to eat it. They’d moved on to Dad’s spring rolls.Western Australian universities have “been thrown into chaos” by the decision to keep the state’s border closed, industry insiders say, with thousands of international students caught in limbo by the snap decision. The state was set to reopen its border to travellers without quarantine from 5 February, but at a late-night press conference last week the premier, Mark McGowan, announced that had been postponed due to the spread of the Omicron Covid variant. The announcement has caused a furore in the university sector, which argues the decision means it will continue to bleed revenue while other states, which have open borders, scoop up enrolments from stranded students. At the end of 2021, more than 30% of all international students studying in Western Australia – just under 7,000 – remained outside the country. But the International Education Association of Australia (IEAA) warned “hundreds” of students had already arrived in the country and were now stuck in the eastern states. Catriona Jackson, the chief executive of Universities Australia, said the state’s universities had worked hard in the lead up to 5 February to ensure a smooth transition. “Staff and students alike are understandably disappointed by the recent decision to indefinitely delay the planned reopening,” she said. “They deserve a concrete roadmap to plan their safe return to WA’s universities, just as their peers have had in other states and territories.” One staff member from a major university, who asked not to be named, said the decision had thrown the sector “into chaos”. “Teachers had their inboxes full with students panicked,” he said. “Many students were already on their way and are experiencing distress and dislocation. But perhaps even more significantly, why would any overseas student ever trust WA in the future as a study destination?” There were concerns among staff that because the sector would continue to lose revenue, it could result in job losses and cuts to research and courses. “The resulting impact on WA university funding is likely to be enormous,” the staff member said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning It is difficult to estimate the exact financial impact of the border decision but published financial results show total operating revenue for the university sector declined by 5.0%, or $1.84bn, to $34.9bn in 2020. On top of this, international education contributed more than $1.2bn to the WA economy in 2019, compared to $1.046bn in 2020. Andre, who asked for his real name not to be used, had been studying at a WA university from his home in South Africa since 2020. The architecture student had terminated his lease and sold his car in anticipation of the border reopening. He said the last-minute decision had left him shattered. “It’s sad to see,” Andre said. “It’s us versus them, instead of coming up with a solution.” Andre has applied for a G2G pass to get into the state but is not holding out hope that he will be allowed in. If it is rejected he will travel to Sydney with his partner, who is a doctor. He said he had tried to apply for universities in eastern states but it was hard to transfer the course work he had already done. “It’s just disappointing that you kind of get lured into a false promise that shouldn’t have been made.” Phil Honeywood, the CEO of IEAA, said because universities were “given an iron-clad promise by Mark McGowan” that overseas students would be allowed in, many of them had already arrived in the country. “Acting on this promise, they now have hundreds of students who have arrived in Sydney and Melbourne waiting to cross the state border,” Honeywood said. “There is no fallback plan from the state government as to what should be done with these now stranded young people.” He said the organisation was working with the Department of Home Affairs and had received assurances that course commencement dates would be extended for any student who had to stay in the eastern states until they could get into WA. Home affairs declined to comment, saying only it was not sure how many students expecting to travel to WA had arrived.I am a child of the internet. I was always drawn to computers and tech, and used to beg my dad to bring us to his office on a weekend so we could use the high-speed internet to play Neopets games. As I got older it was all MSN, MySpace, Paramore fan forums, Tumblr, Twitter and now TikTok. I want nothing more than to zone out and look at my little pictures. One of my favourite things about the internet is that it allows you to see everyone’s best joke. The moment in their life where they were at their absolute funniest – whether it be because they had a moment of brilliant wit or because they got pulled through a panel roof while practising for a high school play (I assume). The internet has rotted my brain with the following content. Please now allow it to rot yours. 1. Mental illness, innit The Pandemic Years have (and continue to be) difficult for everyone. Who among us has not, at one time or another, needed to just explain themselves by saying: “It’s mental illness, innit?” 2. Perfect burger When I showed this video to my fiancee, she flatly said: “I like how absurdist it is.” That’s her code for, “I don’t get it, but I’m happy you’re happy.” And I am happy. Look at how confident and brave this burger is – ready to take on the world, come what may. I wish to be the burger. 3. TikTok’s @rebmasel reads iconic court transcripts I have been to court precisely once because I inadvertently got in a cop’s way and he was grumpy about it so he booked me. The penalty was dismissed but not before I cried in front of the judge trying to explain what happened because I was so stressed out. Court is a daunting place and I simply cannot imagine walking in there with any level of irreverence. However, I’m extremely glad there are people who simply do not care, will say whatever damn thing and then an internet angel turns them into TikToks. 4. Turtle choir This tweet is made all the more majestic by the vaguely threatening Sylvanian Families-style profile picture, on a Twitter account named @bigfatmoosepssy. 5. Trying coffee with pasta water Climate change is slowly turning the Earth into a barren ball of pain as Mother Nature smacks us for being extremely bad. Even though individual responsibility for climate change isn’t enough to turn the tide, I still applaud those who try. Twitter user @madibskatin woke up in the morning and decided to be the change she wants to see in the world, tastebuds be damned. One could argue that it’s pretty obvious that pasta water isn’t going to make a good coffee but like my dad says as he puts pineapple juice in his coffee: “If no one tries it, how will we know? What if it’s secretly good?” 6. Soaring, flying If you look closely, this video is actually a metaphor for the ways in which we attempt to break free from our circumstances, yet are entirely at the mercy of them. 7. You cannot trick me This may be a parody Twitter account, but the spirit of Gail Walden speaks truths. There is no victory sweeter than that which is gained on thine enemy’s own soil. 8. Self-deprecating jokes Humour is a coping mechanism. I am coping. 9. Kid drinks milk Dairy products are delicious. Ice-cream? Revolutionary. Cheese? Life-changing. Whipped cream on a pavlova? Essential. But milk? Disgusting. It’s not a drink, it’s a stepping stone to greater things. 10. Lactose intolerance, but make it strong I am absolutely 100% not at all lactose intolerant (I promise) so I don’t relate to this video at all (not even a bit). • Angharad Yeo is the host of Double J Weekends, 9am – midday, Saturdays and Sundays.Launceston is one of Australia’s oldest and perhaps most characterful cities. It’s full of Georgian, Victorian and Federation-era buildings largely untouched by wrecking balls or developers, often bearing their year of construction a century ago or more. With manicured lawns, flowerbeds and a classically inspired 1859 fountain, Prince’s Square pulls all that heritage charm together. But this week things are a little different. The bitumen around the fountain is painted with giant red letters spelling out messages of sin, theft and scars, while a foreboding soundscape envelops parkgoers. A collaboration project between Aboriginal Tasmanian artist Kartanya Maynard and Kuku Yalandji, Waanji, Yidinji and Gugu Yimithirr artist Vernon Ah Kee, Waranta Takamuna! (we rise) is a simple but moving intervention: it’s disrupting the heritage facade of the square, the city and the colony from the inside out. For Maynard, Prince’s Square is “dripping in colonialism”. “When I look at parks like Prince’s Square I see this deep, deep manipulation of the landscape into something almost too unreal – everything’s a little too perfect, and for me that’s deeply uncomfortable,” she tells Guardian Australia. “One of the trees in the park is even planted by one of Queen Victoria’s kids.” Alongside Ah Kee’s Shakespeare and Kipling-quoting text, Maynard uses sound to reach into the past. “Waranta Takamuna! was our opportunity to look at Launceston, this space, and what it means to Tasmanian Aboriginal people,” she says. The 10-minute audio loop passes through different time periods and emotions, from the early violence of the Black War (the brutal colonial genocide of First Nations people which took place in Tasmania in the 1800s) to waves of assimilation, as Maynard’s ancestors were removed to islands in the Bass Strait by authorities or abducted by sealers. We hear screams, tears and desperate pleas. And then, a campfire singalong of survival and community forged on those islands. “It’s not just a song – it’s a feeling,” Maynard says of Born On Old Cape Barren, sung by the late songman Uncle Ronnie Summers. Maynard herself performs the version heard in the square. “In one of the soundscapes I talk about how my heart was broken before I was even born, and pieces of it were left in all different places: one of them being Cape Barren Island, another being Launceston, Hobart, South Australia. Waranta Takamuna! is a love letter to the island, but it’s also a love letter to talking truth to the hardships of how we got there and how we got taken from there.” The hills and plains between Launceston and Hobart also bear the mark of colonisation, its pre-invasion landscape cleared and replanted into pastoral vistas. In another installation for Mona Foma, metal silhouettes appear to the east as you drive down the Midland Highway – a woman with a child atop a golden hill, and violent scenes between colonisers and Aboriginal men. Trawlwoolway artist Julie Gough based these figures on a series of illustrated boards produced to accompany a 1828 proclamation by Lieutenant Governor George Arthur. Purporting to explain British justice to First Nations peoples and illiterate colonists alike, around 100 copies were painted and nailed to trees around the island. Today, in Gough’s installation The Missing, the images distill truths and fictions about its past in ways language cannot. “It’s not my artwork – it’s a government document that I’ve released again, like a reissue,” Gough says. “It’s coming back to create a bigger conversation across a landscape that has been absorbed and owned by newcomers, colonists, particularly since the 1820s. So in a way I’m subverting the government’s intended use of it to remind everyone whose country it is.” In an audio tour accompanying the route, Gough narrates the experience as we drive through the “epicentre of violence”, and the psychic and physical scars left upon the landscape. “Those figures are looking out at something that’s quite different to when they were first produced, as panels to be [nailed] on trees – there’s not that many trees down in the Midlands of the island now.” The silhouette of the woman and child might appear less violent than other figures in the series – but not to Gough. It’s from the first scene of the proclamation boards, depicting Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal men and women in European dress, with an Aboriginal woman holding a white child and vice versa. “That to me is incredibly violent, but it doesn’t appear violent,” she says. “It’s meant to be, ‘we’ll live happily ever after’, but we don’t know what happened to around 200 Aboriginal children taken by colonists up to the 1850s who were intended to become domestic and agricultural servants. Many of them are unaccounted for. We are the collateral damage of that, those of us that come from children who were living with colonists. One of my ancestors was such a child, Dalrymple Briggs, so that figure, of the woman and child, is close to my heart.” It’s something of a reclaiming, too. For over a decade, the route between Launceston and Hobart has been dotted with 16 silhouettes created by local artists Folko Kooper and Maureen Craig. Featuring convicts, soldiers, settlers and surveyors, they portray an Anglocentric view of the region’s folkloric history – something that had long troubled Gough. “They were a scratch I couldn’t itch,” she says. Gough and project curator Trudi Brinckman consulted Kooper and Craig before embarking on the project. “They were fully supportive of this new inclusion, for a more expansive dialogue and mentioned they had attempted all those years ago, to work with people, to come up with Aboriginal figures,” Gough says. “But it just wasn’t the time. “Now when I’m driving this highway and seeing those figures, I’m like, wow, we are tearing open that wound to be able to heal it better.” At the other end of the highway, another work by Maynard and Ah Kee – titled Warr! – will take over the Parliament House gardens for the festival’s Hobart leg. Following the controversy that engulfed Mona Foma’s winter counterpart Dark Mofo in the wake of Spanish artist Santiago Sierra’s ultimately cancelled Union Flag project, works like The Missing, Warr! and Waranta Takamuna! underscore the value of empowering Aboriginal artists to tell their own stories. Gough doesn’t know how long her figures will stay in place, and doesn’t mind either: “I hate the word permanent – it’s like the statues of colonial monsters in public parks. Let the landscape be permanent; let us humans work out how to be less so. Let nature be able to work on things.” Mona Foma 2022 continues in Hobart from 28-30 January. Walter Marsh travelled to Launceston as a guest of MonaThe Greek prime minister has apologised for the state’s lack of preparedness to deal with a snowstorm that left thousands of people stranded in their cars in Athens. The unprecedented spectacle of elite forces being called in to evacuate motorists trapped in vehicles along the capital’s main ring road left the government reeling as the damage was still being calculated in the wake of Monday’s storm. With blackouts reported citywide, Kyriakos Mitsotakis acknowledged the public’s anger. “I would like to start with a personal and sincere apology to our fellow citizens who suffered for many hours trapped on Attiki Odos,” he said in televised comments. “There were mistakes and shortcomings which have to be fixed.” An estimated 4,000 drivers were left stranded in cars for hours in sub-zero temperatures as the storm pounded Athens. Those who were not evacuated by the army sought refuge in Athens international airport or struggled to walk to their homes through the snow. On Wednesday, scores of cars abandoned by owners remained stuck on the ring road while power cuts in the wider Athens region affected thousands of households for a third day. Mitsotakis, echoing ministers, lay the blame for much of the debacle with the private operator of the Attiki Odos motorway system, which has been criticised for allowing cars on to its road, but he admitted it was also time to boost climate crisis defences. Like Turkey, also hit by the storm, Greece experienced devastating forest fires last year with the loss of hundreds of homes and livestock. “It’s true that a Mediterranean country’s infrastructure is not always adapted to conditions of heavy snowfall,” said the leader. “It is equally true, however, that the state mechanism is not yet at the point of readiness that phenomena of such great intensity require.” In a country of hyper-partisan media coverage where Mitsotakis’ centre-right government is rarely censured, the criticism has been impossible to ignore. Outlets have condemned the authorities’ slow response to the blizzard, calling the chaotic scenes in an EU member state inexcusable. All non-essential services, including the entire public sector, were shut down, with the government declaring a public holiday on Tuesday and Wednesday. Schools are not expected to reopen until Friday after authorities announced that snow was still blocking access to many of the facilities. This is the second consecutive year – and only the second time since 1968 – that Athens, more usually accustomed to the difficulties of extreme heat, has been pummelled by a snowstorm of such vigour. As much as 50cm of snow fell in 12 hours in some parts of the capital. Indicative of the storm’s intensity, tornadoes were reported off islands and coastal areas, with almost all of Athens, from the Acropolis in the ancient city centre to seaside suburbs in the south-east, being blanketed white. Meteorologists were also unsparing on Wednesday in chastising the state’s response. Kostas Lagouvardos, who heads the National Observatory of Athens, said the storm had been accurately predicted well in advance and that officials had ignored the forecasts. “There is no excuse,” he said. “Unlike 20 years ago we have the tools and methods to accurately forecast such events and this was very well forecast. Once again we have seen the state being reluctant to listen to the scientists and that is dangerous when we are talking about the safety of people and their property.” The Greek premier pledged that compensation, in the form of payments of €2,000 would be given to motorists who had endured the ordeal. One thousand euro handouts will be distributed to passengers who had similarly been stuck at a train station north of Athens. A survey released by the Abacus polling company late Wednesday showed the vast majority describing the gesture as a PR stunt by the government.Jesse Lingard feels let down and disrespected by Manchester United after a proposed loan to Newcastle was on the verge of collapse because of the terms demanded by his boyhood club. For the deal to happen as it stands, Newcastle could end up paying more than £15m to take Lingard for the rest of the season. United are demanding a £2.5m loan fee, full coverage of the player’s wages and a £12m bonus if the Saudi Arabian-owned club avoid relegation from the Premier League. Unless a compromise is reached Lingard faces having to finish the campaign at Old Trafford even though Ralf Rangnick has told him he is not in his plans. The forward has also been a target for Tottenham and West Ham but United will not allow him to go on loan to any club battling with them for a top-four finish. Lingard believes he has not been shown the respect he deserves after 21 years at United. He feels the club are upset at his refusal to sign a contract beyond this season and are acting accordingly. The 29-year-old is also dismayed because he thought he had received a promise last summer from Ole Gunnar Solskjær that he would get more first-team chances. Despite the club’s often poor form he has barely featured, including more recently under Rangnick. Lingard has designs on getting back into the England squad and wants United to sanction a move to enhance his chances of making it to the World Cup in November.Emmanuel Macron has told representatives of the Pieds Noirs – the Algerian-born French citizens who fled to France after Algerian independence – that a 1962 shooting by French troops against them was “unforgivable for the republic”. Macron stressed the need for “reconciliation” over the Algeria conflict, as part of his drive to address France’s colonial legacy in north Africa ahead of his bid for re-election this spring. France should “tell the truth even when it’s painful”, and “bring clarity” even if it had to be “pulled from the shadows”, he said. Macron, the first French president born after the Algerian war of independence of 1954-62, has sought during his five years in office to make steps towards recognising the brutality of the Algeria conflict, which has been shrouded in secrecy and denials and remains a divisive factor in modern French society. Macron met representatives from French and European families who lived in Algeria during French rule and returned to France after Algeria was granted independence, who were known as pieds noirs. He recognised as a “massacre” the civilian deaths that happened at rue d’Isly in Algiers on March 1962, one week after the signing of the Evian peace accords and the ceasefire which ended the war. On rue d’Islay, supporters of French Algeria who had tried to push towards the Bab El-Oued neighbourhood of Algiers were shot at by a unit of the French army, causing at least 50 deaths. It marked the start of a mass exodus of the so-called pieds noirs from Algeria to France, many settling in southern France. Macron also described what he called a “massacre” of Europeans, mostly French, in Oran on 5 July 1962, saying it must be “recognised” and the “truth” told. Macron’s latest move to address France’s past in Algeria, which it occupied from 1830 to 1962, comes before the 60th anniversary of Algerian independence this year, just as far-right candidates in the spring French presidential election continue to focus on issues of immigration, Islam and divisions in society. Macron had sparked controversy, including criticism from some pieds noirs groups, during the last presidential campaign in 2017 when he declared that France’s colonisation of Algeria was a “crime against humanity”. He later backtracked on his comments, calling for “neither denial nor repentance” over France’s colonial history and adding: “We cannot remain trapped in the past.” Since then, he is seen as going further than previous French presidents in beginning to officially recognise the brutality of the Algeria conflict, although rights groups and historians have said Paris has further to go in reconciling France with its colonial past. In 2018, Macron acknowledged that the French military instituted a “system” that facilitated torture as it sought to cling on to its 130-year rule in the country – a landmark admission by France. He used the case of the mathematician Maurice Audin, a Communist pro-independence activist who disappeared in 1957, to make a far-reaching comment about France’s sanctioning of torture, going further than any previous president. Last year, Macron admitted that French soldiers tortured and killed Algerian lawyer and activist Ali Boumendjel, in 1957 during the country’s independence war. The death had been recorded as suicide. “No crime, no atrocity committed by anyone during the Algerian war can be excused or remain secret,” the president’s office said at the time. Last year, Macron asked forgiveness for the failures of France towards the Algerians known as “harkis”, a loaded and often pejorative term for the Algerian Muslims who helped the French in the brutal eight-year independence war and faced discrimination and poverty in France. Macron also said in a statement last autumn that a bloody police operation against Algerian protesters in Paris on 17 October 1961, which led to dozens of deaths that have never been legally investigated and in which protesters were beaten and thrown into the Seine, amounted to crimes that were “inexcusable” for France. But he was accused by historians and rights groups for stopping short of an official state apology.A postmortem has confirmed that an elderly Palestinian-American man who died after being detained in an Israeli raid had a “stress-induced sudden cardiac arrest stemming from external violence”, after witnesses challenged soldiers’ accounts of events in the high-profile incident. Omar Abdalmajeed As’ad, 78, was detained in his village of Jiljilya in the occupied West Bank at an impromptu road checkpoint on 12 January and “apprehended after resisting a check”, according to an Israel Defence Forces (IDF) statement. He was handcuffed, gagged and blindfolded for between 20 minutes and an hour, and his body was discovered by local residents and others detained in the raid after the soldiers left. A copy of the Palestinian justice ministry-commissioned autopsy, released on Wednesday and seen by the Guardian, said As’ad had internal bleeding in his eyelids as a result of pressure on his eyes, abrasions and bruises, and redness around the wrists from being cuffed with zip ties. It also noted he had several pre-existing heart problems. Palestinian officials previously alleged that As’ad had been beaten. According to initial military investigation findings leaked to Israeli news outlets, the soldiers involved in the incident realised As’ad had gone quiet and thought he looked a little “stoned” before “falling asleep”. After the zip ties were cut, the soldiers left without checking his wellbeing, despite the fact a military medic was nearby, Haaretz reported. In interviews, several witnesses said As’ad had clearly lost consciousness and stopped breathing before the soldiers left. They said he was left lying on the ground, rather than sitting in a chair, at the construction site where he was held. A separate report on the Ynet news website on a leaked military summary of events suggested that none of the troops involved “would be indicted, nor have they been suspended.” It quoted military lawyers representing the soldiers as saying As’ad had been “lawfully detained during the operation in accordance with procedures” and “his death is not related to the conduct of the military force”. The IDF’s international spokesperson Lt Col Amnon Shefler said on Wednesday that he had no immediate comment on the autopsy’s findings. “The investigations are continuing. If we find wrongdoing then of course we will demand answers from the soldiers, and if needed they will be punished as according to our protocols and our values,” he said. In a previous statement, the military said As’ad was alive when the soldiers released him, but that the military police criminal investigation division was reviewing the incident. As’ad and his wife emigrated to the US in the 1970s, running a grocery store in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, before retiring and returning to the West Bank a decade ago. The 78-year-old’s US citizenship means that his case has received more international attention than most civilian deaths related to Israel’s military occupation of the Palestinian territories. In 2021, security forces killed 41 Palestinians in the West Bank who were not involved in attacking or allegedly attacking Israelis, according to the human rights group B’Tselem. The US state department has asked Israel for “clarification” on As’ad’s death, while his family and several members of Congress have demanded a US-led investigation.The Commons has adjourned for the day, meaning that making a statement to MPs tonight on the Sue Gray report into the partygate scandal is no longer an option for Boris Johnson. Johnson had at one point been expected to publish the report, and take questions on it from MPs, today. But No 10 has not given any more detailed guidance on when it will be published, and there has even been speculation about it being delayed until next week. We are pausing the blog tonight, but if anything changes in the next few hours, we’ll revive the blog immediately. Keir Starmer has called in parliament for Boris Johnson to resign immediately for misleading MPs over Downing Street parties, saying the prime minister’s continued attempts to save his career were causing “immense damage to public trust”. Foreign Office emails appear to contradict Downing Street’s insistence that Boris Johnson did not personally authorise the controversial rescue of cats and dogs from a British animal charity in Afghanistan. That’s all from me for today. But if there are any important developments in the Waiting for Sue Gray saga later tonight, a colleague will reactivate the blog. ITV’s Anushka Asthana has been tweeting on the Boris Johnson fightback operation. The SNP wants Boris Johnson to come to the Commons to explain why he said he was not involved in the decision to allow animals to be rescued as part of the British Kabul evacuation when emails published today say the opposite. In a statement Alyn Smyth, the SNP’s foreign affairs spokesman at Westminster, said: Boris Johnson is stumbling from one scandal to the next – how many revelations can we have that contradict the prime minister’s stated position before we discount every word he says? The leaked redacted excerpts from these emails seem to give the lie to Mr Johnson’s denial of any personal intervention in getting cats and dogs in Afghanistan to safety before people. If true, this raises serious questions for the UK government. The reality is that the UK government’s exit was dominated by chaos and incompetence. There were countless cases of people in Afghanistan - including those who helped UK armed forces and those at real risk of Taliban reprisals - being left behind. The prime minister stated explicitly at the time that the UK was prioritising the evacuation of people, but this now seems deeply questionable. The prime minister cannot dodge this latest scandal and he must come before parliament to address his conduct urgently. The debate in the Commons is now over, and the house has adjourned. That means there is no chance of Boris Johnson making a statement to MPs tonight on the Sue Gray report. We have still not heard what the plans are for publishing the report, but No 10 has always said it wants its publication to be followed by a Commons statement from Johnson soon afterwards. From the BBC’s Peter Saull In the Commons the adjournment debate, the final piece of business before the adjournment, has just started. In response to a point of order, Rosie Winterton, the deputy Speaker, told MPs that the Speaker’s office has not yet had a request from the government to schedule a statement on the Sue Gray report later today. She said that if such request came in before the end of the adjournment debate, the sitting could be suspended and a statement could be scheduled for later tonight. But if the house adjourns first, that won’t be an option, she said. Adjournment debates normally last just half an hour. Sky’s Jon Craig says a minister told him not to expect the Gray report tonight. A senior former Whitehall official said legal complications with the publication of Sue Gray’s report were likely to be guided by police advice and the possibility of prejudicing any future criminal trial. But, given the Met police are understood to have broadly agreed to have the report published, the risk of any offences proceeding to criminal trial are low – the offences carry fixed penalty notices. The other risk government lawyers will be considering is the risk of defamation of those named in the report – if they contest its findings or believe that things have been published that are known to be untrue. Again, it is unlikely to be a great risk, especially as there may be an argument the report has qualified privilege. The main argument against publishing all the evidence Gray has collated is a fairness point: junior officials who carried the cake into the cabinet room would face disproportionate harm if they were named. Instead, the official said, Gray’s report was unlikely to contain any photos or lurid WhatsApp, but to take a broader view of the facts of the different events and the culture that developed in Downing Street under senior leadership, including the prime minister. My colleague Aubrey Allegretti says time is running out for a statement in the Commons on the Gray report today. The FT’s Robert Shrimsley says it would suit No 10 for the report to come out this evening. From ITV’s Anushka Asthana In the Commons the Labour MP Chris Bryant and the Lib Dem MP Layla Moran both raised the discrepancy between what Boris Johnson said in the past about his involvement in the decision to allow animals to be evacuated from Kabul with support from the MoD, and the revelation today that he was involved. (See 1.47pm and 2.17pm.) Bryant said: The prime minister said on August 26 that he had no influence on that particular case and nor would that be right. On December 7 he was asked ‘Did you intervene to get Pen Farthing’s animals out?’ He said: ‘No, that is complete nonsense.’ And a Downing Street spokesperson said: ‘Neither the prime minister nor Mrs Johnson were involved.’ Yet today the foreign affairs committee has been able to publish a letter from Lord Goldsmith’s office which says the ‘prime minister has just authorised their staff and animals to be evacuated’. How can I get to the bottom of who is telling the truth? And Moran asked what could be done to ensure these “discrepancies” were “clarified”. Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Speaker, said that if ministers made incorrect statements to MPs, they should correct the record as soon as possible. He also said he expected that to happen in this case, and he urged Bryant and Moran to pursue the matter further. Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Speaker of the Commons, told MPs during points of order that he was committed to ensuring that they get time to read the Sue Gray report before Boris Johnson takes questions on it in the chamber. He was responding to a question from Peter Bone (Con), who wanted an assurance that if the report were released on Thursday, there would be a statement in the Commons on Friday. Hoyle replied: The prime minister has promised to make a statement. What I would expect is that members will be able to see the report and I would hope time will be given for members to digest that. Hoyle also said that he would be happy to adjourn the house at some point this afternoon, and schedule a statement in the evening, if necessary. He said: I’m more than happy to adjourn and leave it until later tonight if it arrives now, to give good time, I’m happy to work with the leader of the house to ensure this house is treated correctly, fairly and in the right manner. So I reassure him that those conversations between my office and the leader’s office, as well as Downing Street, are taking place to do the right thing by this house. And here is a summary of the main lines from the post-PMQs Downing Street lobby briefing. No 10 said it still had not received Sue Gray’s report. (See 1.25pm.) The prime minister’s spokesman backed away from past claims that Boris Johnson had no involvement in the government’s decision to allow dogs and cats from animal rescue home run by a former British soldier to be evacuated from Kabul last summer. At the the decision provoked outrage because of the implication - denied by the MoD - that this used up resources that could have been used to help humans. Last month Johnson said the claim that he was personally involved was “complete nonsense”. But today Johnson’s spokesman said: “It remains the case that the PM didn’t instruct officials to take any particular course of action.” The spokesman said he was not aware of any plans by the Metropolitan police to interview Johnson over parties at No 10. The spokesman said Johnon intended to publish the findings of the Sue Gray report as they were received. He said: The findings will be made public in line with the terms of reference. It is our intention to publish those findings as received. Here is my colleague Peter Walker’s story about the Johnson/Starmer exchanges at PMQs. Foreign Office emails appear to contradict Downing Street denials that Boris Johnson did not personally authorise the controversial rescue of cats and dogs from a British animal charity in Afghanistan, my colleague Dan Sabbagh reports. His story is here. With Johnson already trying to fend off claims that the partygate revelations have highlighted his lack of honesty, this story has landed at a particularly damaging time because it adds to the charge sheet against him. In December last year Johnson said it was “complete nonsense” to claim he intervened to help the rescue of the animals during the evacuation in Kabul earlier in the summer. Asked at the post-PMQs lobby briefing about the latest revelations, the prime minister’s spokesman said: “It remains the case that the PM didn’t instruct officials to take any particular course of action.” Downing Street has still not received the Sue Gray report, the PM’s spokesman told journalists at the post-PMQs lobby briefing. This means that the likelihood of publication being delayed until tomorrow is increasing. I will post a full summary from the briefing shortly. Many people consider exchanges at PMQs largely pointless and, while sometimes they illuminate the key policy arguments dividing the parties, often they don’t. Today the Johnson/Starmer contest was in that category. It did not really take us anywhere. But often the real audience for PMQs is not the public at large, but those in the chamber, and today – more than usual – it sounded as though Boris Johnson was primarily interested in shoring up his standing with Conservative MPs. It is quite possible that the Sue Gray report (about which we learned nothing new today, not even its timing) will trigger a Tory no-confidence vote. If so, Johnson will have to appear at a 1922 Committee hustings (a hustings against himself, in effect). If you want to understand what he was up to at PMQs today, think of it as a rehearsal for the speech he will give there. What did we learn? The main thing, probably, was just that he is up for the fight. The figure we saw in that TV interview with Beth Rigby eight days ago seems to have vanished. Otherwise the pitch was the usual mixture of boosterism and dishonesty (the claim the government is cutting tax is particularly egregious), although Johnson did seem to be hardening his language on the Northern Ireland protocol. (See 12.28pm.) Johnson did deploy a new attack line against Keir Starmer, “a lawyer not a leader”, which worked reasonably well in the chamber. Interestingly, the former Ukip MEP Patrick O’Flynn claimed he used it first in a Telegraph column. Judging by the noise, all this went down well with Tory MPs. But you know what? At PMQs, or in the chamber generally, you can’t judge by the noise. MPs, particularly Conservative ones, are very capable of cheering a leader to the rafters while privately disparaging them and doing their best to remove them. It probably is the case that some Johnson loyalists have become more willing to rally to his side in recent days (we saw that in the Michael Ellis UQ yesterday), but it would be a mistake to interpret the noise level this afternoon as firm evidence that opinion is shifting back in Johnson’s favour within his parliamentary party. Starmer was suitably withering, but it felt as if he is holding back until his next encounter with Johnson – later today or tomorrow – once the Gray report is out. He got Johnson to confirm that he accepts the rule that he must resign if he has misled parliament, and then he argued that Johnson’s comments about partying at No 10 last year clearly show that he did lie. Some of Johnson’s critics believe that this ought to be what forces him to go, but parliament does not really have a body willing to arbitrate on these matters (apart from the standards committee, which has shown no interest in becoming a PMQs fact-checking body), and Johnson can argue that his “rules followed at all times” statements either applied to specific dates, or were true to the best of his knowledge. (The ministerial code says “knowingly” misleading the Commons is the problem, not any misleading.) Starmer dropped this line of attack after his second question, perhaps suggesting he thinks there are limits to how far it will take him. Johnson used the “lawyer not leader” jibe in his final answer, and so Starmer did not have a chance to reply. But Lloyd Russell-Moyle, a Labour Corbynite with form for parliamentary hooliganism, rode to his defence by declaring: “I would prefer to be led by a lawyer than a liar.” He received the expected rebuke from the Speaker, but it was the best retort of the entire session, and not a bad slogan for the opposition. Rob Butler (Con) says there is a real threat of China invading Taiwan. Will the government always stand up for freedom and democracy? Johnson says the recent Chinese flights near Taiwan are not conducive to peace and stability. And that’s it. PMQs is over. Richard Burgon (Lab) says a nurse who organised a demonstration against pay cuts was fined £10,000. “For God’s sake, resign,” he says. Johnson says of course the Labour party want him to resign. Labour has nothing to say, he says. John McNally (SNP) asks about spending on zero-emission buses. Johnson says there has never in this country been “such a bonanza for buses”. He wants to see all parts of the UK benefit. Rushanara Ali (Lab) says instead of writing off loans to fraudsters, Johnson should write his resignation letter to the Queen. Johnson says the Tories are the party of hope and opportunity. Sir Mike Penning (Con) asks about a meeting on a new hospital in Hemel Hempstead. The PM promised that at a previous PMQs. Penning says he was finally offered the meeting last night. Instead he asks about making medical cannabis more easily available for children who need it. Johnson says he backs that, provided the MHRA approves that. Lloyd Russell-Moyle (Lab) says “happy unbirthday” to Johnson. Like the Mad Hatter, Johnson does not need a birthday for an excuse for a party. He says his constituents think Johnson is a liar. He repeats the point, prompting the Speaker to intervene. Russell-Moyle then goes on: I would prefer to be led by a lawyer than a liar. Will he now resign? The Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, tells Russell-Moyle to withdraw that. He does. Johnson says Russell-Moyle does not know what he is talking about. Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, the DUP leader, says the Northern Ireland protocol has added 27% to the cost of bringing goods to Northern Ireland from Britain. Will the government restore NI’s place in the UK single market? Johnson says he agrees. He says 200 businesses have stopped supplying NI. The EU is implementing the protocol in an “insane and pettifogging way”, he claims. Ian Blackford, the SNP leader at Westminster, says the PM is being investigated by the police for breaking his own laws. Every moment he stays he drags out the agony for families. When will he go? Johnson says Blackford made the same point last week. He was wrong then and is wrong now, he says. Blackford says every moment the PM lingers, he is sucking attention from the real issues facing the public. The national insurance hike “hangs like a guillotine while they eat cake”. It is time for the PM to get this over with, and go. Johnson says he is not sure who has been eating most cake (a reference to Blackford’s waistline). And he says (as he often does at PMQs) that in private he gets on well with Blackford. (This is not intended to be helpful to Blackford in Scotland.) Simon Baynes (Con) asks about the levelling up fund. Johnson says he once fought Clwyd South, the seat now represented by Baynes. He says the government is levelling up. Starmer says we have the spectacle of a PM under police investigation. And as the cabinet refuse to speak out, they become more complicit. He says whatever Johnson says in his statement today or tomorrow, the PM has not shown respect for this country. No, says Johnson. He says Starmer wants him out of the way. Many people do, he says. He say Starmer wants him out because he can be trusted to deliver. He delivered Brexit and the vaccine programme, he says. He says he is going to unite and level up. The problem for Labour is that Starmer is “a lawyer not a leader”. He has taken the tough decisions, and got the big calls right. He is “getting on with the job”. Starmer says the cabinet has treated Scotland with “utter disdain”. He is referring to Jacob Rees-Mogg’s comments about Douglas Ross. Johnson claims he has been focusing on the NHS. There are more NHS staff, and the government is fixing social care. Labour has no plan. “Vote Labour, wait longer,” he says. Starmer says the PM went into hiding for five days because of these allegations. Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Speaker, intervenes to say the jeering is too loud. Starmer says No 10 has said the full report will be published, not a summary or edited copy. Will it be published when the PM receives it? Johnson says he will do “exactly what he said”. But people want to hear what the government is doing to help people with issuess like the cost of living. The government is cutting tax, he claims. And he claims Labour wants to abolish universal credit. Starmer turns to the police decision to investigate No 10. As Tories heckle, he tells the PM: If you do not understand the significance of what happened yesterday, I really do despair. He says the police said they would only investigate the most “flagrant” breaches of the rules. And he refers to the threshold passed for the police to investigate. Johnson claims there is no way he can comment on these issues. He says he is focusing on bringing the west together to threaten Russia with the toughest package of sanctions. Starmer needs to “raise his game”, he says. Starmer says Johnson has confirmed he must resign he if misled parliament. He says he told MPs last year that the guidance was followed completely, and there was no party. So will he resign? No, says Johnson. He says Starmer has been “relentlessly opportunistic”. Labour would have kept the country in lockdown, he says. He calls Starmer “Captain Hindsight” and says he (Johnson) got all the big calls right. Keir Starmer asks if Johnson thinks the part of the ministerial code saying that ministers who knowingly mislead parliament must resign applies to him. Yes, says Johnson. But he says Starmer is trying to get him to comment on something in advance he cannot comment on yet. He is launching a plan tomorrow to get 500,000 people off welfare and into work, he says. Craig Tracey (Con) asks the PM to join him in thanking health service workers. Will he issue a medal to all key workers who served during the pandemic? Johnson says he supports the plan for a medal by Tracey’s local hospital. Kate Osamor (Lab) asks if the PM agreed with the chancellor to write off £4.3bn of fraud. Of course not, says Johnson. Everyone should be proud of the huge effort made by government to secure PPE and ventilators, he says. Johnson starts by saying Sunday is the 50th anniversary of Bloody Sunday. We should learn from the past, reconcile and build a peaceful future, he says. Boris Johnson gets loud cheers as he enters the chamber. From the Independent’s John Rentoul Paul Waugh from the i wonders if this will come up at PMQs today. From my colleague Peter Walker, who has been watching Northern Ireland questions in the Commons PMQs is starting shortly. Here is the list of MPs down to ask a question. Boris Johnson will be leaving Downing Street for PMQs shortly. Here is the scene outside his front door. This is from Sky’s Joshua Masters. Ipsos Mori has published polling this morning suggesting that the proportion of people saying lack of faith in politicians is a big issue for this country, at 25%, is at its highest level since the pollster started recording this in 2016. This is from Ipsos Mori’s Michael Clemence. There will be an urgent question in the Commons at 12.30pm, after PMQs, on proposals for an economic crime bill. Although the main factor that will determine whether or not Conservative MPs decide to replace Boris Johnson as party leader will be their assessment as to whether or not keeping him will increase or decrease their chances at the next election, for some of them policy and ideology will be relevant too. A new leader would have more opportunity to change course. With this in mind it is worth noting that Lord Frost, who resigned as Brexit minister before Christmas, restated his call last night for the government to embrace a low tax agenda. He was endorsing a column by Philip Johnston in the Daily Telegraph. Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, is understood to be one of the cabinet ministers most likely to agree with David Frost on this, and most sceptical about the case for the £12bn national insurance increase the government is going ahead with in April. But, in her Sky News interview, asked if the increase would be reconsidered, she replied: “No.” She said: Cabinet has made the decision to proceed with the National Insurance increase and we’re all behind that, and there are no plans to change that. And later told LBC: “The decision has been made on national insurance, that was a collective decision and it’s going ahead.” Truss gave a firmer answer on this than Johnson himself did on Monday, when he refused to firmly commit to the national insurance increase going ahead. Sir Bob Neill, the Conservative MP and chair of the Commons justice committee, says Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, was talking “nonsense” last night when he argued that a new prime minister would have to call a general election. (See 8.49am.) Newsnight’s Lewis Goodall says the Sue Gray report will definitely be formally handed over to No 10 today. But that does not guarantee it will be published today. WH means Whitehall (not the Biden administration). The Lib Dems are arguing that Boris Johnson should be placed on gardening leave while under investigation by the police, in line with what happens in other workplaces when someone is subject to disciplinary proceedings. In a statement Alastair Carmichael, the Lib Dems’ home affairs spokesperson, said: Since Boris Johnson is such a fan of spending time in his garden, it’s only fitting that he be placed on gardening leave and leave Number 10 whilst the police investigate. This will ensure he cannot try and abuse his position to get himself off the hook. Refusing to do so will show both the Conservatives’ utter contempt for the public and erode trust in this government even further. Arguably this is softening of the Lib Dem position; until now, they have been saying he should just resign. Unsurprisingly, Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, approves of the Daily Mail’s take on partygate. These are from ITV’s political editor Robert Peston, explaining what he thinks is going on with the Sue Gray report. The Daily Mail has been more supportive of Boris Johnson in recent weeks than any other paper and this morning it has splashed on a story premised on the notion that Johnson’s critics are failing to maintain a sense of proportion over the importance of partygate. In his Today interview this morning Chris Bryant, the Labour MP who chairs the Commons standards committee, said that Johnson’s allies must be “utterly stupid” if they expected people to accept this argument. He explained: If I could just say something about this argument that Boris Johnson’s henchmen are advancing, that this is all small beer and we should all just forget about it... This whole idea that the prime minister was ambushed by a cake and all of that ... I honestly do think that they think that the British people must be utterly stupid. The truth of the matter is that this is a pattern of behaviour. It’s not just one event, it’s dozens of events, and every single one of us can recite a moment when a family member had to do without. The line about the prime minister being “ambushed by cake”, at the suprrise birthday event laid on for him in the cabinet room when indoor social gatherings were against the rules, came from Johnson loyalist Conor Burns. Burns, a Northern Ireland minister, told Channel 4 News last night: “As far as I can see, he was, in a sense, ambushed with a cake. They came to his office with a cake, they sang Happy Birthday, he was there for 10 minutes. I don’t think most people looking at that at home would characterise that as a party.” James Forsyth, the Spectator’s political editor, says Jacob Rees-Mogg’s claim last night that a new Conservative leader would have to call a general election (see 8.49am) has gone down badly with some Tory MPs. Chris Bryant, the Labour MP who chairs the Commons standards committee, told the Today programme this morning that Boris Johnson thought he was “above the law” and that Johnson thought it did not matter if people at Downing Street ignored rules everyone else was following. Bryant said: This is why it’s utterly despicable that we’ve had to go through all of this, because you’ve got the complete erosion of the prime minister’s moral authority because of this pattern of behaviour. It’s so disrespectful to the bus drivers, the nurses in ICU and everybody else that Tory MPs come on the air and say ‘Well, all these people in Downing Street, we’re working terribly hard.’ Well, I’m sorry, everybody was working terribly hard. The Conservative MP Robert Halfon, chair of the Commons education committee, told Times Radio this morning that he would like to see Boris Johnson “respond and take responsibility” for partygate. He said: I don’t need Sue Gray or the police to tell me or my constituents of Harlow that what’s gone on has been pretty awful. We all feel let down and disappointed. We’ve just been talking about education and what I’d say is, I call it the three Rs, I’d like to see the three Rs from the prime minister. How he’s going to respond to the anguish and upset from the public, how he’s going to take responsibility himself and his own staff and how he’s going to reset the government. I’ll wait for the parliamentary statement. Here is a question from below the line worth answering up here. The answer is no. The Green party peer Jenny Jones said yesterday she would like the police to consider whether Boris Johnson or others are guilty of this offence. The lawyer Adam Wagner has also speculated on Twitter about this being a possibility. Misconduct in public office carries a maximum sentence of life imprisonment, so clearly an investigation on these grounds would somewhat escalate the seriousness of this crisis. But yesterday Dame Cressida Dick, the commissioner of the Metropolitan police, said clearly that the new investigation into Downing Street related to “potential breaches of Covid-19 regulations”. And she said that if the inquiry did lead to action being taken against anyone, the penalty would be a fine. Johnson’s critics sometimes argue a misconduct in public office prosecution against him would be justified, and this was one recommendation from the People’s Covid Inquiry last year. But, although prosecutions under this offence have been going up in recent years, it is still seen as a relatively archaic offence, and it tends to be used to prosecute corrupt public officials. There is no recent precedent for it being used against a government minister. In an article for Politico Angela Rayner, the deputy Labour leader, has restated her party’s call for Boris Johnson’s resignation. “We don’t need the Sue Gray report to know that Boris Johnson needs to go,” she says. Rayner also argues that the rest of the cabinet is at fault for defending him. It’s not just the prime minister playing the British people for fools. The rest of the cabinet have spent weeks defending the indefensible when in reality, like the rest of us, they could see through the lies and deceit. It’s not good enough for them to now say, “not me pal.” They had the chance to stand up for decency in public life. Instead, they appeared on the television day after day, more concerned with trying to save their jobs than doing the right thing. But the British people aren’t fools, and they won’t forget or forgive ministers who stood by as the prime minister partied and the rest of us followed the rules. In her Today interview Liz Truss was asked about something Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, said on Newsnight last night. The very fact that Rees-Mogg was on Newsnight was notable in itself. For much of his cabinet career No 10 would not let him anywhere near big, mainstream broadcast interviews, because he was seen as too much of a liability. But enthusiastic supporers of Boris Johnson are in short supply in the government, and Rees-Mogg has now been on Newsnight twice within a fortnight. His first appearance saw him calling the leader of the Scottish Conservatives, Douglas Ross, “a lightweight” (Ross has called for Johnson to resign), a comment that offended not just Ross, but much of Scotland. Last night Rees-Mogg used his interview to advance an interesting, but novel, constitutional theory. Johnson’s acolytes in the Conservative party are telling MPs that, if they vote to replace him, the new prime minister will be obliged to call a general election - a prospect that should be unappealing to Tories with the party well behind in the polls (by eight points, according to this one from yesterday). Technically, this is untrue. Within the last 40 years, John Major, Gordon Brown and Theresa May all became prime minister without feeling the need to call a swift election. But Rees-Mogg told the Newsnight: It is my view that we’ve moved, for better or worse, to essentially a presidential system, and therefore the mandate is personal rather than entirely party, and any PM would be very well advised to seek a fresh mandate. Gordon Brown didn’t and that didn’t work; Boris Johnson did and that did work. I think the days of Macmillan taking over from Eden or even Callaghan taking from Wilson no longer get the mood of the constitution and our constitution evolves. So I my view a change of leader requires a general election. This may come as a surprise to those who thought people like Rees-Mogg favoured Brexit because it would restore the primacy of parliament, not a president. The historian Robert Saunders has an interesting Twitter thread on Rees-Mogg’s argument starting here. Q: Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, said last night that if Boris Johnson were replaced, there would have to be a general election. Do you agree? That is completely hypothetical, Truss says. Q: MPs are talking about you becoming the next Tory leader. Is that your ambition? Truss says she wants Johnson to continue in his job. “He is doing a great job, I support him 100%,” she says. And that’s it. The Truss interview is moving on to partygate. Q: How serious is the police investigation? Truss says they are awaiting the Sue Gray report. She does not want to pre-judge that. “I suspect we won’t have much longer to wait.” Q: But we know what the Met police commissioner said. She said the evidence met the threshold for “the most serious and flagrant” breach of the rules. Truss says it is best to wait for the investigation. Only once the evidence has been examined can the police come to a decision. Q: Was the PM blind to this when he told the Commons repeatedly he had no evidence of rule breaking. Truss says she does not know what happened. Q: Do you take him at his word when he says no rules were broken? Truss says she takes him at his word. Q: Would he have to resign if fined? Some people say this would be no more serious than a speeding fine. Truss says she won’t answer a hypothetical question. Q: Has trust been lost? Truss says she wants to wait for the full report to see what it says. The PM has admitted mistakes have been made. “Clearly things will have to be looked.” Q: You accept political damage has been done? Truss says the PM himself has said mistakes were made, which implies there will need to be changes. Martha Kearney is now interviewing Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, on the Today programme now. They start with Ukraine. Truss says the UK has ruled nothing out in terms of the sanctions it might impose on Russia in the event of an invasion. Sanctions would cover financial institutions and individuals, she says. In her Sky News interview Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, said she supported Boris Johnson 100%. She said: The prime minister has appeared before parliament, he has apologised for what has happened. He’s admitted that mistakes were made and I 100% support him, and want him to continue as prime minister. Good morning. The much-awaited report from the civil servant Sue Gray into partygate - which has joined the small and select group of official Whitehall reports in history seen as having the potential to end a prime minister’s career - may be published later today. Or it may not come until tomorrow. As I write, to the immense frustration of the Westminster political-media establishment, and many others, no one actually knows. Sorry about that. But we do know that the report has not yet officially been handed over to Downing Street, because Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, has said so her morning interview round. Asked if No 10 had yet to receive it, she told Sky News within the last hour: That’s correct. And, of course, it’s an independent report, it’s a matter for Sue Gray when she sends that report, when she’s completed her work. Truss also said that “security issues” might prevent parts of the report from being published. We have been absolutely clear that we will publish the findings of the report. We don’t know the content of the report, so there could be, for example, security issues that mean parts of it are problematic to publish. But we will absolutely publish the findings of the report. Boris Johnson has indicated that he will publish the report very soon after receiving it, and make a statement about it to the Commons. The fact that it is still not yet on his desk means that such a statement is extremely unlikely to happen straight after PMQs, although potentially he could come back to parliament later. Or he could wait until tomorrow. Once the report is out, and particularly if it is anything like as damning as some commentators suggest, Conservative MPs who have been holding back from demanding a vote of no confidence in the prime minister could submit the necessary letters to the 1922 Committee chairman, Sir Graham Brady. There is a very real chance of that vote happening before the end of the week. Today I will be focusing almost exclusively on this story. Here is our overnight preview. And here is my colleague Heather Stewart’s guide to the key questions the Gray report could answer. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to holdinanswer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comNewcastle are close to signing Bruno Guimarães from Lyon after the defensive midfielder agreed to the move and the French club accepted a €40m (£33.5m) bid. Subject to details involving agents and the clubs being finalised, Guimarães will take a medical when he returns to Brazil from Ecuador, where he is with his national team for Thursday’s World Cup qualifier. Payments terms are among the issues still to be resolved between the teams. Other clubs, including Arsenal and Juventus, had hoped to buy Guimarães at the end of the season but Newcastle have got in ahead of them. The player joined Lyon in January 2020 from the Brazilian club Athletico Paranaense. Newcastle have had a bid for the Brighton defender Dan Burn rejected as their pursuit of a central defender continued. The offer for the 29-year-old is understood to have been about £9m. Newcastle turned to Burn because Sevilla remain adamant they will not sell Diego Carlos. An earlier attempt to sign Sven Botman from Lille was also unsuccessful. Jesse Lingard is prominent on Newcastle’s list to strengthen in forward areas but Manchester United’s demands have left a proposed loan on the verge of collapse. Kieran Trippier and Chris Wood have been the first two signings of the Saudi Arabian-led era at St James’ Park.The celebrity chef Jamie Oliver and campaigners aiming to improve the quality of school lunches are to meet with the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, after Oliver teamed up with the leaders of hundreds of schools urging the government to tackle the rise in child obesity since the Covid pandemic. Oliver’s charity Bite Back 2030, with headteachers and academy trust executives, wrote to Zahawi to lobby for changes to the government’s planned food strategy, and to call for schools in England to publish annual food reports showing what progress they have made in meeting standards on health and nutrition. Oliver – who helped start a national debate over unhealthy school lunches when he exposed the spread of Turkey Twizzlers as part of the 2005 TV series Jamie’s School Dinners – said the quality of food was unreliable in too many schools and still needed to be improved. “Whether your child gets good food at school is currently a postcode lottery. That’s why I’m supporting a growing army of teachers, young people and charities who are all calling on Nadhim Zahawi to make it policy that every school publishes their annual plan so every child gets healthy nutritious food at school, no matter where they live,” Oliver said. The letter drew a quick response from Zahawi after Oliver tweeted about the issue on Wednesday, with the education secretary thanking him “for raising this important issue” and offering to arrange a meeting. The letter was backed by executives representing many of England’s largest multi-academy trusts – including Ark, Star Academies and Ormiston Academies Trust – totalling more than 600 individual schools. “We know that a major driver of poor Covid-19 outcomes in the UK has been our spiralling obesity rates,” the letter to Zahawi states. “The causes of childhood obesity and health inequalities are of course complex, but we believe – as school leaders – that with young people in school 190 days of the year, schools should be supported to do everything we can to set the stage for dietary health. That means government taking the opportunity – as it formulates its levelling up strategy and food strategy – to rethink, review and reform how the school food system works in England.” The letter follows a recent report compiled by Bite Back that highlighted the vastly different experiences of food offered at secondary schools, with pupils on free school meals reporting they were given fewer choices. One student said: “There aren’t any healthy options, to be fair. My school used to do salad bowls and fruit bowls, but they’ve stopped that now and it is literally just junk food.” Critics say one reason for the decline in food quality and choice has been the Department for Education’s failure to increase payments for school food, including infant free school meals available for all children in the first years of primary school. The government pays just £2.34 for each child’s food per day, a rate that has barely changed since 2011.Nothing is more radical in fashion than an even slightly rounded thigh or tummy. At Paris haute couture fashion week, Valentino challenged the catwalk’s last taboo by using models whose bodies were mostly close to average size, rather than super skinny. With the elegant understatement for which his dresses are known, designer Pierpaolo Piccioli observed simply that he “thought it was time for a change”. The enduring hegemony of the size zero ideal in fashion has been obscured by the trend for using one or two token “plus size” models in a show – often dressed in longer, looser garments than their slender colleagues, lest their flesh offend. Here, by contrast, leather-look satin hugged normal-sized curves, and sharp thigh-high splits in silk faille skirt flashed glimpses of soft thigh. Bustier dress met skin with a hint of softly oozing flesh, rather than with the clang of zipper against shoulderblade. Fashion has trailed behind culture in clinging rigidly to model proportions unchanged in a century. Valentino looked dreamier than ever on more relatable bodies, which showed off Piccioli’s skill as a couturier – a factor that will, perhaps, prompt other designers to follow suit. “The message does not change in its purpose, which is to convey beauty, but in its welcoming expression,” said the designer. Haute couture, where dresses are made to order with six-figure pricetags, is a unlikely conduit for the winds of modernity, but Piccioli believes that the symbolism of diversity in fashion’s highest echelon is powerful. In five years he has revolutionised what was once a bastion of patrician glamour into one of fashion’s more progressive names. A house forged in the image of its permatanned founder, Valentino Garavani, who dressed Jackie Kennedy and Elizabeth Taylor and had a sofa installed on his private jet for his beloved pugs, now stands for inclusivity. This show’s casting “reflects the richness and diversity of the contemporary world and … an idea of beauty that is not absolute”, Piccioli said. Two years ago, when a Valentino couture catwalk featured a cast of 65 models, 43 of whom were black, Piccioli said that “although [couture] celebrates uniqueness, which is a synonym for diversity, it has always meant to be [sic] for white people”. He told Vogue that in the context of rising anti-immigration feeling in his native Italy “to have a Roman brand represented by Black beauty goes against all the xenophobia in Italy”. This week’s Paris haute couture shows have seen a near return to live events, although with smaller audiences due to fewer visitors from Asia. However, the runup to New York fashion week, which begins in two weeks, has been hit by announcements of delays. Tom Ford, whose show had been scheduled for the closing night of the New York shows, has cancelled the event, citing Covid-related delays. “We have struggled internally over the past month with many of our staff out with Covid in our design studio and atelier in Los Angeles as well as in our factories in Italy … [we] are faced with the sad fact that we will simply not have a completed collection in time.” Designer Thom Browne also cited manufacturing delays as a factor in the postponement of his show from February’s fashion week to an April date adjacent to the Met Gala, New York’s most star-studded annual fashion party.The Six Nations chief executive, Ben Morel, has denied that Italy’s dismal recent record is damaging the credibility of the tournament and kept the door shut on South Africa joining Europe’s premier rugby event. Speaking at the launch of the 2022 men’s edition, which begins a week on Saturday, Morel rejected the idea of promotion and relegation in the Six Nations, but said the organisation is instead putting “all our resources” into plans for a new event within existing international windows. Italy’s last victory came against Scotland in 2015 and they endured a torrid campaign last year, with five heavy defeats accruing a points difference of –184. Morel, however, insisted that they deserve their place. “They’ve got young talent and they’re performing well at the under-20s regularly,” he said. “The conversion to the senior team has been their struggle. They’re putting a lot more resources behind it, and we’ve got all the faith in their management. “This is a year they’ve got three away games [in France, Ireland and Wales], so we need to be mindful, but they’ve got a young, exciting team. They know what they need to do. I don’t believe there’s a question of credibility [for the tournament].” Asked if promotion and relegation had been considered, Morel said: “No. It’s not on the current agenda. But we understand there needs to be a pathway for emerging nations to elite rugby.” It is not just emerging nations, such as Japan, that have been mentioned as potential entrants: the world champions South Africa have also been linked with a place at European rugby’s top table. But Morel said he remains “extremely cautious on the topic” of expansion. The priority is to agree significant changes to the existing international calendar, and that conversations are “active” with World Rugby and unions about a structured tournament beginning in 2024, after next year’s Rugby World Cup. “In order to give a stronger pathway to the emerging nations, whoever they may be in the north or southern hemisphere, there could be some adaptation to the July or the November windows,” Morel said. “That could give more competitive matches to those unions … to give them the experience that they need to get to that level. I think a priority right now would be to have a more structured July and November. “Our current strategic priority is we experienced a really successful Autumn Nations Series … we believe that we could enhance the sporting narrative and give every game a meaning and a link, hopefully culminating in some sort of final weekend. “In order for this to happen post-World Cup, we’d need to have this finalised before the summer. So these conversations are active. [There are] a lot of people to discuss it with, a lot of consultation … hopefully a good common solution can be identified. Where there’s a will, there’s a way.”My friend Ninon Leader, who has died aged 88, was a many-sided scholar and broadcaster. From 1978 until 1993, living in London, she was senior programme organiser at the Hungarian section of the BBC World Service. During these years, her radio series The Brits: A User’s Guide was a great success both in Britain and in Hungary. She wrote a book about the London she loved to explore, published in 2012 as Londonban Van, Hej, Sok Számos Utca… (There are Many Streets in London…), with the drawings of Mátyás Sárközi. Ninon was born in Budapest, Hungary, into a Jewish family, and survived the second world war on false papers in hiding. Her father, Imre Neményi, was a journalist, who died doing forced labour under the Nazis, so for a couple of years she was in an orphans’ home. The Scottish Mission where she hid was run by her godmother, the heroic charity worker Jane Haining, who in 1944 was deported by the Nazis and murdered in Auschwitz/Birkenau. I first met Ninon, who was then married to the poet Endre Kövesi, in the youth section of the Hungarian Writers’ Union, but we became friends only later while studying Hungarian language and literature at ELTE (Budapest University) in the mid-1950s. Ninon won numerous poetry reciting competitions at the university thanks to her clear, expressive voice and impressive presentation. Though already graduated, she took part in the revolution of October 1956 started by the students, and had to flee Hungary after its brutal suppression by the Soviet army. Like many Hungarians of the same generation, after arriving in Britain, Ninon obtained a research scholarship to study, in her case at Girton College, Cambridge, where she received a doctorate in 1961. She had married Eliot Leader, a Cambridge physicist, in 1959, her first marriage having ended in divorce, and travelled with him to the University of California at Berkeley where she taught Hungarian literature from 1962 to 1965. Her doctoral thesis, Hungarian Classical Ballads and Their Folklore, published by Cambridge University Press in 1967 (and reissued in 2011) received many favourable reviews. On returning from the US, Ninon received a research fellowship at Clare Hall, Cambridge, and for some years taught Hungarian there. It was when she and her family moved to London in the 1970s that she joined the Hungarian section of the BBC and became its senior programme organiser for nearly two decades. Ninon was a most likable person, with a wonderful sense of humour who would invariably end her telephone calls with a new joke or an old anecdote. She kept her cheerfulness as well as her intellectual alertness to the very end of her life. Ninon is survived by Imre and Darian, the sons from her second marriage, which ended in divorce, and five grandchildren.Police in Berlin have been authorised to crack down on protesters wearing badges resembling the yellow “Judenstern” (Jews’ star) and other symbols associated with the Nazi era at demonstrations against vaccine mandates or other pandemic restrictions. According to an internal update by the Berlin police antisemitism commissioner, first reported by the newspaper BZ Berlin, “the use of adapted ‘Jewish stars’ at gatherings can now be assumed to be a fundamental disturbance of public peace”. Police in the German capital have been instructed to document, remove and confiscate the yellow star badges, which some German vaccine sceptics have taken to wearing with the superimposed words “ungeimpft” (“unvaccinated”) in order to draw a parallel between modern governments’ treatment of those who decline to take a jab against Covid-19 and the systematic stigmatisation of Jewish citizens in the Nazi era. The police’s internal memo clarifies that wearing the blue and white Star of David, classified as a purely religious symbol, remains legal at demonstrations. In addition, police are also instructed to take action against other analogies that trivialise the Holocaust, which are to be classified as forms of “secondary antisemitism”. The guidelines follow a ruling by a Berlin district court that came into effect last October, when a 56-year-old man was sentenced to “incitement to hatred” over a Facebook post that showed the yellow star imprinted with the words “ungeimpft”. In a possible sign that Berlin is already acting on the guidelines, a woman wearing a placard with the words “stop this genocide” was filmed being detained by police at a rally against Covid-19 vaccine mandates outside the Bundestag on Wednesday afternoon. Berlin police said its officers had briefly detained a woman and taken her details on suspicion of incitement to hatred, the concept in German criminal law that also relates to Holocaust denial. The woman’s placard also referenced Vera Sharav, a US-based Holocaust survivor who has campaigned against some practices of the biomedical industry, including vaccines for children. Inside the German parliament, delegates were for the first time on Wednesday debating a universal vaccine mandate, which some politicians argue will be a necessary tool to stop further resurgences of the virus. About 73% of Germany’s population is considered fully vaccinated against Covid-19. While the government has positioned itself in favour of a mandate, some parliamentarians from the three governing parties are opposed, while others, including Germany’s justice minister, Marco Buschmann, argued in favour of following Italy’s path in requiring only those aged over 50 to take the jab.More than 1,300 reports of needle spiking have been made to UK police forces in less than six months, MPs have heard. Jason Harwin, the National Police Chiefs Council’s drugs lead, told a home affairs committee inquiry into spiking that police forces had received 1,382 reports of drug spiking using needles since September, compared with 1,903 crimes that could be linked to spiking in 2019. Forces were aware of 14 secondary offences, such as sexual assault or theft, potentially linked to needle spiking, he added. Harwin, the Lincolnshire police deputy chief constable, called needle spiking “a new phenomenon” and said forces were receiving an unprecedented volume of calls. Universities and student unions were also raising concerns with police, he said. “Students [are] saying ‘we are really worried about going into the night-time economy because these things are happening to our friends and colleagues’. We’ve not seen that before, the scale of that before,” he said. Dr Adrian Boyle, the head of emergency medicine for the NHS, previously told the inquiry there was “no hard, reliable data on the prevalence of spiking at the moment”, and said that in the majority of cases where people attended emergency departments with concerns about having been spiked, tests found no sedative drugs. Dean Ames, the forensic drugs operations manager at the Metropolitan police, told the inquiry on Monday that analysis of 100 toxicology samples undertaken by the Met had found “a small number of positive suspected spiking incidents to date”. About 30% of the samples contained a “controlled drug”, which could include prescribed medicines. After prescribed and self-administered drugs had been accounted for, the force had found one suspected spiking incident involving the sedating antihistamine diphenhydramine, another sample that included a chemical found in magic mushrooms, and a third containing GHB, which the committee separately heard was a viscous liquid that would be difficult to inject. Joy Allen, the Durham police and crime commissioner, said that between October and December the force recorded 82 spiking incidences, with 25 related to injections. “It’s a significant number and demonstrates the trend,” she said, adding that a “staggering” number of people who were spiked did not feel comfortable reporting it. Harwin said none of the cases of reported needle spiking had yet resulted in a prosecution, and police recognised that was “not enough”. Forces had to do more to stop offenders, make them realise they are committing a serious offence and change their behaviour, he said. Victims or witnesses of spiking can share their experiences through the committee’s public survey, which is open until 31 January.France’s Socialist party presidential candidate, Anne Hidalgo, has vowed to continue her campaign despite indications she has no chance of getting through to the second round of the contest in April. While political analysts and opinion pollsters have written her off, Hidalgo, who is mayor of Paris, said she remained the left’s best hope of leading France. She said it was too late to heal bitter divisions in the left, accusing rivals, including the Greens, of missing an historic chance to join forces. Another five years of Emmanuel Macron would leave France in a dangerously “deplorable” state, she said. “It will be ungovernable. It will be unmanageable. He has not understood the French. He has not understood the country. He sees the French as infants: there’s him and a country of children who are waiting for the divine word.” In an exclusive interview with the Guardian and two European newspapers, Hidalgo also questioned the validity of the much-publicised “people’s primary”, an unofficial popular vote to designate a preferred left-wing presidential candidate that opens on 27 January and runs until Sunday. Almost 467,000 people have signed up to take part but the main left-wing candidates, Hidalgo, the Green party’s Yannick Jadot, and Jean-Luc Mélenchon of the hard-left La France Insoumise, refused to take part. Only the former Socialist justice minister Christiane Taubira, who threw her hat into the presidential election ring 11 days ago, has said she will respect the result. “Whatever the result of the vote, Mélenchon will say, I continue; Jadot will say, I continue; I will say, I continue. The primaire populaire will follow its course but it will have no consequence on my candidacy,” Hidalgo said. Opinion polls have Hidalgo trailing badly with about 3% of intentions to vote, a disastrous score that would leave the Socialist party (PS) in an existential crisis. Any candidates scoring less than 5% of the polled vote in the first round will not have their campaign expenses reimbursed by the taxpayer, making it even more difficult for the party to fund candidates in the general election that follows. In an editorial, Le Monde described the PS as a “dead star”. “The presidential candidate [Hidalgo] is paying the price for the slow decay of a Socialist party that is now a shadow of its former self with barely 22,000 members,” it wrote. “Anne Hidalgo is not entirely to blame for her underperformance in the presidential election polls, which put her under the 5% required for the campaign expenses to be reimbursed.” Polls currently show Macron likely to be re-elected after facing Marine Le Pen of the far-right Rassemblement Nationale (National rally) or the mainstream right Les Républicains’ candidate Valérie Pécresse in the second round in April. The hard-right candidate Éric Zemmour is in fourth place followed by Mélenchon, Jadot and Hidalgo. Hidalgo hit back at the polling indications. “I am not at 3%,” she said, although she could not give a figure for her support. “I am confident the dynamic can be changed because the actual campaign hasn’t yet started. Emmanuel Macron has not yet declared he is standing and we don’t yet have all the candidates at the starting line. When it kicks off a lot of things will happen very quickly,” she said. “Let’s wait for the result of the election in April. Don’t tell me what the result will be today because the opinion polls say this or that. “I’ve been invited on to television programmes and wondered what the hell I was doing there. All they wanted to talk about was the polls, the polls, the polls, while at the same time there were articles explaining how polls were done and how opinion was being largely fabricated by those polls. “People told me the problem with the polls was that I wasn’t talking about what really interests the French like immigration and integration, but the French tell me their real concerns are about their spending power, their children’s future, their worries about health … while all they hear in the media is about Zemmour.” Émeric Bréhier, director of the Observatoire de la vie politique of the left-leaning Jean-Jaurès foundation and a lecturer at the Bordeaux Institute of Political Studies, said he believed the 2022 election was lost for the Socialist party. “It’s too late for the party to make a mark on this election. Each candidate on the left is swimming in their own lane and none of them wants to budge an inch. The Socialist party is in trouble and has been for several years. I can’t see at this stage how we can get out of that,” he said. Hidalgo agreed the French left had lost its “compass” and needed to reunite voters behind her 70-point social democrat programme. She said the PS had performed strongly in local elections in 2020 and 2021, and had a reservoir of loyal grassroots support across France. Her biggest regret she said, was Jadot’s refusal to take part in a leftwing primary to select a candidate at the end of 2021. “A primary would have allowed us to put the debate back on to our subjects – the ecological, social and democratic crisis – and address the French, especially those of the left, about the subjects that interest them and show that no, the left is not dead,” she said. “We could have shown what we stand for, what are our differences and what brings us together. It was a big personal risk for me but I said I would accept the result of that vote. It was a historic chance for the left to do this, but they refused. Now it’s not possible.” She added: “Never, never can Mélenchon or Jadot win the second round. If the left has any chance of winning it’s with me … only I am capable of reuniting from the centre left to the centre right.”My mother, Ruth Silvestre, who has died aged 92, was a cabaret singer in the 1950s and 60s. Later she turned to writing books, including three, known as the Sunflower Trilogy, about the summers she spent away from the UK in the south west of France. Ruth was born in Basingstoke, Hampshire, to Dorothy (nee Harmsworth), a nanny, and Bill Simmonds, an engineer. A scholarship to Basingstoke high school gave her the good fortune to meet an inspirational music teacher and, as she would later write, “from then on music always seemed as essential as breathing to me”. Moving to London in 1947, she did teacher training at Goldsmiths College (now Goldsmiths, University of London), where she met Michael Grater, a fellow student, whom she married in 1952. There she also took singing lessons with the former opera singer Catherine Rosser, who became a firm friend. A singing spot at Balsam’s restaurant in Mayfair was such a success that she decided to concentrate her efforts on cabaret, using the stage name Ruth Silvestre. A regular on the after dinner circuit in the 50s and 60s, she was able to sing in many languages, including Italian, French, Yiddish and Hebrew. In 1960 she appeared on stage as Fan-Tan Fanny and also Kama Saki in the Flower Drum Song musical at the Palace theatre in London, and in 1968 played the lead role of Aldonza in Man of La Mancha at the Piccadilly. Afterwards she continued with cabaret engagements, seasonal work on cruise ships and occasional stage performances. There were also small roles on TV and in films, including, coincidentally, in Peter Yates’s film version of Man of La Mancha. Out of the limelight Ruth was generous with her time and talents. She joined Xenia Field’s “Old Lags” prison entertainers, was a trustee of the Cara Aids Trust and gave home schooling to children who had fallen outside the educational system. In 1976 she and Michael bought a derelict farmhouse in the south-west of France which they restored, and where long summers were shared with an eclectic mix of family, friends and locals. Diaries from this adventure led to the writing of the Sunflower Trilogy: A House in the Sunflowers (1996), Reflections of Sunflowers (2004) and A Harvest of Sunflowers (2010). Later she wrote a series of children’s books, Tom (1989), The Old Woman Who Lived in a Roundabout (1993), Henry to the Rescue (1994) and the Secret in the Storm (1995), as well as a historical account of the murder of the actor William Terriss (Final Performance, 2009). Ruth served as a committee member of the Concert Artistes Association and celebrated her 90th birthday at its club with a cabaret dinner, giving a robust performance of Maybe It’s Because I’m a Londoner. Michael died in 2003. Ruth is survived by her sons – my brother, Matthew, and me – and grandchildren, Thomas and Elliot.The Premier League and Uefa are taking legal advice over the use of images of their trophies in non-fungible token (NFT) digital assets being promoted by John Terry and other big names in English football. Chelsea are looking into Terry’s posts because some have included images of the club’s badge. Terry has used his Twitter account to promote the NFTs in question, which are cartoons of baby apes. Some of the images feature the Premier League, Europa League and Champions League trophies and have been tweeted by Terry and in one case retweeted by his former Chelsea teammate Ashley Cole. As first reported by the Daily Telegraph, the posts have caught the attention of the league. Its trophy is protected by its trademark and its use in any commercial venture requires a licensing agreement with the league. Uefa, which organises the Europa League and Champions League, said: “Uefa takes the protection of its intellectual property rights seriously and we are investigating this matter further.” The Football Association is also aware of the NFT activity related to Terry’s account, which includes use of the FA Cup trophy, the Community Shield and the England kit. Terry, who has taken up a consultancy role in Chelsea’s academy, has been heavily promoting the “Ape Kids Club” NFTs on Twitter. Others who have endorsed them are Bobby Zamora, Jack Wilshere and Nigel de Jong. The Chelsea and England full-back Reece James has tweeted about acquiring a “Mutant Ape” NFT. “Ape Kids Club” NFTS are an offshoot of another popular NFT, the “Bored Ape Yacht Club”. The collection features 10,000 digital illustrations of cartoon apes. The “Ape Kids Club” features 9,999 different ape NFTs available for purchase. It is understood that Cole has not entered into a contract with the creators of “Ape Kids Club” and he has only retweeted an image of an NFT that included an illustrated image of the Premier League trophy. NFTs are unique digital assets stored on the Blockchain and traded in cryptocurrencies. The ownership and provenance of NFTs are verified by the Blockchain, an online ledger. The two biggest cryptocurrencies are Bitcoin and Ethereum, but there are more than 5,000 different varieties. Critics argue the tokens are potentially dangerous financial assets. NFTs remain part of an unregulated financial sector. Terry and Ape Kids Club have been approached for comment.Leading Democrats have written to Joe Biden appealing to him to stick to his promise to reduce the US reliance on nuclear weapons for its defence and to revive arms control. The letter, signed by 55 senators and representatives, was sent on Wednesday while the White House was making final decisions on the US nuclear posture review (NPR), amid reports that Biden will make only minor adjustments to the vast nuclear modernisation plans inherited from his predecessors. “Your NPR represents a once-in-a-generation opportunity to ensure that US nuclear doctrine reflects your recognition that a nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought,” the letter said. During the election campaign, Biden said the US “does not need new nuclear weapons” and pledged that his administration would “work to maintain a strong, credible deterrent while reducing our reliance and excessive expenditure on nuclear weapons”. The campaign also said it would make deterring and responding to a nuclear attack the sole purpose of the US nuclear arsenal. The current nuclear posture envisages its potential use against a range of threats, including an overwhelming cyber-attack. Despite Biden’s campaign rhetoric, an advocate for restraint in nuclear weapon modernisation and arms control was removed last year from her Pentagon post overseeing the drafting of the NPR, after a campaign against her by hawks in the defence department and in Congress. The draft NPR produced by the Pentagon is believed to be a conservative document, endorsing the existing modernisation plans, expected to cost well over $1tn. Meanwhile, allies led by France have lobbied the Biden administration not to introduce a “sole purpose” policy, concerned about the global pressure it would bring on them to change their own doctrines. The White House insists that the president will have the last word in shaping the policy. The Democrats behind the letter urged Biden to make the “sole purpose” policy part of the NPR and to scrap two new weapon variants introduced by Trump: a low-yield warhead for Trident missiles, and a planned nuclear sea-launched cruise missile, saying the moves “would further signal that the United States believes that deterrence, not war-fighting, is the sole purpose of nuclear weapons”. “Your forthcoming NPR should reflect your administration’s views, not embrace President Trump’s nuclear weapons programs,” the letter said. It was written by the two leading voices in the Senate for arms control, Ed Markey and Jeff Merkley, and their co-chairs of the Nuclear Weapons and Arms Control Working Group from the House, Donald Beyer and John Garamendi. Failure to change the status quo would fuel a cold war-style arms race with Russia and China, the letter warned, arguing: “A clean break with President Trump’s policies can send a strong signal to Russia and China that the United States believes restraint and nuclear arms reduction are measures of a country’s great power status, not nuclear weapons overkill.”Gone are the days when the only backdrop to the Dubai Desert Classic was the city’s famous skyline. As a number of the world’s top golfers prepared for the 34th staging of this event, all discussion surrounded the Saudi International. Next week’s event will offer $15m in appearance fees and has become the sport’s bete noire as Saudi Arabia continues with its pursuit of a super league. Under that plan, hotly contested by the European and PGA Tours, 14 events – mainly US-based – would pay players in telephone numbers simply for involvement. Phil Mickelson and Bryson DeChambeau have been routinely linked with the breakaway. Rory McIlroy made his lack of interest in all things Saudi perfectly plain long ago. He speaks from afar in this context. The Northern Irishman defends the right of high-profile colleagues to go to Riyadh next week but believes lofty appearance payments can distort sport. “It’s the competitive integrity, to me,” McIlroy said. “That’s one of the biggest issues here. How hard are guys going to compete when they know that they are guaranteed whatever the money is?” McIlroy is uneasy with the notion of Saudi money automatically equalling bad money. He cites Uber as an example of a widely used company backed by Saudi’s public investment fund. Yet in professional terms, McIlroy views the potential to be a poster boy for a nation castigated for human rights abuses as not worth any cheque. “I like being my own boss,” said the four-times major winner. “I don’t want to be told what to do. I don’t want to be told where to show up, when to show up, you have so many events, you have to travel here. It’s nice to feel like taking a couple weeks off and doing that. That’s the nice thing.” One key complication with the Saudi International is that it was once the domain of the European Tour. At that point, golfers were encouraged to attend. Many signed multi-year deals to do so. There is player annoyance attached to that. “I understand the position of the Tours,” said Sergio García, who will play both this week and next. “At the same time, they have to understand all of us, too. We’re trying to achieve things, not only for myself but for my family. I’ve been a member of the European Tour for 23 years and I’ve done a lot of things to make that happen. I’ve put a lot of mileage in my body.” Asked whether existing tours should let golfers choose where they play, García said: “Probably that would be the best thing for golf. When you get banned from playing, or whatever, it hurts the game. People want to see us play all around the world and enjoy us wherever we go so I hope that won’t be a problem.” Paul Casey will join García in Saudi. The Englishman – the defending champion at the Desert Classic – remains an interesting case as an ambassador for Unicef. Casey is adamant his appearances in Saudi can be a force for good. “It’s a very difficult thing to try to communicate what happens in our golf space with revenues and how much is played for and players’ feelings towards what their share should be,” Casey said. “It’s a very difficult thing to communicate to the general public, because you look at the numbers [and they are] incredible. It’s a delicate topic and I tend to not talk about money.” Which will not stop others from doing precisely that.In a tiny motel at the back of a Wellington garden, a group of lodgers with shiny cigar-shaped bodies and spiny legs are making themselves at home. A male is bunking in with his harem of females, their bodies huddled together, a wiry mashup of legs and antennae. Once a fortnight the motel’s owner, Holly Neill, briefly opens the door to peer into the perspex window and check on her tenants, each time experiencing the thrill of being able to spy on the shy, strange creatures inside. They are not paying guests and nor are these ordinary motels, but rather human-made houses for one of New Zealand’s most beloved insects – the wētā. Increasingly, wētā motels are popping up in gardens as New Zealanders begin to embrace the bugs in their backyards – something that may also give the endangered species a chance at survival. Forests, grasslands, caves and alpine terrains once crawled with wētā, but their populations have suffered with the introduction of foreign pests and increasing habitat decline due to dairy farming. Sixteen of New Zealand’s wētā species are at risk and the rest are classified as threatened or endangered. The largest species, the giant wētā (or wētāpunga), once abundant across parts of the North Island, is now found only on Hauturu-o-Toi (Little Barrier Island), a pest-free sanctuary off the east coast. The Mahoenui giant wētā, feared extinct until it was rediscovered in 1962, exists only in a patch of King Country gorse. “I think people hold them in high regard and it’s almost a point of pride to have wētā in the garden,” says Neill, a keen conservationist and wildlife photographer. “It adds another dimension of appreciation of nature if you’re including the small, more secretive bugs that come out at night.” Wētā belong to the same group of insects as crickets and grasshoppers, and there are between 70 and 100 species of wētā endemic to New Zealand. They are wingless and nocturnal, and some, including the wētāpunga, are among the heaviest insects in the world – comparable to the weight of a sparrow. Neill installed two wētā motels on native kānuka trunks at the back of her Raumati Beach garden just over a year ago, after discovering the motels at “loads of different sanctuaries”. Within three months she had her first guests. At one point she opened a motel to find a wētā, a native cockroach and a bumblebee in the same chamber. “I felt like I was interrupting a bug meeting,” Neill laughs. When she first moved into the property, the garden was overrun with agapanthus plants and weeds, where she found just three spiders lurking. She cleared it, set traps for predators, planted native trees and installed the motels. “I was shocked at how barren it was and then, since doing this, all the rooms are full [of wētā]. It shows quite a rapid change.” ‘A window on the world’ The motels are made of non-treated wood and are designed to have entrance and exit tunnels large enough for the wētā to crawl into but small enough that a mouse cannot. To attract wētā, they must be dark during the day. “If you were to split a log and look at what they naturally do, it’s pretty similar to that,” says Steve Rawson of Swiss Wood Technicians. He began making wētā homes in 2016 for the Department of Conservation, and in 2018 started selling them to the public, becoming one of many small retailers or community groups now doing so. Sales have plodded along, but in the lead-up to last Christmas, they sold roughly 40 motels – double that of the year prior. “We’ve noticed a real increase in sales, especially in the Wellington area,” Rawson says, something he credits to education programmes at Wellington’s urban sanctuary Zealandia. “Before that, I think a lot of people would look at wētā and think ‘Yuck, I don’t want to go near them’, but they are actually amazing creatures and they are not that horrifying at all.” The motels (sometimes called hotels or condos) were originally conceived as a research aide around 1994 by Massey University ecologist and wētā expert Steve Trewick – a scientist so dedicated to the insect, that a tree wētā, the Hemideina trewicki, was named after him. Trewick was trying to ascertain the distribution of wētā in the environment – a difficult task when dealing with a secretive, nocturnal creature – when he discovered two species sharing a dead tree trunk. “From that observation, I said, well, let’s just make our own versions of that because then we can open them up and see how many males or females are present.” A growth in higher education and deepening awareness of conservation problems could be prompting more interest in wētā and how to care for them, says Warren Chinn, an invertebrate ecologist at the Department of Conservation. “I would also say that social media and the internet has been an extraordinary boon to consciousness of conservation values. “These things have become really successful – the animal doesn’t know that it’s artificial, they just know that it’s suitable.” The motels are “undoubtedly” helpful for wētā populations, particularly in urban environments, Trewick adds, and the growth in understanding biodiversity, and caring for it, has knock-on effects for boosting other species. But the crossover of wētā motels into private backyards achieves more than helping protect wētā populations; they are also sating the curiosity of creepy-crawly fans. “I think that the most useful thing about the motels is that people see that there is much more to the biology of our planet than they would otherwise see. Most New Zealand biology is out and about at night. It’s a window on the world,” Trewick says. They are fascinating creatures to observe, Chinn adds: “If you open up the doors on the big ones … there is a density of these monsters and their great prickly legs. That is delightfully horrific.”We have got used to reading of the shocking goings on in Downing Street day after day – with some degree of schadenfreude, I admit. But it was truly appalling to read that 22% of of the population were living in poverty even before the pandemic (Editorial, 24 January). In one of the richest countries in the world, that is over a fifth – more than one in five. Do those in power have no shame at all? Florence Challands London • I am beginning to lose track of all the parties that took place at Downing Street during lockdown. Perhaps it’s time to produce a handy Guardian wallchart? Nick Rozanski London • After 25 years of haphazard advice and lengthy botched attempts to prune my blackcurrants, I went up to the allotment after reading Alys Fowler’s article (January is the time to prune your fruit trees for a bountiful summer crop, 22 January) and just snipped out the darkest stems – 10 minutes, job done. Thank you, Alys, I love you. Jill Webster Frogpool, Cornwall • John and Judy Watson ask (Letters, 25 January) if they had the most delayed Christmas card this year – posted in Southampton on 23 December, reached Manchester on 15 January. About 225 miles in 23 days. My sister’s card to me was much slower. Posted in Winchester on 20 December, reached London on 21 January. About 70 miles in 32 days. Frances Holloway London • On 14 January I received a first-class item posted on 8 December. Patrick Parrinder London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The Orwellian reports coming from Hong Kong will come as no surprise to those of us who have been watching its legal system deteriorate (New Hong Kong barristers’ chief warns profession to stay out of politics, 21 January). Since the draconian national security law was imposed in 2020, Beijing’s interference in Hong Kong has been increasingly flagrant. As shocking as the attack on the rule of law in Hong Kong is, we should also be asking why British judges are still propping up a broken system. British judges have sat in Hong Kong’s court of final appeal since the territory was returned in 1997. But the deterioration of the city’s legal system means they are now lending a false veneer of respectability to Beijing’s campaign against human rights and political freedom. The authorities in Hong Kong are no longer pretending to be on the side of democracy and justice. If British judges won’t stand themselves down in Hong Kong, then the president of the supreme court and the foreign secretary must remove British judges from Hong Kong immediately. Siobhain McDonagh MP Vice-chair, all-party parliamentary group on Hong Kong • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Jonathan Liew’s article (Sportswashing is associated with certain countries – why not Israel?, 24 January) stated that Israel uses sport as a “tool of repression”. I wonder what Bibars Natcho, the Muslim captain of the Israeli football team, would think about this statement; or the Sports in Service of Peace programme which enables Israeli and Palestinian children to play together to promote coexistence, and who participated in the Argentina-Uruguay match. While Israel may not be renowned as a sporting powerhouse, on a human level, sport is clearly an invaluable tool for promoting cooperation between peoples. According to the article, even Israelis engaging in sport is considered illegitimate. So we, Israelis, cannot do anything. Even our contributions to the international community are deemed illegitimate. Pinkwashing, greenwashing, vaccinewashing – even a peace agreement with Arab countries receives similar accusations. This is particularly dangerous, implying that Israel is not a state like any other, whose contribution to the world can be celebrated. This week marks the greatest catastrophe to the Jewish people, and it is 73 years since the UN recognised the Jewish people’s right to self-determination in Israel. Israel can be criticised, even harshly, but it is about time it was treated the same as any other country in the world. Ohad Zemet Spokesperson, Israeli embassy • Cycling is indeed an expression of freedom, but can also be a political tool. It is being used as sportswashing by Israel, as Jonathan Liew highlights in his excellent article, but we, in The Big Ride for Palestine, combine our love of cycling with expression of solidarity with the Palestinian people. We have been riding since 2015, when about 150 people joined the first ride from Edinburgh to London to commemorate the bombing of Gaza in 2014, when 2,251 Palestinians were killed, including 551 children. Last year, 250 people cycled from Bristol to London and raised over £100,000 for the Middle East Children’s Alliance to help build playgrounds for traumatised Palestinian children in Gaza. Our rides do not get media coverage, despite the hundreds of people who come out to support us as we cycle through their towns and villages. Salle Dare Manchester • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Polly Toynbee (The verdict is in: George Osborne’s help-to-buy scheme has been an utter disaster, 25 January) further exposes the lie behind the government’s policies, that by encouraging private home ownership we will solve the housing crisis. Her article confirms that the origins of the crisis are in the right-to-buy policies of the 80s, compounded by the refusal to allow the proceeds to fund new council stock and dismantling the Fair Rent Act. The housing crisis results from failing to meet the housing “needs” of those unable to afford a mortgage. Help to buy simply boosted the market demand for private housing. But if that achieved little in helping those in real housing need, how much more morally reprehensible is it that we now subsidise private landlords and their buy-to-let mortgages to the tune of £22bn a year in the form of housing benefit? It is at this level because those without access to affordable social housing cannot pay private rents set to cover the cost of a mortgage and provide the owner with a return. This is revenue expenditure that could be better used to support much-needed public services. The government will only address the housing crisis by investing significant capital over a long period of time in new social housing and seeing it as an infrastructure investment that will produce both a capital asset and an income stream to the public sector, ultimately reducing the demand and therefore the cost of private rented housing. Surely this is what levelling up should be all about? Mike Lambert Aldham, Essex • Polly Toynbee’s idea for a hypothecated tax on unearned property wealth, with presumably the rate of capital gains tax being increased to match that of income tax, and to be spent directly on council housing, is excellent, but more needs to be done to help tenants in the private sector immediately. That would require local councils being given additional funding to enable more property inspections to take place, and power to remove letting licences from rogue landlords. Rent caps have to be established and applied in all areas, evictions paused for a year, and housing benefit thoroughly reviewed. How ludicrous to have a system whereby a landlord can increase a tenant’s rent in the knowledge that the benefit system will cover the extra. Bernie Evans Liverpool • In an otherwise excellent article, Polly Toynbee fails to list buy-to-let mortgages as a further reason for rising prices and the difficulties faced by younger people wishing to buy their own home. While my middle-class friends buy several houses each as a way of subsidising their incomes or pensions through rent, so the share of houses available to young people is severely reduced and prices rise. Moira Sykes Manchester • There is another side to the picture Polly Toynbee paints. I own one house for rent, which I have always maintained to a very high standard. Last March, my tenant stopped paying any rent and says quite openly that he will stay there until I evict him, knowing full well that I must obtain a court order to do so. Covid regulations prevented me from filing court papers until early September, and five months later I am still awaiting a date for the hearing. Protection of tenants from bad landlords is fine, but let us also have some protection for landlords being cheated by unscrupulous tenants. Name and address supplied • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Afghans who worked for the British but were not able to get on flights out of Kabul said the revelation that Boris Johnson appears to have personally approved the evacuation of animals last August added to their pain and despair. “People have died in Afghanistan, because of their connections to the UK, but the prime minister was just allowing animals to get out of there,” said Asif*, a senior adviser to British aid projects for several years. “It is like a joke. I see now that animals have a higher value than us.” His pregnant wife was shot by Taliban gunmen who raided their home in autumn 2021. She died in hospital days later from her injuries. Despite years of service, and support from his former employer, he was told he was ineligible for refuge in the UK because he was a contractor rather than a direct employee. He has fled Afghanistan and is now living in a mosque in a neighbouring country, but the Taliban threatened his brother, demanding that he reveal where Asif was hiding. “We are human beings living here like animals, while they are rescuing animals from Afghanistan. It’s very painful,” Asif said. Abdullah*, a British embassy security guard who worked for GardaWorld in a management role, said he remembered waiting at the airport gate beside vans full of dogs. “They got clearance, and we didn’t. We were there at the same day, waiting at the same gate,” he said. “We’ve talked about it a lot – all the guards were very angry – they gave priority to dogs over guards who had spent years serving the British government. Our buses were full of women and children – none of us got through. It was such a bad day for us.” About 180 colleagues had been told they would make one of the last evacuation flights, but their departure was halted when Islamic State bombed an airport entrance. The Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) made a clear commitment that all GardaWorld staff would be allowed to travel to the UK, but this has not happened. “We’re still here waiting. Since the embassy closed, we don’t have jobs, we don’t have money to buy food. It’s been minus 15 in Kabul, and some of us don’t have money to buy a kilo of wood to heat our homes,” Abdullah said. “We’ve been told that GardaWorld staff will be eligible for evacuation under a new scheme, but we’re still waiting. We really hope that the British government will prioritise us now.” Asif and Abdullah’s stories formed part of the Guardian’s Afghanistan: the left behind project. The series featured the stories of those who were trapped, in Afghanistan or in limbo as they searched for safe haven, fearing for their lives from Taliban attacks or through hunger because they could not work. *Names have been changed to protect anonymityThe head of the BBC has said it was “not for one person to decide the funding model” of the corporation, in a swipe at the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries. Dorries confirmed on 17 January that the licence fee would be frozen for two years, remaining at £159 until April 2024, after which it would rise in line with inflation for four years. The announcement was made in a Sunday newspaper and on Twitter. Addressing the public accounts committee on Wednesday, Tim Davie, the BBC director general, said the announcement had taken him by surprise, but he had been “expecting an agreement within the next few days”. He said he had been disappointed by the announcement and it would leave the BBC with a funding gap of £285m by 2027. However, he was pleased the corporation would have “six years of certainty”. He said that after that there would be a “process” with a public consultation to decide future funding models. “I don’t think it’s for one person to decide the funding model of the BBC. We need to go through that properly. And I think the licence fee has proven itself to be very strong in what it delivers.” Davie said there was “a lot to play for and a lot at jeopardy”, and he praised the corporation’s unique model. He said the BBC was important for democracyand for its commercial and economic value. “There is a lot made at the BBC that flows out [to the broader economy]. We are accountable, and obsessed with household value … I worry if we dismantle this then it is a disservice to culture and democracy but also the economic health of our creative industries,” he said. Davie gave a projection on the hole that the licence fee settlement has blown in the BBC’s finances, telling MPs the corporation had a “£1.4bn challenge” over the next six years. After the freezing of the licence fee was announced last week, Davie told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme there was “no doubt” the deal would affect the broadcaster’s frontline output. He argued for a publicly backed model for the organisation, in the face of recent suggestions from the Conservative government that the future of its funding was up for discussion. Revealing that the settlement would leave a £285m gap in funding by 2027, Davie said: “We are disappointed, we would have like to have seen an inflation rise throughout the period. We’ve got four out of six years and on we go. I would say having certainty of income for six years – as you know the media market is moving so fast – is very material to us. “Our estimate is – and just to set this clearly for everyone – by the year end 2027, the licence fee income will be about £4.2bn, based on our assumptions around inflation. Obviously guessing games around inflation are difficult. We know this settlement … gives a £285m gap at the end of the period.”Online grocery specialist Ocado has developed robots which it says will enable cheaper, faster deliveries and help with labour shortages by requiring fewer staff in its warehouses. Tim Steiner, the chief executive of Ocado, said the new technology was a “game changer” that would enable the group’s retail partners to automate picking in smaller local warehouses and provide a “compelling immediacy proposition” that could take on the likes of Getir, Deliveroo and GoPuff, the fast-track food couriers which have grown rapidly during the pandemic. A robotic picking arm, expected to be introduced in new and some existing warehouses from the end of this year, could reduce the need for workers to pick and pack groceries into shoppers’ bags by up to half initially, and 80% longer term. Another new system, which will automatically pack totes of groceries destined for shoppers’ homes into crates ready to be loaded on to vans, will reduce labour costs by 30% and could replace manual labour entirely in this role. Steiner said the new technologies were “transformational in the market and really drive our innovation forward” in a way that would “shatter the existing rules of the industry”. He said: “All companies we are working with are having challenges employing enough people to work.” He said most warehouses were still not at full capacity, and so new technology would mean that workers could be redeployed from certain jobs to others and he did not expect waves of redundancies. Ocado has also designed a new lighter and cheaper version of its grocery picking robots, which buzz about on top of a cubic grid known as “the hive” – which stores products ready for distribution. The 600 series robots will be five times lighter than their predecessors so that they can work on more lightweight grid systems in smaller warehouses around the world. Steiner said the systems would not require specially built warehouses, unlike its current grid system, so Ocado’s technology could be set up more quickly for its clients, which include Marks &amp; Spencer in the UK and Kroger in the US. With more than half of their parts 3D-printed, the robots can also be more easily made around the world. These robots are intended to be combined with new software systems that will enable local delivery vans to be loaded more quickly, mixing orders made less than an hour before they set off with those made the night before. That will enable quick deliveries to be made much more efficiently. Software will also link up smaller warehouses to create a system where products delivered to one can be shared between several locations to help improve efficiency.Germany’s approach to the Russian threat to Ukraine has been described as a “joke” after Berlin responded to requests for arms by offering 5,000 protective helmets. Vitali Klitschko, the mayor of Kyiv and a former world heavyweight boxing champion, who previously lived in Germany, said he could not understand the lack of support. “The behaviour of the German government leaves me speechless,” he told the newspaper Bild. “The defence ministry apparently hasn’t realised that we are confronted with perfectly equipped Russian forces that can start another invasion of Ukraine at any time. What kind of support will Germany send next, pillows?” Olaf Scholz, the German chancellor, has declined to export weapons to Ukraine and has been accused in recent days of holding up the movement of arms offered by Nato allies. Earlier this week Ukraine’s ambassador in Berlin had urged the German government to at least help by sending 100,000 helmets and protective vests. However, Germany’s defence minister, Christine Lambrecht, announced on Wednesday that Berlin would instead supply just 5,000 military helmets. She said the offer sent “a very clear signal: we are on your side”. Germany is also providing a complete field hospital and the necessary training, at a cost of €5.3m (£4.4m). The development will not ease concerns in the EU over Germany’s approach to the crisis on Ukraine’s border, where more than 100,000 Russian troops have been deployed. Berlin is facing pressure to drop its objection to an EU military training mission in Ukraine. According to diplomatic sources, Josep Borrell, the EU’s foreign policy chief, raised the issue of the mission at a meeting of ministers from the 27 member states on Monday and asked opponents of the plan to reconsider. Officials at the EU’s foreign affairs wing, the external action service, are expected to make further efforts in the coming weeks to convince Berlin to give the green light. Italy, Spain, Austria and Greece are among those who also oppose the proposal, according to EU sources. EU training missions to build up armies have previously been established in Mali and Somalia. Germany instead favours establishing a “European peace facility” – a financing programme that could help in reforming the Ukrainian armed forces – which the government in Berlin believes would be better suited to EU goals. A communique issued after a meeting on Monday of EU foreign ministers said only that the bloc was “was defining modalities of support to Ukraine also in the area of professional military education”. A spokesperson for Borrell declined to comment on the confidential discussions. He said: “On the issue of a possible EU training mission to Ukraine, I can confirm that discussions among the member states continue. We are intensifying the work in this regard. We hope that the decision, which is for the member states to take in unanimity, will be taken soon. On our side, we will continue accelerating the preparatory work to deploy such a mission if member states agree on that. “In light of evolving developments, we need to move forward quickly. This message was clearly conveyed by the high representative for foreign affairs to the foreign ministers on Monday.” While the US and the EU have emphasised their unified position over the threat posed to peace from the 106,000 Russian troops on Ukraine’s eastern border, Scholz has faced heavy criticism at home and abroad over his relatively cautious approach to the crisis. “You hear nothing from him,” said one diplomatic source in Brussels. “The political signalling is really weak.” The German government’s stance on the EU training mission has been cited by some in Brussels as evidence of Berlin’s fear of provoking the Kremlin. There is also growing criticism of a delay in German approval on arms exports to Ukraine. Estonia has been seeking to send Soviet-made D-30 howitzers to Kyiv. The arms were previously kept in the former German Democratic Republic, in east Germany, meaning approval is required from the German government. Poland’s prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, said on Tuesday that it was a “huge disappointment” that Berlin had been withholding permission.The lack of a widespread electric vehicle charging network in the UK is holding back the mass adoption of zero-emission cars, according to carmakers and industry analysts. This year is considered crucial for electric vehicles (EVs) going mainstream, but the German manufacturer Volkswagen has warned that a significant increase in the number of available chargers is needed to convince consumers to make the switch from petrol and diesel cars. The UK government plans to ban sales of new cars with internal combustion engines from 2030, when ministers hope one in every three cars on Britain’s roads will be electric, compared with one in 100 currently. “The key thing now is to ensure that the charging infrastructure not just increases to meet the current demand, but accelerates to overtake the current demand,” said Alex Smith, the managing director of Volkswagen Group UK. “We’ve got to get the charging infrastructure ahead of the game to enable us to progress from the quite specific adoption that we have at the moment into mass adoption. And we’re not there yet.” Sales of EVs have soared in recent years, and almost doubled between 2020 and 2021, rising from 108,000 to 190,000, according to data from the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT). This meant that Britons bought more electric cars last year than during the previous five years combined. However, sales have been climbing from relatively low levels, and accounted for just under 12% of sales last year. “We’re already seeing that divergence between the acceleration rate of EV adoption and the supporting infrastructure that’s in place,” Smith said. “Pure EV sales increased by 76% last year. The charging infrastructure increased by about a third.” The UK arm of Volkswagen saw its EV sales double between 2020 and 2021. It has committed to investing €89bn (£74bn) in EVs over the next five years, as it tries to atone for its 2015 Dieselgate scandal. It was found to have rigged the emissions of cars to make them appear cleaner than they were. Its newest models, the all-electric ID3 and ID4, are manufactured at its plant in the German city of Zwickau – the first factory belonging to a volume carmaker to only build cars powered by lithium-ion batteries. Smith believes “range anxiety” among consumers – when drivers feared electric vehicles wouldn’t travel far enough on a single charge to get them where they needed to go – has now been replaced by “charging anxiety”. “When there is a certain density of public charging infrastructure in a particular area, EV sales started to climb almost exponentially in that area,” Smith said. “Ultimately, filling your car with electrons should be as convenient and as reliable as filling your car with a liquid fuel.” Problems finding chargers are a common gripe among EV drivers, who complain that even if they do find chargers during their journey, they may be in use or out of order. There is also huge variation in the number of chargers available in different parts of the UK. The UK is lagging behind its continental neighbours in this regard. At the start of the year, there were 28,375 public EV charging devices available in the UK, according to figures published by the Department for Transport. Fewer than 20% of these – only 5,156 – were rapid chargers. That is fewer than half of the 66,665 chargers that had already been installed in the Netherlands by 2021, and a third less than the 44,538 chargers found in Germany at that time, according to figures from the EU’s European Alternative Fuels Observatory. Car industry analysts believe the UK government needs to take responsibility for developing and funding the vehicle charging network. “We need fast chargers on main routes, we need destination chargers, we need on-street [schemes] for installing chargers at home. We need a really holistic approach,” said David Bailey, a professor of business economics at the University of Birmingham. “We’ve not had that from the government.” Bailey is also critical of “premature” cuts to subsidies for electric vehicles made by ministers last year. This has been coupled with a delay in the government’s plans to force shops, factories and offices in England with large car parks to install at least one electric car charger. “The government isn’t going to do it all, but leadership is about trying to get a variety of different actors to move in the same direction, and harnessing not only central government, but also local government and private sector investment to make this happen. Really they have not done enough,” he said. Bailey believes a big investment in infrastructure is needed to get the UK where it wants to be by 2030, when compared with a country such as Norway, where more than half of cars sold are electric. “We have simply set a date and have not put in place the infrastructure to get us to that date,” he said. The Department for Transport’s electric vehicle infrastructure strategy was reportedly due last autumn, but has been delayed. A spokesperson for the department said: “The government is providing more than £1.3bn to support the continued roll-out of chargepoints at homes, businesses and on residential streets across the UK, levelling up our chargepoint provision while supporting the deployment of rapid chargepoints on motorways and major A roads in England.”The owners of Peppa Pig, the rosy-cheeked $1bn global phenomenon, are suing a Vietnamese studio that has created a hugely popular YouTube series based on an animated family of wolves. Entertainment One (eOne), the formerly London-listed owner of Peppa Pig that was acquired by US toy firm Hasbro for £3.3bn in 2019, has filed an action against Sconnect at the high court in London in conjunction with Astley Baker Davies, the company formed by the creators of the children’s character. The action, brought by the London-based law firm and intellectual property experts Brandsmiths, is for alleged “passing off and copyright infringement” relating to Sconnect’s library of thousands of YouTube videos and burgeoning merchandise business. The claim form, which gives brief details of the case, also alleges that Sconnect is in breach of six registered trademarks relating to the use of Peppa Pig’s name, images and references in its content to push its own kids franchises by association. The target of the legal action is Sconnect’s Wolfoo franchise, which revolves around the main character, Wolfoo, “a five-year-old little wolf living on a hill in a small American village” and her family and friends. Wolfoo has rapidly grown to become a major YouTube hit among the same demographic of two- to eight-year-olds that catapulted Peppa into becoming one of the biggest preschool brands in the world. The legal action was first reported by Variety. Sconnect has three official Wolfoo YouTube channels, with close to 30 million subscribers who have access to thousands of the three-minute episodes available in languages from French to Bahasa, as well as other properties such as stop-motion series WOA Luka and 2-D animation Max’s Puppy. In a sponsored article, the company boasts that “Wolfoo is dominating YouTube for kids”, and says its whole portfolio of properties attracts 2.5bn online views per month. In online forums and articles Wolfoo is frequently referred to as similar to Peppa Pig. In 2019, eOne sued a number of individuals over counterfeit merchandise, in both China and its biggest market, the US, to protect its $1bn-plus annual toy sales. The loveable character, who hit the headlines in November when Boris Johnson referred to a trip to Peppa Pig World theme park in a “rambling” speech to business leaders at a Confederation of British Industry (CBI) event, first appeared in 2004 as a five-minute children’s animation on Channel 5. Peppa Pig, which is now broadcast in over 40 languages and is available in more than 180 territories worldwide, was created in 2000 by Mark Baker, Neville Astley and Phil Davies. The trio, who became friends working in the animation department of Middlesex Polytechnic in the mid-1980s, are now multimillionaires and have stepped away from the business. The huge appeal of the Peppa Pig franchise prompted the Labour party to attempt to piggy-back off the cartoon character’s fame ahead of the 2010 election. The trio turned down the invite.The government will take the BBC to court in March in an attempt to prevent it from publishing or broadcasting a proposed news report. Oliver Sanders QC, representing the attorney general, Suella Braverman, told the high court on Wednesday that the case involved matters of national security and breach of confidence. The Telegraph reported on Friday that the BBC was planning to reveal the identity of a spy working overseas, prompting comparisons with the Spycatcher saga. It is a rare example of breach of confidence claim being brought by the government against a media organisation. In 1987, the Thatcher government gagged newspapers in England from reporting on Peter Wright’s claims against MI5, contained in his autobiography, Spycatcher, which had been published in Australia. Given the sensitivity of the current case, Sanders requested that Wednesday’s hearing be held in private, telling the court: “In our submissions, the difficulty of proceeding in open court … is it makes it almost impossible to discuss the issue, in terms of what the case is about.” The BBC’s lawyer, Adam Wolanski, opposed the application for the hearing to be held in private, describing it as “a departure from the open justice principle”. Mr Justice Chamberlain ruled that it would be held partially in private but only for discussions surrounding the Telegraph story. As a result the press and public were excluded from the hearing for more than an hour. However, Chamberlain said he was committed to the case being heard in public where possible, saying: “The principle is not to derogate from open justice unless it is strictly necessary and compellingly justified. He added: “The interim relief hearing will take place on 1 and 2 March. It will take place in public until – and to the extent – there’s an order made that any part of the hearing should not be in public.” The judge also directed that a redacted version of the injunction application and claim form, which were previously sealed, can be made public on Thursday. Before the hearing, a spokesperson for the BBC said: “The attorney general has issued proceedings against the BBC with a view to obtaining an injunction to prevent publication of a proposed BBC news story. We are unable to comment further at this stage, beyond confirming that we would not pursue any story unless it was felt it was overwhelmingly in the public interest to do so and fully in line with the BBC’s editorial standards and values.” A spokesperson for the attorney general’s office said: “The attorney-general has made an application against the BBC. It would be inappropriate to comment further while proceedings are ongoing.”A First Nation in Canada says it has discovered 93 potential grave sites on the grounds of a former residential school. The chief and council of Williams Lake First Nation said that a preliminary search of St Joseph’s Mission Residential School had revealed “potential human burials” in a small portion of the school’s sprawling grounds. “This journey has led our investigation team into the darkest recesses of human behaviour,” said Kúkpi7 (chief) Willie Sellars on Tuesday. The school operated in the province of British Columbia between 1891 and 1981 and has a dark history of abuse. Many students ran away and others tried to kill themselves. One child died of exposure in the wilderness after fleeing. “At the time, the coroner’s service and RCMP saw no reason to investigate the death as the child was ‘only an Indian’,” Sellars said. He said the investigation had exacted a heavy on toll survivors. “Our team has recorded not only stories regarding the murder and disappearance of children and infants, they have listened to countless stories of systematic torture, starvation, rape and sexual assault of children at St Joseph’s Mission,” he said. Sellars said the investigation had found evidence of children’s bodies being disposed in nearby rivers and lakes and evidence the school’s incinerator had been used to dispose of children. Murray Sinclair, who led the country’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission, previously told the Guardian of similar reports. Canada’s legacy of residential schools has come under renewed scrutiny since the Tk’emlúps te Secwépemc Nation announced last May that it had discovered what was believed to be more than 200 unmarked graves at the former Kamloops Indian residential school. Over more than a century, at least 150,000 Indigenous children were taken from their families and forced to attend the schools, many of which were run by the Catholic church. Children were forcibly converted to Christianity, given new names and were prohibited from speaking their native languages. The last residential school closed in the 1990s. Only a portion of the 470 hectares have been searched. Of the 93 potential graves identified, 50 were outside the school’s cemetery, said Whitney Spearing, the lead investigator. “It must be emphasized that no geophysical investigation can provide certainty into the presence of human remains,” she said. “Excavation is the only technique that will provide answers as to whether human remains are present.” Sellars said the community would hold discussions over whether to excavate the sites, a fraught question that many nations across Canada are dealing with. But Tuesday’s announcement validated the stories of survivors, he said. “For decades there were reports of neglect and abuse at the St Joseph’s Mission, and worse, there were reports of children dying or disappearing from the facility,” he said.“For the bulk of St Joseph’s Mission’s history, these reports were at best given no credence.”n That noise? The sound of the bottom of the barrel being scraped. Boris Johnson not only degrades himself but the Tory backbenchers falling over themselves to defend him. Not so long ago, Conservative MPs could just about kid themselves there were no parties in Downing Street and that Big Dog’s integrity was intact. Now the game is long since up and no one even bothers to defend the lies. Apart from Chris Philp. He’ll repeat any nonsense he’s been told to say. Instead we get ever more improbable lines from Tory MPs, who seem to have forgotten The Suspect made the laws, The Suspect broke the laws and The Suspect lied about it. Mostly along the lines of “it was only a small bit of cake”, “it wasn’t really a party”, “it was a surprise so he couldn’t be expected to remember it” and “he’s done such a brilliant job we shouldn’t be too bothered if a little bit of law breaking went on inside No 10”. The advocates of this last excuse have been excelling themselves. We’ve had Jacob Rees-Mogg as good as admitting he couldn’t think of anything Johnson might do that would cause him to reconsider his support. Conor Burns said The Suspect had been “ambushed with a cake”. That Colin the Caterpillar can be a right bastard. Then there was Andrew Rosindell telling Sky’s Kay Burley that “it wasn’t as if he had robbed a bank or anything”. Phew. It can’t be long before someone says “he hasn’t killed anyone, as far as I know”. In the end, this kind of feeble moral relativism drags everyone down to the bottom. But we are where we are. And come Wednesday lunchtime, MPs of all parties appeared to be in limbo as they waited for the Sue Gray report to land on No 10’s doorstep. So prime minister’s questions had the feel of the Phoney War as both leaders seemed to pull their punches, as if they were testing each other out for weaknesses before the real battle when the two went head to head in the Commons statement in the coming hours or days. Keir Starmer kept it simple at the start. Did the prime minister think the ministerial code – especially the section on knowingly misleading parliament – applied to him? The Suspect mumbled a quick, rather uncertain, “yes” before going on to say that he couldn’t possibly comment on matters that were the matter of a police investigation. Except he could if he wanted to. There was nothing stopping him giving a long and detailed explanation of how he was completely innocent of everything that had been alleged against him. Other than, of course, that it would have been yet another lie. Then who was counting? In which case, said the Labour leader, why didn’t The Suspect do everyone – Sue Gray and the police in particular – a favour and just resign now? In December he had said all guidance had been followed and that no parties had taken place. Now he wasn’t even bothering to pretend there had not been parties, nor that he had attended them. So unless he was now pleading he had been in a fugue state for 18 months and had had no recollection of anything until Gray had reminded him, then clearly he had knowingly misled parliament. All that was missing as a coup de grace, was for Starmer to pass him a slice of cake. The Suspect smirked and toyed with his toddler haircut, determined to appear upbeat. As much for himself as the MPs on his backbenches on whom he was depending to prolong what was left of his career. He wanted at least to go down with a semblance of fight. All hope of going with dignity had long since passed. If he had had a conscience, he would have been up to his neck in shame. For him it was still all a big joke that the police were conducting a criminal investigation into the prime minister of the UK. What followed was a stream of unconsciousness. He rattled on about trying to stop Putin invade Ukraine, while Labour just focused on his unfortunate habit of lying about everything. Why was everyone making such a fuss about something so trivial? I wouldn’t be at all surprised if Big Dog believes he only lies because other people make him do it. It didn’t seem to have occurred to The Suspect that it was him and his government that had spent virtually every waking hour for the past two months trying to protect his own job. Nor was there any greater self-awareness as he went on to say he was cutting taxes – they were going up in April – and fixing the cost of living. Just as food and fuel prices were rising. He ended by declaring Starmer was “a lawyer not a leader”. In time he might come to realise that wasn’t such a killer line as he imagined. Not least because he might be needing the services of a top lawyer in the coming weeks. It’s also probable most voters would settle for a good lawyer running the country rather than a pathological fraud. The only thing he can be trusted with is to be untrustworthy. The Tory benches were rather louder in their support than they had been in the past two weeks. Though this was more for show than sincerity. Most would happily knife The Suspect in the front if they thought it would play to their advantage. The loyalty is barely even skin deep. Only Sheryll Murray delivered a full on love bomb to her leader. Which was as pathetic as it was touching. Johnson ended by claiming the difference between the Tories and Labour was that he had a vision. If he does, it’s a drug-induced one. The main difference between the two parties is that the Tories are knee-deep in their own shit. And still have no real idea how to get out of it. • This article was amended on 27 January 2022. An earlier version said the prime minister “wasn’t even bothering to pretend there had been parties”; it meant to say, “there had not been parties”.Salah races off and embraces his keeper Gabaski! Egypt’s two heroes cavort, soon to be joined by the rest of the squad. As they celebrate, Ivory Coast crumble to the floor as one, Eric Bailly’s casual penalty having cost them dear after a tense game with plenty of ebb and flow. Commiserations to them, and congratulations to Egypt, who face Morocco on Sunday afternoon for a place in the semi-finals. Thanks for reading this MBM. PENALTIES: Ivory Coast 4-5 Egypt. Salah thrashes the penalty into the bottom right, sending Sangare the wrong way, and Egypt will face Morocco in the quarters! PENALTIES: Ivory Coast 4-4 Egypt. Zaha fires into the top left to keep Ivory Coast alive ... for one more kick at least. Here comes Salah! PENALTIES: Ivory Coast 3-4 Egypt. Abdelmonem lashes into the left-hand side of the goal, and Egypt are one successful kick away from the quarter-finals! PENALTIES: Ivory Coast 3-3 Egypt. Cornet stutters but sends a forensic penalty into the bottom left. Gabaski guessed correctly but can’t reach. PENALTIES: Ivory Coast 2-3 Egypt. Kamal gives Sangare the eyes, sending the keeper one way, rolling the ball the other, into the bottom right. PENALTIES: Ivory Coast 2-2 Egypt. Bailly skips, in the style of his club team-mate Bruno Fernandes, and chips casually towards the top left. Gabaski sticks up a strong hand and tips onto the post and away! Advantage Egypt. PENALTIES: Ivory Coast 2-2 Egypt. El Soleya takes a straight run-up before rolling powerfully into the bottom left. Badra Sangare, in goal, guesses incorrectly. PENALTIES: Ivory Coast 2-1 Egypt. Ibrahim Sangare slots into the bottom right, Gabaski going the other way. PENALTIES: Ivory Coast 1-1 Egypt. Zizo batters into the top left and wanders off smiling. PENALTIES: Ivory Coast 1-0 Egypt. Salah wins the toss, after more friendly laughs with Aurier, and asks Ivory Coast to take the first penalty. The keepers Gabaski and Badra Sangare embrace each other too. And then Pepe steps up. He hesitates, then whips into the right-hand side of the net, sending Gabaski the wrong way. Penalties will decide who faces Morocco at the weekend. ET 30 min: Salah strides down the inside-left channel and reaches the byline. He cuts back for Trezeguet, who whips weakly, straight at Sangare in goal. ET 29 min: Zizo tries to release Sherif down the middle. Deli, the last man, gets in the road and mops up just in time. ET 27 min: The corner’s hit long. Too long. Ivory Coast break up the other end, Zaha threatening to slip clear down the left. He’s forced to check by Trezeguet, then tugs him over, before going nose to nose with Hegazy. It briefly threatens to kick off. Zaha his eventually booked for losing the rag. ET 26 min: Salah latches onto a loose ball and sends Trezeguet off on another romp down the left. Trezeguet enters the box and his low cross-cum-shot is blocked out for a corner. Zizo to take. Up goes the volume. ET 24 min: Kamal is stripped by Zaha down the Ivorian left. Zaha tries to combine with Cornet, who over-elaborates when a simple return pass would have sent his team-mate free. The nerves are really jangling at both ends now. ET 23 min: Salah plays a cute pass round the corner, sending Trezeguet free into the box down the left. Trezeguet shoots hard, but without any accuracy. Salah leaps up and down in frustration. ET 22 min: Deli is booked for clattering Salah as the pair contest a high ball. Salah thinks it’s a second yellow for Deli - there was some confusion when Bailly got booked early in the game - but it isn’t, and it’s still 11 versus 11. ET 20 min: Sangare nearly dribbles his way free down the right, but after beating two men, can’t pass a third, El Fotouh, on the edge of the Egypt box. For a spilt second, it looked as though the referee might point to the spot, but it’s a fair collision and no penalty. ET 18 min: The pace drops, understandably so given the temperature and humidity. ET 16 min: El Soleya launches long for Salah, who would be through on goal were it not for a towering clearing header by Bailly. Ivory Coast get the second period of extra time underway. Penalties loom! There’s just enough time for Cornet of Burnley to come on for Haller of Ajax, and that’s the end of the first period of extra time. ET 15 min: From the resulting corner, Deli heads over with Gabaski flapping. Ivory Coast so close to opening the scoring. ET 14 min: Pepe, probing down the right, cuts back for Ibrahim Sangare, who sends a sumptuous curler towards the top right from 25 yards. It’s heading in, an almost perfectly placed shot. Gabaski extends to full length and tips over. What a shot, and a save to match! ET 12 min: Zaha understandably takes a while to get back up, but thankfully once the pain of impact subsides he’s good to continue, no real harm done. VAR took a look at the replay, but there was no foul play. All accidental. We play on. ET 11 min: Kamal gets ahead of Zaha to a loose ball. Only by a split second, though, and Zaha hurdles over Kamal before landing awkwardly on his head, then his shoulder. That will hurt. ET 10 min: Die tries to release Haller with a long pass down the right, but Haller climbs all over El Fotouh and the whistle goes for a free kick. ET 8 min: Ivory Coast win a free kick out on the right, and load the Egyptian box. Aurier’s delivery is no good at all, and sails out of play on the opposite flank. Egypt break, Zizo cutting in from the left and having a speculative pop from distance. The ball swerves all over the place and Sangare does well to react and parry. Trezeguet is lurking but the ball doesn’t rebound to him. ET 7 min: Sherif returns. ET 6 min: Sherif is bundled onto a stretcher and carried off the pitch. Not sure if he’s dazed, or if they simply need to patch him up some more. The game restarts without him. ET 4 min: Sherif accidentally connected with Haller on the follow through to that header, and he’s taken a painful one in the mouth. Blood pouring. On come the doctors. ET 3 min: Egypt pin Ivory Coast back. El Soleya crosses deep from the right. Hegazy rises at the far stick and heads back to Sherif, who heads over from close range. Close again! ET 1 min: Almost an explosive start to extra time, as Trezeguet is slipped into the box down the left. Upon reaching the corner of the six-yard box, he shanks a shot across the face of goal. Salah can’t bundle home, and Ivory Coast escape. Aurier and Salah share a joke at the coin toss, all very convivial, and then Egypt get the first period of extra time underway. They’ve made a change, replacing Mohamed with Sherif up front. ... and that’s that. Egypt started the second half stronger, Ivory Coast finished it on top. But neither team could find a winner. Morocco still don’t know who they’ll face in the quarters. On we go to extra time, with penalties a possibility afterwards! 90 min +3: Pepe and Boga briefly threaten to open Egypt up down the right, but Elneny nips in to intercept, just in time. 90 min +2: Pepe swings the ball towards Gabaski, who claims under his bar, despite the physical arrival of Deli. Egypt launch a counter, but Zizo clatters Pepe on the halfway line and goes into the book. 90 min +1: In the first of four added minutes, Pepe takes on El Fotouh down the right and wins a corner. Pepe will take it himself. One corner leads to another. Here comes take two. 90 min: Aurier and Pepe combine down the right and earn a corner off Trezeguet ... but it’s not awarded. Ivory Coast are livid, the chance to immediately test the new keeper denied them. 88 min: El Shenawy limps off and is replaced by Gabaski. A slight element of farce to that substitution, which took an age, despite the keeper immediately knowing he couldn’t continue. Very strange. 87 min: For the second time in less than ten minutes, Egypt seem to be in some sort of denial over a substitution. El Shenawy stays down, and it takes an age for the penny to drop with Carlos Queiroz. Finally, he prepares to make the change. 85 min: ... but as Trezeguet blooters the rebound clear, El Shenawy goes down, having twisted something while planting his leg. The keeper looks over to the bench, and shakes his head sadly. He makes the mime for Kaput. He won’t be able to continue. 84 min: Zaha drives purposefully down the inside-left channel, reaching the box and pearling a shot towards the bottom left. El Shenawy parries bravely, and the ball’s hacked clear. So close! 83 min: Egypt finally replace Fathi, sending on Zizo. 82 min: El Shenawy hesitates in claiming Boga’s overhit through ball. He eventually gathers, but only after nearly letting Pepe in. Nerves clearly jangling now. 80 min: Looks like Fathi’s pulled something. The doctor performs the international mime for substitution. Fathi departs, but nobody comes on in his place. 79 min: Fathi is down, his right leg giving him some bother. 78 min: Boga dribbles in from the left and considers a shot, but instead leaves it to Pepe, who sends a weak curler towards the bottom left. Easy for the keeper. 76 min: Salah spins gloriously past two orange shirts down the right, then passes to Mohamed and makes off, hoping for a return that would send him clear on goal. Mohamed’s pass is no good. A huge chance slips by. 75 min: Pepe cuts in from the right and aims for the bottom left. He sends a bobbling ball towards the corner, but El Shenawy is behind it all the way. 74 min: A slight drop in pace. Nobody wants to make a mistake as we reach the business end of proceedings. 73 min: Trezeguet is immediately up to speed, sent into space down the left. He’s got Mohamed and Salah in the middle, but attempts to curl around the keeper and into the bottom right instead. Just wide. To be fair, he was within his rights to take that on. 72 min: Some changes! Ivory Coast replace Seri and Gradel with Boga and Zaha, while Egypt swap out Marmoush for Trezeguet. 70 min: Pepe hits the corner long. Sangare, at the far post, heads back across goal to Haller, who tries to eyebrow an effort past El Shenawy from six yards. The keeper tips spectacularly over the bar. The next corner isn’t so eventful. 69 min: Corner for Ivory Coast down the left. Egypt clear easily. But then Ivory Coast come again, Bailly jinking his way in from the right before clipping the cutest little pass down the channel, nearly teeing up Haller, 12 yards out. Egypt bundle the ball out for a corner, just in time. 67 min: Haller hesitates when Aurier tries to slip him free down the right. Then up the other end, Marmoush and Mohamed make a mess of a fairly simple one-two. This is tense and it’s getting rather scrappy. 65 min: Egypt are dominating the midfield, but they’re not exactly creating a huge bunch of chances. 63 min: Marmoush busies in from the left and nearly slips Salah clear down the channel. The ball pinballs instead to Mohamed, who takes a touch, opens his body, and aims a curler towards the top right. It’s always sailing high and wide. 61 min: Salah tears off down the right and is cynically clipped on the heel by Die. The referee continues with his laissez-faire approach to punishment. You’d expect a player to see yellow for that, but no. 60 min: Mohamed goes down and requires a little treatment, but he’s back up again soon enough. 58 min: This is being played at a fair old lick now. Fathi attempts to release Salah clear through on goal with a long pass down the middle. Deli, positioned perfectly, makes a crucial header to intercept and clear. Had he not done so, Salah was away. 56 min: Fathi meets a half-cleared ball and creams a shot towards the Ivorian goal from 25 yards. Bailly blocks bravely. 55 min: Marmoush is fortunate not to go into the book for a cynical lunge at Die. 54 min: Konan makes his way down the left and earns a corner off Hegazy. Haller competes for a header, but Egypt clear with ease. 53 min: Elneny drives down the right and hits a fierce cross that deflects off Deli, sending the ball flying towards the top right. Sangare does extremely well to react quickly and tip around the post, then claim the resulting corner. Egypt knocking on the door here. 52 min: Salah romps down the right, draws most of the Ivorian defence towards him, then rolls across the face of the box to El Soleya, who is in acres. El Soleya lifts a poor effort miles over the bar. Again, he should have done better. 50 min: Hegazy crosses deep from the right. On the other flank, Marmoush cushions a header down for El Soleya, who can’t find Salah or Mohamed on the penalty spot with his dinked cross. A big opportunity for Egypt goes begging. 49 min: Salah turns on the jets to advance down the right. He glides infield and nearly slips Marmoush free down the channel and into the box. Not quite, but that’s Salah’s first major dribble this afternoon. Egypt could do with more of them. 47 min: Pepe wins a free kick out on the right. Aurier swings it in. Abdelmonem heads clear. Not a particularly distinguished start to the half. Egypt get the second half underway. There have been no changes at the break. Half-time entertainment. Today’s Fiver has landed. Sign up if you haven’t already. Just enough time for Haller to take a whack at goal from the edge of the box, straight at El Shenawy, and that’s the end of the first half. It’s not been all that, tell the truth, and yet both teams could easily have notched a spectacular goal, Marmoush with a vicious curler that hit the bar, Ibrahim Sangare with a bicycle kick that nearly flew into the top right. Here’s to an exciting second half! 45 min: Egypt pin Ivory Coast back. They pass and probe. Suddenly Marmoush has a dig from a position just to the right of the D. His low drive is deflected out for a corner. Marmoush takes it himself, and it’s no good. There will be one added minute. 43 min: Salah loops it long for Hegazy at the far post. Hegazy tries to set a team-mate up with a downward header, but Ibrahim Sangare blooters clear, which ensures his namesake Badra in goal has no work to do. 42 min: Salah works his way down the right and is pointlessly clipped by Gradel near the corner flag. Free kick, which Salah will take himself. 40 min: There’s a case to be made that Sangare had time to trap and shoot in a more methodical style, but the effort was well executed so you can’t really knock it. 39 min: Ivory Coast finally put something together, the ball being shuttled left to right across the front of the Egypt box, then hooked back into the centre by Pepe. Ibrahim Sangare, free on the penalty spot, goes for the acrobatic spectacular, and scissors a fine effort down and back up towards the top right. El Shenawy, at full stretch, parries clear. What a shot, what a save! 37 min: Egypt take it up a notch, Salah playing a cute pass down the inside-right channel to release Mohamed, who sends a first-time shot towards the bottom right. He doesn’t quite catch it, allowing Sangare to tip around the post. The resulting corner’s hit long. Salah retrieves it on the left wing and nearly flukes a looping cross into the top right. Sangare tips this one over the bar, and nothing comes of the next corner. 35 min: Salah probes down the right, to little effect. A reminder that this game will go to extra time and penalties if necessary. 33 min: Aurier runs down the right wing, a long tail of orange tape trailing from his sock. A carnival touch to match the party atmosphere in the stand. Plenty of noise, still, despite this game failing to reach the heights. 31 min: Gradel is given an absurd amount of space down the left by Elneny. Gradel crosses aimlessly, then Elneny compounds his earlier error by letting a loose ball clank off the top of his head while shepherding it out for a goal kick. Thankfully for the unfortunate Egyptian, nothing comes of the wholly avoidable corner. 30 min: Die comes on in Kessie’s place. 29 min: Kessie is down again, those ribs causing him some distress. He looks extremely upset, as the realisation that his race is run dawns on him. 28 min: Hegazi fouls Haller, 30 yards out. Gradel takes the resulting free kick, sending a strange bouncing dribbler through the box and straight at El Shenawy. 26 min: Pepe twists and shimmies down the right, reaching the byline and firing a low centre into El Shenawy’s arms. This game hasn’t quite taken off yet, but both teams are slowly beginning to find their range. 25 min: Aurier forces a corner down the right. Mohamed blooters clear and Egypt counter quickly. Salah considers going on a solo run, and in retrospect should probably have backed himself, because the move ends when Kamal takes up possession and dribbles an awful effort into Sangare’s hands from distance. 24 min: Kessie is down, having taken a whack to the hip. As cooling spray is applied by the doctor, everyone else takes the opportunity to knock back some delicious water. Kessie eventually gets back up and necks some too. 22 min: Salah takes the corner himself, from the right. His low scuffed effort is cleared at the near post by Bailly, making up for his earlier mistake. 21 min: Egypt are beginning to trouble Ivory Coast now. Salah forces Bailly into a poor clearing header, then takes a shot from the edge of the D. It’s always rising over the bar, but Sangare takes no chances and tips over for a corner. 19 min: ... so while it’s Ivory Coast who have been hogging the ball, it’s Egypt who nearly opened the scoring. The Elephants have created nothing of note. 17 min: ... but this is quite brilliant, as Marmoush nearly makes up for that dismal free kick in spectacular style. He’s the best part of 30 yards out, and sends a fierce dipper up and back down towards the top right. Badra Sangare is beaten all ends up in the Ivory Coast goal, but the ball twangs off the crossbar and away. What a goal that would have been! 16 min: El Fotouh works his way down the left and draws a clumsy foul from Aurier. Free kick, and a chance for Egypt to line up on the edge of the Ivory Coast box. Marmoush hoicks a dreadful effort miles over everyone’s head and out for a goal kick. That is quite appalling. 15 min: Ivory Coast continue to dominate possession, though it’s all a bit slow, and Egypt don’t look particularly troubled by this state of affairs. 13 min: Mohamed goes up for a high ball and clanks Konan on the ear. Ivory Coast want a booking, but they’re not getting their wish. Konan is back up and running again quickly. 11 min: It’s a bit early for a lull, but here we are. 9 min: The first card of the afternoon is shown to Bailly, who hangs out a leg and brings Mohamed crashing down. It’s well deserved, a fairly crude swipe at the Egypt attacker’s ankle. 8 min: Egypt are struggling to retain possession during these early exchanges. A couple of long balls in the vague direction of Salah, and that’s the sum total of their creativity so far. Plenty of time to hone their art. 6 min: Aurier bursts into the Egypt box from the right. Marmoush lightly nudges him on the shoulder, and he crashes dramatically to the floor. He wants a penalty, but come off it and come on. Goal kick. 5 min: Gradel drops a shoulder and makes his way past Elneny down the left. He aims for the top right but the shot is blocked. It’s a fast start by the Ivorians. 3 min: The first shot in anger is taken by Kessie, who spins into a bit of space, 25 yards from goal, and drags a low effort wide right of the Egypt goal. El Shenawy had it covered. 2 min: This is the 11th time these countries have met at the Afcon. It’s now the most-played fixture in tournament history. Ivory Coast get the ball rolling. They ping it forward quickly, albeit to little effect. Egypt will most likely sit back and hope to hit their opponents on the break. Before kick-off, there’s a moment to reflect the Olembe Stadium tragedy. The eight who lost their lives are remembered with a poignant minute of silence. The teams are out! Ivory Coast in their orange shirts, Egypt in second-choice white. Anticipation crackles around the Japoma Stadium in Douala. The place isn’t full, but there’s plenty of noise nonetheless. It’s a balmy 32 degrees in Cameroon, with humidity levels at a fairly uncomfortable 66 percent. Once the anthems have been performed, pennants exchanged, coins tossed and hands shaken, we’ll be off. Some grim pre-match reading. Sleep well the poor souls who went to the game but never got back home. Fans of the Premier League will spot several recognisable names in the Ivorian ranks. Nicolas Pepe of Arsenal up front, Manchester United’s Eric Bailly at the back. On the bench, Wilfried Zaha of Crystal Palace and Burnley winger Maxwel Cornet. Plus some old friends in Serge Aurier, formerly of Spurs but now at Villarreal, erstwhile West Ham striker Sebastien Haller, now banging them in for Ajax, and one-time Bournemouth attacker Max Gradel, a Sivasspor man these days. Throw in Jean Michael Seri of Championship side Fulham, and that’s quite a contingent of familiar faces. Egypt by contrast are heavily represented by home-based players. Some notable exceptions: Liverpool and Arsenal are represented by Mohamed Salah and Mohamed Elneny, who both start, while Aston Villa’s Trezeguet is on the bench. Ivory Coast: B Sangaré, Aurier, Bailly, Deli, Konan, I Sangaré, Seri, Kessié, Gradel, Haller, Pépé. Subs: Tapé, Kanon, Kossounou, Zaha, Kouassi, Cornet, Maïga, Boga, Dié, Kouamé, Cissé, Boli. Egypt: El Shenawy, El Soleya, El Fotouh, Marmoush, Hegazy, M Abdelmonem, Kamal, Fathi, Salah, Elneny, Mohamed. Subs: Trézéguet, Abdelghany, Bakr, Sobhi, Ashraf, Ali, A Abdelmonem, Bekhit, Ibrahim, Sayed, Daader, Mehany. Referee: Jean Jacques Ndala Ngambo (DR Congo). It’s a heavyweight last-16 clash at the Japoma Stadium in Douala this afternoon. Seven-time winners Egypt meet two-time champions Ivory Coast for the right to face Morocco in the quarter finals on Sunday in Yaoundé. Both teams made comfortable progress through their respective groups. The Elephants topped Group E unbeaten, thanks to wins over Equatorial Guinea and Algeria, the latter a 3-1 win which sent the reigning champions Algeria packing. Meanwhile, the Pharaohs lost their opening fixture against Nigeria, but bounced back with solid if unspectacular wins over Guinea-Bissau and Sudan. Egypt are equipped with arguably the tournament’s biggest star in Mohamed Salah. However, coach Carlos Quieroz’s defensive mindset can be a bit of a downer, and it’s not as though Ivory Coast are without top talent of their own, Sebastien Haller of Ajax and Arsenal’s Nicolas Pépé at the sharp end of their attack, Milan’s Franck Kessié the main attraction in midfield. It’s a tough one to call, and it could go to extra time and even penalty kicks. The match starts at 5pm in Douala, Cameroon, 4pm GMT. It’s on!In his latest film, released in the UK this week, Pedro Almodóvar breaks new ground in a career that began as Spain started to transition to democracy in the late 1970s. Until now, the great director’s work has virtually ignored the dark decades of dictatorship under General Francisco Franco. “It was my way of getting revenge on him,” he explained to the Guardian last week. “But it didn’t mean to say I’d forgotten.” After Franco’s death in 1975, a “pact of forgetting” and an Amnesty Law largely drew a veil over the bloody atrocities of the Spanish civil war and the repressive era of dictatorship, allowing a traumatised population to move on. As the plot of Parallel Mothers reflects, this mood has given way on the left to a determination to bear witness to crimes never recognised or atoned for. The film stars Penelope Cruz as a photographer determined to exhume bodies from a mass grave near her village, where she believes her Republican great-grandfather lies after being summarily executed by fascist forces. In recent years, such exhumations have been sought and performed throughout Spain, and more than 100,000 bodies are known to still lie in unmarked graves. The Socialist-led government plans to make new funds and resources available for digs, as well as other activities and research related to historical memory. As work progresses, civil war historians have been able to draw on new sources to better understand the horrors of the time and the specific nature of the fascist terror unleashed across the country. Last year, the government moved to outlaw the defence and cultural celebration of the Franco era. There has, inevitably, been a backlash. Many conservatives argue that the historical memory movement has unnecessarily stirred up division and recrimination. A culture war over the politics of memory is underway. This week, for example, Madrid’s rightwing city council restored the name of a street which memorialises a nationalist ship that shelled civilians in 1937. The rise of the nationalist Vox party has emboldened parts of the right which aim to rehabilitate the Franco era and the nationalist cause in the civil war. The direction of travel, though, is clear. For some time, plans have been underway for Spain’s first national museum devoted to the civil war, located in the Aragonese battleground town of Teruel. A commission of experts from across the political spectrum is to decide how to tell the story of the conflict, focusing particularly on the suffering of the civilian population. Its architects, led by the former Socialist MP and professor of politics, Javier Paniagua, hope that the £5m project can become a Spanish equivalent to the Verdun memorial or the Imperial War Museum. This is unlikely to be a museum which will appeal to Vox supporters. But Mr Paniagua said that the aim will be to fairly portray nationalist and republican perspectives, in an effort to enhance understanding of why a national tragedy took place. In an age of polarisation this is surely the right approach, however challenging and ambitious. Collective amnesia was perhaps an understandable option for a generation desperate to embrace a democratic future in the 1970s. But as Mr Almodóvar points out: “Remembering is part of the soul of who we are.” It will be a mighty task, but more than 80 years after the civil war ended, Teruel’s planned museum deserves to succeed.The hallmarks of this government have been its cavalier disregard for integrity, accountability and honesty. But there are exceptions; Lord Agnew’s resignation shows ministers can do the right thing. The counter-fraud minister decided to leave over the alarming scale of pilfering taking place under the government’s coronavirus support scheme, and colleagues’ apparent unwillingness to do anything about it. His departure should be a wake-up call. Since May 2020, around £50bn had been lent out to firms under the government-backed Covid loan scheme. The National Audit Office last December warned it had “limited verification, and no credit checks on borrowers, which made it vulnerable to fraud and losses”. The government also chose not to disclose the companies in receipt of Bounce Back loans, leaving ministers open to accusations that there was something to hide. Lord Agnew agreed, saying “desperately inadequate” efforts were made to stop government cash being stolen. The Tory peer thought that Covid loan fraud ran as high as 26%, which suggests the state handed over £10bn to thieves. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, denied “ignoring” fraudulently claimed Covid support funds, saying he would recover looted monies. Lord Agnew thinks doing so would give Mr Sunak a “sporting chance of cutting income tax before a likely May 2024 election”. This is true under the Treasury’s fiscal rules. Labour says recouping such losses would mean hardly any need for a national insurance hike. On offer from the government were advances of up to £50,000, or a maximum of 25% of annual turnover, to support businesses during the pandemic. More than 1.5m loans were made to a business community of 5.6m eligible companies. Yet there are only about 1.4m UK private sector businesses with employees. That all such UK businesses could have taken advantage of self-certified loans that were granted in 24 hours and for which the state was wholly liable should have rung alarm bells. Lord Agnew said schoolboy errors were made; more than 1,000 companies received state loans that were not even trading when Covid struck. Counter-fraud measures weren’t put in place. Simple acts could have helped. David Clarke, the former chair of the Fraud Advisory Panel, proposed to MPs last year that a centralised bank data repository could have identified long-dormant company accounts that received government cash. Companies House fails to undertake basic checks on its corporate register. Inexplicably, ministers have shelved long-promised plans to overhaul it. The former minister blames the banks for the losses. Lenders had no reason to implement checks as there was a 100% state guarantee for non-payment. Honest businesses needed the money to pay the rent. This cash helped landlords pay their mortgages – which in turn kept banks flush with cash. Bankers also make money by creating and selling mortgage derivatives, a financial investment instrument that depends on the underlying value of property loans. If they went bad, then potentially billions of pounds in the Square Mile might be affected. No wonder many finance houses are reporting record profits. The suspicion is that losing £10bn to fraud might have been seen as an acceptable price to pay to keep the UK’s jewel in the crown – the City – safe from harm. But if that is the case, then it is just another example of how finance has become an end in itself, unhinged from the economy and from the people and businesses it ought to serve. • This article was amended on 31 January 2022 to add detail regarding the number of companies eligible for loans from the British Business Bank.Tottenham are ready to submit an official proposal to sign the defensive midfielder Sofyan Amrabat on loan from Fiorentina with an option to buy for €16m (£13.4m). Amrabat, who is with Morocco at the Africa Cup of Nations, has his heart set on a move to Spurs and is Antonio Conte’s preferred option in that position. Talks have been taking place since Sunday but Tottenham need to offload Tanguy Ndombele, who is wanted on loan by Paris Saint-Germain, or Dele Alli, who is an option for Newcastle, if they are to take Amrabat. Amrabat has made only one Serie A start this season, in mid-October, with his other 10 appearances in the league coming from the bench. The 25-year-old, born in the Netherlands, has previously played for Utrecht, Feyenoord, Brugge and Verona. Fiorentina are close to selling the striker Dusan Vlahovic to Juventus for €75m, including add-ons, and have a deal in place to bring in Arthur Cabral from Basel to replace him for a fee that could rise to €16m. Barcelona are stepping up their attempts to sign César Azpilicueta, who is moving closer to leaving Chelsea on a free at the end of the season. Chelsea still hope to convince Azpilicueta to stay, but they are yet to agree to the 32-year-old defender’s request for a three-year deal. Further talks are planned and Thomas Tuchel does not want to lose his captain, who is valued for his dependability and leadership. Chelsea tend not to offer long deals to players in their 30s and Barça are understood to be prepared to offer a three-year deal. Xavi Hernández, Barcelona’s manager, is keen to sign the Spain international and confidence is growing that his future lies at the Camp Nou. Sources believe that Azpilicueta, who is interested in playing for Xavi, is likely to move at the end of the season. However the right-back could have a change of heart if Chelsea alter their stance and increase their offer of a one-year extension. Barcelona are interested in signing the Chelsea centre-back Andreas Christensen on a free. Christensen, in the final six months of his deal, has also been targeted by Bayern Munich. Chelsea could also lose the Germany defender, Antonio Rüdiger, who could join Real Madrid on a free. One defensive option for Chelsea could be Niklas Süle, who is set to leave Bayern on a free this summer. However it remains to be seen whether Tuchel wants the Germany defender.Some regions that produce coffee, cashews and avocados may not be able to support the growing of these crops within decades as a result of global heating, a study has found. Researchers combined climate change projections and soil factors to model how suitable various regions will be for growing crops in 2050. The analysis found that all major coffee-producing regions face a decline in suitability, including Brazil, Vietnam, Indonesia and Colombia. For cashews, major growing regions such as India, Ivory Coast and Benin are predicted to become less suitable, while for avocados areas including the Dominican Republic, Peru and Indonesia will suffer. For all three crops, appropriate growing regions may open up at higher altitudes and latitudes, particularly for cashews and avocados. The US, Argentina, China and countries in east Africa are predicted to benefit the most. The study found that climate change adaptation will be necessary in many major producing regions, with potential mitigation measures including adaptations in plant breeding and site-specific management. “It was important to investigate where there will be shifts amongst suitable growing regions for all three crops due to climate change, with both expansions and contractions. This is why we put a focus on today’s main producing countries,” said Dr Roman Grüter, of ZHAW School of Life Sciences and Facility Management in Switzerland, who was the lead author of the paper. “In our suitability model, we wanted to prioritise regions where crops were locally adapted already. “When you identify regions that are climatically suitable for growing crops, the typography and soil factors are critical for cultivating crops and that’s why we took them into account in our model, as well as taking into account climate projections for 2050. Due to a negative impact on crop suitability in those countries there will be adaptation measures required in all of those regions with all three crops.” Dr Paul Jensen, of the Sustainability Research Institute at the University of Leeds, who was not involved in the study, said: “The research demonstrates the wide range and complexity of crop management considerations that food system stakeholders need to increasingly consider in the face of both extreme and minimal climate change scenarios. Long-term planning for how we manage the agricultural environment, without simply moving cultivation and related environmental impacts to new areas, is needed now to secure supplies of not only luxury crops such as those covered in the study, but also many staple crops that we all rely on. “This is particularly true of those crops that support the livelihood of smallholder farmers across the globe. If smaller entities in the global food system are not suitably supported in terms of understanding the impact of climate change and adaptation strategies and opportunities, we will see yet again that the most vulnerable in society will be those that suffer first and the most as climate change takes hold.”A litter of hairless French bulldogs has been branded a worrying example of “extreme breeding” by the British Veterinary Association, which has voiced concerns that some owners are prioritising novelty over the health of their pet. The dogs are believed to have been bred in Scotland and to be the result of crosses between French bulldogs, Pugs and Chinese crested dogs. They are thought to be the first litter of hairless French bulldogs in the UK. But the national body for veterinary surgeons in the UK has warned that while the puppies might be healthy, they could end up with myriad problems, including a susceptibility to sunburn and heat stress as well as breathing difficulties. “Just because people like things to look a certain way it shouldn’t justify people being able to do things to these dogs that we know is going to cause potential harm and suffering and welfare issues,” said Justine Shotton, president of the British Veterinary Association. “I’m just really disappointed when I see things like this and I wish that we can get potential owners to understand how much some of this extreme breeding really does affect the day to day welfare of these dogs,” she added. It is not the first time hairless French bulldogs have been produced – one such dog made headlines when it entered the US after apparently being bought from China. At the time of the report vets described the animal as a “monster” and raised concerns that it could be at increased risk of painful acne, dermatitis and skin cancer. Shotton said the latest litter is just one example of extreme breeding, adding the novelty factor, “cuteness”, or chance to notch up likes on social media may be among the motivations for breeding and buying unusual crosses. “We feel like a lot of these types of dogs that are being marketed as very rare or particularly unique, are just being bred as a sort of popularity thing to get people potentially attracted to these dogs, because they’re almost a status symbol, rather than thinking about the welfare of the dogs themselves,” she said. Shotton added that while crossbreeds have sometimes been thought to be healthier than pedigree dogs, that is not necessarily the case, noting that crossing breeds that have particular health issues can mean the offspring get the worst of both worlds. “Unfortunately, in some of the crosses, [vets are] seeing a multiplication of problems,” she said. Hairless dogs can find it difficult to keep warm and are at increased risk of sunburn, and other skin problems, while flat-faced, or brachycephalic, dogs are known to be at increased risk of breathing difficulties, as well as being prone to heatstroke, eye ulcers, spinal problems and skin disorders. A study published in the journal Plos One by researchers at the Royal Veterinary College, found that flat-faced dogs have almost seven times the odds of prolapsed nictitating membrane gland – or “cherry eye” – compared with dogs that have a head of medium proportions, with high levels of this disorder also seen in “designer” crosses such as Puggles. If not dealt with, the authors warn the condition can lead to chronic problems including inflammation or infection which may cause discomfort or pain. Dr Dan O’Neill, co-author of the study, said the development of new flat-faced breeds with even more extreme characteristics – as would be the case with hairless French bulldogs – goes against the position of the UK Brachycephalic working group who have described such breeding as “unacceptable”. A spokesperson for the Scottish Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SSPCA) said crosses of certain dogs were worrying, adding the organisation has a confidential helpline for anyone with concerns about low-welfare breeding. “The Scottish SPCA is extremely concerned about the increase in unscrupulous breeders breeding dogs with exaggerated characteristics and attempting specialist medical procedures without training. We are spearheading a taskforce to look in to these issues specifically,” they said.Boris Johnson’s plight is leaving government in a state of near-paralysis, with key decisions delayed while No 10 focuses on defending the prime minister amid the Downing Street parties scandal, sources say. “It’s not as easy to get policy through if it has to involve No 10 at the moment. I’m aware the civil servants feel it – feel the slowdown,” said one frustrated aide in a Whitehall department. “You just need to have things to carry on doing.” Michael Gove’s levelling-up white paper was expected before Christmas but has been repeatedly delayed – though sources in his department insist that is as much to do with the Omicron Covid surge as “partygate”. One MP who has been given a preview of the policy paper said they were underwhelmed and expressed concern that the government’s internal turmoil means strategic direction has been lacking. Despite inflation hitting a 30-year high, and with energy prices set to jump sharply in April, the government is also yet to present a plan to alleviate the cost of living crisis. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, said to Boris Johnson on Wednesday: “What’s utterly damning, despite the huff and puff, is that this [the parties scandal] is all happening when petrol prices, the weekly shop, and energy bills are going through the roof.” He said of government ministers, many of whom have spent recent media rounds explaining away the allegations of rule-breaking parties: “Instead of getting on with their jobs, they’re wheeled out to save his.” Marking two years since Brexit, Johnson told his cabinet on Tuesday that “we must be bold to unleash growth and innovation, and show the British people, businesses and investors that things are changing for the better”. Yet civil servants point to the relatively empty parliamentary timetable, with little heavyweight legislation under discussion, as evidence of the lack of direction from the centre of government. The House of Commons adjourned before 5pm on Wednesday. Tim Durrant, associate director of Whitehall thinktank the Institute for Government, said of the partygate row: “It just sucks up everyone’s attention, that’s the problem … Whether or not they’re directly involved, ministers are always being asked: ‘Do you support the prime minister?’ So they’re having to defend him. They’re not able to get on with other things.” He pointed out that every hour spent by Johnson wooing backbenchers is time he cannot spend being briefed about the crisis in Ukraine, or other pressing concerns. “It’s not just about his time, it’s about the rest of government,” he added. “Ministers are paying attention to what’s going on, officials are following what’s going on; people will be thinking about, what are the various scenarios we need to be planning for, in case there are changes.” With Johnson asking wavering MPs what policies they would like to see implemented, there are also concerns that policy decisions civil servants believed had been settled could now be reversed. The prime minister has come under intense pressure, including from some members of his cabinet, to reconsider the increase in national insurance contributions due to take effect in April. Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, wrung the commitment to the tax rise from Johnson in exchange for signing off on a surge in spending on the NHS, and sees himself as the representative of the Tory tradition of sound money. Sunak’s aides insist there have been no conversations between the pair about postponing or cancelling the increase, and Johnson’s spokesperson insisted on Tuesday there were “no plans” to do so. But government insiders fear the government’s stance on this and other issues may now be in flux as Johnson bids to win over sceptics in his own party in advance of a potential no confidence vote. Those policies that have been announced recently – including the freeze on the BBC licence fee, and the enhanced involvement of the military in tackling small boat Channel crossings – appear to be aimed at placating rightwing backbenchers.It ended, as it had for a long time seemed that it would, with penalties. And as has happened twice before at the Africa Cup of Nations in the past 24 years, Egypt beat Ivory Coast on penalties after a 0-0 draw. Eric Bailly, who had had an excellent game, saw his dinked effort pushed against the crossbar by Egypt’s substitute keeper Mohamed Abou Gabal. Combined with Mohamed Salah’s decisive spot-kick, it was enough for Carlos Queiroz’s Egypt to progress. Unbending, unyielding, Queiroz remains the same as he always been. His hair may slowly be retreating from his crown with each passing year but the hands-on-hip prowl around his technical area means the same as it ever did. So too does the football. “It’s down to work,” Queiroz said. “We have prepared very well since our last match. We repeated what we did during training. We were there in the spaces and marking. Concentration and respect for the game plan. We were the best team, we had the best chances.” Queiroz has spent the tournament despairing of fans who doubt his cautious approach and demand Egypt “kick the ball forward, kick the ball forward”, insisting he was content to wait for “one small mistake, one rebound”. Against this Ivorian defence, it was less likely to be one small mistake than several big ones. The pitch in Douala is probably even more disappointing than the media facilities, which perhaps offers some excuse, but again and again passes were misplaced. As Queiroz had hinted, Egypt did not so much try to create anything as wait for Ivory Coast to present them with the ball but, as in the group stage, a vaunted forward line squandered the opportunities. Omar Marmoush pinged a 15th-minute shot off the crossbar but, that aside, Egypt’s threat was largely theoretical. The Ivory Coast coach, Patrice Beaumelle, has twice won the Cup of Nations as assistant to Hervé Renard and apes Renard’s famous lucky white shirt. The rugged Mills &amp; Boon hero look though, is rather undermined by his decision to pair the shirt with a pair of Jerry Seinfeld trainers. And he could not overcome the familiar failing of Ivory Coast against Egypt. Early in the second half, as the game became tense and the tempo rose, it became a case of the terrible finishing of Egypt against the terrible crossing of Ivory Coast. But Queiroz soon put a stop to that, shifting to 4-2-3-1. Egypt became increasingly conservative and wasted time at every opportunity. It was all very familiar; Egypt have always been masters of that if they feel the game might be slipping from them. Queiroz preaches control and, while a shootout clearly offers no guarantees, it was better than the alternative of taking Ivory Coast on in an open game. And when you have Salah taking your final penalty, that does tip things in your favour. Morocco will be harder to stifle on Sunday, but Queiroz will not change: Egypt are in the last eight having only scored two goals.