Manufacturers have warned that Brexit will add to soaring costs facing British industry, amid concerns that customs delays and red tape will rank among the biggest challenges for firms this year. Make UK, the industry body representing 20,000 manufacturing firms of all sizes from across the country, said that while optimism among its members had grown, it was being undermined by the after-effects of the UK’s departure from the EU. One year on from the end of the transition period, two-thirds of industrial company leaders in its survey of 228 firms said Brexit had moderately or significantly hampered their business. More than half of firms warned they were likely to suffer further damage this year from customs delays due to import checks and changes to product labelling. According to the 2022 MakeUK/PwC senior executive survey, Brexit disruption remains among the biggest concerns facing industry bosses for the year ahead as Britain’s departure from the EU complicates the fallout from Covid-19 and the rising costs facing companies. Delays at customs, the additional costs from meeting separate regulatory regimes in the UK and the EU, and reduced access to migrant workers were among top concerns raised in the survey. “It is clear from these figures that Brexit and the global Covid-19 pandemic have had a scarring effect on the mentality of many businesses, which are traumatised by the ongoing delays and disruptions to their supply chains,” the report said. The warning came as other research showed Britain’s economy was losing steam at the end of last year as the Omicron variant hit demand for goods and services. According to analysis of leading business surveys by BDO, an accountancy firm, and the Centre for Economics and Business Research, business optimism and output growth fell in December as firms grappled with the fallout from the latest wave of Covid infections. A separate survey by IHS Markit and NatWest found that activity dropped in 11 out of 12 regions of the UK, with a marked loss in momentum in London, and the north-east slipping into contraction. Kaley Crossthwaite, a partner at accountants BDO, said: “Ongoing uncertainty around Omicron is providing a further blow to UK businesses which have already battled a string of supply chain issues, the threat of furtherCovid restrictions and inflationary pressures this past year.” Despite concerns over the impact of Brexit and the Omicron variant, Make UK and PwC said that three-quarters of companies in its senior executive survey expected conditions in manufacturing to improve over the coming year. Almost three-quarters of companies said they believed conditions for the sector would improve, with about 73% believing that opportunities outweighed the risks. That optimism tallied with a separate survey of chief financial officers of large companies by Deloitte, another accountancy firm. The latest quarterly survey showed that a record 37% were planning on increasing capital investment in the next year. More of the companies were considering expansion into new products, services, or markets than at any time since it began in 2009. The Deloitte poll showed that the financial executives believed that Brexit would be a significant negative for UK-EU trade and migration. Although finding that confidence was tempered by the impact of Brexit, Covid-19 and rising costs, the Make UK survey showed two-thirds of companies regarded the UK as a competitive location for manufacturing. Around a third of companies in the survey were also looking to “reshore” their supply chains to rely more on domestic sources following severe disruption to the delivery of international components and materials. Make UK said that despite the challenges in the short term, the shift could represent the “possible death of the just-in-time supply chain business model”. “[That] may be a good thing for British manufacturers, who are now developing ways to ensure they are more resilient and less exposed to unforeseen international risks in future,” it added.Fortnum &amp; Mason is launching a competition to find a dish celebrating the Queen’s 70 years on the throne, marking the beginning of official jubilee festivities. Much like Poulet Reine Elizabeth, more commonly known as coronation chicken, invented by Le Cordon Bleu London for the Queen’s coronation banquet in 1953, it is hoped the Platinum Pudding competition will serve as a long-lasting reminder of the 95 year-old monarch’s reign. Recipes will be judged by an expert panel including the queen of British baking herself, Dame Mary Berry. Other programmes unveiled by Buckingham Palace on Monday include the Queen opening her private estates to the public and a concert outside the palace. The Queen usually spends the anniversary of her accession privately at Sandringham. It is not clear which events she will attend or take part in following orders to rest by doctors in October last year and an overnight hospital stay for unspecified preliminary investigations. The bulk of the jubilee duties are expected to be given to the rest of the royal family, including the Prince of Wales and Duchess of Cornwall. From 12 to 15 May, more than 500 horses and 1,000 performers are expected to take part in a show in the grounds of Windsor Castle, which will take the audience through history from Elizabeth I to the present day. More ceremonies are to take place later in the year, starting on Thursday 2 June, the first day of the special four-day bank holiday, when the Queen’s birthday parade, Trooping the Colour, will take place in Horse Guards Parade. On the same day, the UK, Channel Islands, Isle of Man and UK Overseas Territories will come together to light a beacon at the same time as the principal beacon at Buckingham Palace. On Friday 3 June, which will be a bank holiday, a service of thanksgiving for the Queen’s reign will be held at St Paul’s Cathedral, before what’s billed to be a star-studded Platinum Party at the Palace on the Saturday. Performers are yet to be named but it’s said to be bringing together some of the world’s biggest names in entertainment. People across the country will sit down together for the Big Jubilee Lunch on 5 June. Sandringham and Balmoral will also be open for residents and visitors to enjoy the celebrations across the long weekend. Performers, dancers, musicians, military personnel, key workers and volunteers will tell the story of the Queen’s reign in the Platinum Jubilee Pageant, which will form a River of Hope – devised of 200 silk flags – making its way along the Mall. Schoolchildren have also been invited to create a picture of their hopes for the planet over the next 70 years, and some of their designs will be put on to the flags. From July, three displays marking the Queen’s accession to the throne, the coronation and jubilees will be put on at the official royal residences.A dog called Beyoncé, a Roland drum kit, a 1940s typewriter and a suitcase full of Blackpool rock were among the items left behind by people who stayed at Travelodge hotels last year. Other items that guests forgot to take home with them included a DJI Phantom drone, six-foot feathered angel wings, a coin collection that was started nine decades ago and a Jimmy Choo Cinderella shoe. Staff at Travelodge’s 582 hotels reported a significant increase in holiday items being left behind over the last year. The suitcase of rock was found at the firm’s South Promenade venue in Blackpool, a dress made out of postcards was left in Bournemouth and housekeepers at the Rhyl Seafront hotel in north Wales discovered a huge inflatable unicorn pool float on the bed of room 13. A Pomsky dog called Beyoncé was left behind at Manchester Central, and the owner of a miniature horse called Red Rum was said to be beside herself when she got home and realised that she had forgotten her horsebox in the Cockermouth hotel car park. Brides, grooms and wedding guests left behind a number of items, including an Islamic marriage certificate and a wedding cake piñata. A bridesmaid staying at the Liverpool Exchange Street hotel left behind the bride’s pet lovebirds, Will and Kate, which she was supposed to take to the ceremony. Among other items left behind were: A smart robot dog A first edition of Watership Down A banana boat A GT V8 Bentley convertible An Angora rabbit called Thumper A wedding proposal message in a bottle An ice-cream cart A telescope A birth chart and tarot reading Travelodge’s communications director, Shakila Ahmed, said: “In 2021, following freedom day, we welcomed back millions of customers to our 582 UK Travelodge hotels and we saw a significant increase in bookings. This has led to a range of interesting items being left behind by our customers across our UK hotels. “When it comes to why so many of our customers forget their treasured items, it’s basically due to us all being time poor, juggling multiple tasks and being in a hurry to get from A to B. In the rush, valuable possessions are easily forgotten.”On the second Monday in January every year, Japan’s 20-year-olds put on their best kimono and suits, brave the winter chill and congregate at event halls across the country to celebrate their official passage into adulthood. In happier times, Coming of Age Day is a time to reunite with old school friends from the same neighbourhood and take endless commemorative photos, knowing that a party invariably involving the legal consumption of alcohol will be just reward for sitting through dreary speeches by local dignitaries. But for the latest cohort of Japanese men and women who have turned 20 in the past eight months – or will do so by 1 April – this year’s festivities will be tinged with anxiety, as they contemplate a future filled with uncertainty caused by the coronavirus pandemic and Japan’s skewed demographics. Mao Kato, who celebrated her 20th birthday last month, will be among those marking the occasion the traditional way, in a colourful furisode kimono she will wear at the Tokyo metropolitan government’s official seijin shiki, or coming-of-age ceremony. Like many of her contemporaries, Kato has spent almost all of her two years at university living in the shadow of Covid-19. “It has definitely disrupted my studies,” says Kato, a social studies major at a university in Tokyo. “I couldn’t make new friends, as our classes were online, and I had no proper contact with my seniors, which also affects my job prospects.” Kato, who graduates in two years’ time, will enter a job market very different from the one experienced by her parents’ and grandparents’ generation. Japan’s “lost” two decades of low or no growth and the rise of low-paid, non-regular workers have created a generation that can no longer look forward to the postwar guarantees of lifetime employment, seniority-based pay rises and a comfortable pension. Instead, they can expect to work well into “retirement” – paying into a pension pot that will be of little benefit to them by the time they reach their twilight years – as part of a shrinking workforce expected to fund older members of a declining, ageing population. “I am definitely more worried than excited about the future,” says Kato. “It’s getting harder for graduates to find jobs, and we don’t know if we will be paid enough. We will also have to pay for our parents’ pensions.” A record low number of 1.2 million people in Japan greeted the Year of the Tiger as new adults, according to the internal affairs ministry, 40,000 fewer than the previous year and an all-time low since the government began keeping records in 1968. Twenty-year-olds now account for just 0.96% of Japan’s 125 million people. By contrast, the number of people aged 65 and older reached 36.4 million last autumn – almost 30% of the entire population, while life expectancy has risen to a record high of 87.74 for women and 81.64 for men. The birthrate, meanwhile, remains stubbornly low. Against that backdrop, it is no surprise that Japanese millennials were the most pessimistic about the future compared with their contemporaries in 17 other countries, according to a 2016 survey. Shota Nagao, who will spend Monday catching up with high school friends but has decided not to attend his Tokyo ward’s coming-of-age ceremony, says the pandemic has brought the challenges he and other new adults face into stark relief. “It’s taken a toll on my mental and physical health,” Nagao, a sociology and anthropology student, says of 18 months of remote learning at a university in the Japanese capital. “The stress of not being able to socialise really shook me, but the biggest problem was that I wasn’t getting the quality of education that older students had.” In other ways, the ripping up of the postwar employment contract between state and citizen could prove a blessing in disguise. In return for lifetime employment and financial security, postwar generations were expected to put in punishing hours, often at the expense of family life and their mental health. “I hear that the work-life balance is better at Japanese companies these days, and that it’s no longer practically impossible for women to have families and careers,” says Kato, who lives with her parents in the same apartment building as her grandparents. Nagao, too, can see the benefits of the less rigid work culture that is emerging as more Japanese companies look beyond a contracting domestic market. “I don’t see myself spending my entire working life doing the same job … people my age don’t think that way,” he says. “We feel like we have more freedom to choose and switch jobs, and maybe even start our own companies.” But as he and Kato prepare for Monday’s milestone, complete with independent bank accounts and state pension books, Nagao – like his contemporary a fluent English speaker – said he would put his faith in Japan … for now. “I don’t feel like politicians are listening to my generation at all,” he says, despite promises by the new prime minister, Fumio Kishida, to address the growing income gap – which disproportionately affects young people and women – as part of his self-styled “new capitalism”. “Some of them use social media to give the impression they are engaging with younger people, but their policies don’t benefit us. They are still more interested in what my parents and grandparents think.”Michael Gove must spend billions more on ending the fire safety crisis in homes across England, campaigners will say on Monday, as they warn that his latest move to replace all Grenfell-style cladding overlooks myriad other risks faced by leaseholders. The secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities will unveil a £4bn package that enables leaseholders to escape the onerous costs involved in replacing combustible cladding, announcing to parliament that residents of blocks between 11m and 18m tall will no longer face crippling bills. He will tell building companies and manufacturers of combustible materials: “We are coming for you” in a new plan to hold them accountable, with a warning that firms have shown “insufficient contrition” since the disaster that killed 72 people in June 2017. But leaseholders in buildings with other fire-safety problems – such as wooden balconies – will still face huge bills, and campaigners will urge Gove to help these people to finally draw a line under the crisis. “This feels like it could be the beginning of the end of our cladding scandal, but we are still a long way away from solving it,” said Giles Grover, a spokesperson for the End Our Cladding Scandal campaign group. “The government is still focusing on cladding, but they know full well it goes beyond that. People are still facing life-changing costs.” People living in unsafe properties have been landed with bills of up to £200,000. Many blocks have combustible cladding, but also problems with defective fire doors, flammable balconies and missing firebreaks because of non-compliant building works. Under the new Treasury-approved plan, which aims to force developers to pay the £4bn bill but could require funds to be diverted from existing government budgets, only cladding remediation costs will be covered. Campaigners want a change to the law to protect them from all costs caused by fire safety defects that were not their fault. The latest funding will add to the £5.1bn already announced for fixing combustible cladding on apartment blocks over 18m in height. Yet the cost of remedying all post-Grenfell fire safety problems was last year estimated by MPs at £15bn – and may be even higher. Gove will say if developers and builders don’t pay, government could legislate to force them to pay up. Gove has given property companies until early March to agree a fully funded plan of action, warning that he will take all steps necessary to make this happen, including restricting access to government funding and future procurements, the use of planning powers, and the pursuit of companies through the courts. He told them homes should be “a source of security and pride”, but “for too many of the people living in properties your industry has built in recent years, their home has become a source of misery. This must change.” The government expects that all developers responsible for affected buildings with annual profits from housebuilding of at least £10m will be in the frame for paying up under the new plan. He said discussions will be “transparent” and will not be held behind closed doors. In the meantime, the Treasury has made clear that any public funds required will have to be diverted from the Department of Levelling Up’s existing budget, according to a letter leaked to BBC Newsnight. However, construction lobbyists argue that firms that manufactured or supplied combustible cladding should be urged to shoulder the financial burden. The Home Builders Federation (HBF) said the largest housebuilders had already spent or committed £1bn to fix the buildings for which they were responsible. Stewart Baseley, the HBF’s executive chairman, said: “Whilst housebuilders are committed to playing their part, there are many other organisations involved in the construction of affected buildings, including housing associations and local authorities. “As well as developers and government, other parties should be involved in remediation costs, not least material manufacturers who designed, tested and sold materials that developers purchased in good faith that were later proved to not be fit for purpose.” Ministers could end up paying millions of pounds if developers cannot be identified. For instance, foreign developers often set up UK shell companies that share out work between subcontractors, then dissolve once it is finished. In other cases, developers may have since gone bust, meaning there is no corporate entity to target. If the Treasury does not give the housing department more money to cover the costs of remediation for buildings with no obvious developer, it could eat into the government’s budget for other projects to increase the supply of new homes, an industry source warned. Taylor Wimpey said the company had already committed to fixing its buildings. “We trust that we will not be penalised for our early action to do the right thing,” a spokesperson said. “This is an industry-wide issue and therefore needs an industry-wide solution.” Gove’s expected announcements were cautiously welcomed by leaseholders, who feel a solution may be finally be in sight, after many have suffered serious mental health problems in the intervening years. Homeowners have been trapped in unsellable, in effect worthless homes, which has destroyed plans to move jobs, have children and marry. Striking a more aggressive tone than his predecessors, Gove is set to say: “Those who manufactured dangerous products and developed dangerous buildings have shown insufficient contrition.” He is planning to signal a new “proportionate” attitude to risk and, crucially, will scrap post-Grenfell advice from the government that all residential block wall systems need checking for possible removal and replacement, regardless of building height. He will say sprinklers and fire alarms should be used more often to mitigate risks instead of expensive remediation works. The government will also start auditing assessments of the risks posed by buildings to make sure expensive fixes are only being proposed where lives are at risk. Gove’s intervention comes ahead of former ministers facing questioning at the Grenfell Tower public inquiry over claims that Conservative-led governments prioritised a “bonfire of red tape” over safety. Labour’s shadow housing minister, Matthew Pennycook, said: “On the face of it, these proposals appear far less significant than they sound … There is nothing new for the significant numbers of leaseholders facing huge bills to fix non-cladding defects; no guarantee that the cost of remediating buildings under 18 metres won’t be drawn from already allocated public funding; no help for the countless leaseholders currently mired in mortgage chaos.”A 14-year-old girl remains missing as parts of Queensland continue to be affected by major flooding. The aftermath of ex-tropical cyclone Seth has caused “unexpected” heavy rains and storms across parts of the state, with further cyclone activity expected. Tropical Cyclone Tiffany has strengthened to a category 2 storm and is just hours from making landfall in far north Queensland, the Bureau of Meteorology has reported. “People between Cape Tribulation and Coen, including Cooktown, should complete preparations quickly and be prepared to shelter in a safe place,” the bureau said. The cyclone which formed in the Coral Sea was expected to cross into Queensland between Cooktown and the Lockhart River sometime on Monday night. The bureau was warning communities to expect wind gusts of up to 130km/h as the centre of the cyclone makes landfall. Tiffany was sitting approximately 190km northeast of Cooktown late on Sunday. It was expected to bring destructive winds and heavy rain to communities in far north Queensland before moving into the Gulf of Carpentaria on Tuesday and intensifying as it moves towards the Northern Territory coast. Severe tropical cyclone coastal impact in the Northern Territory is possible on Wednesday or Thursday, the bureau says. “People in far north Queensland communities will start seeing and feeling the effects of Tropical Cyclone Tiffany as it comes closer to the coast, which means an increased risk of flooding and some localised damage in these regions,” Senior Meteorologist, Dean Narramore, said. Other parts of Queensland have already been struck by flood waters with one person dead and an evacuation order issued for parts of the city of Maryborough. The levee was protecting the CBD until an underground stormwater valve failed just before 2pm on Sunday, allowing flood water to surge through the drains and into the streets. A dozen pumps each moving about 120 litres a second appear to have kept the flood waters at bay as the river peaked at about 10 metres late on Sunday night, the local mayor said. A 22-year-old’s body was found in a submerged ute at Kanigan, north of Gympie, on Saturday. Police also hold grave fears for a 14-year-old girl swept away while abandoning a flooding car. On Sunday, Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said emergency services were readying for the cyclone. “So to all the residents in those areas please be on the lookout, I know that they know how to deal with these events,” she told reporters. “They’re very well prepared and we’ll be keeping a very close eye on that.” Palaszczuk said all agencies were “well prepared” for the cyclone. “To all of the residents in those areas – please be on the lookout. We’ll be keeping a very close eye on that,” the premier said. Queensland fire and emergency services have responded to 42 swift water rescue jobs, with people trapped by flood waters throughout Imbil, Gayndah and Woolooga. The SES has responded to more than 155 requests for assistance across the region, including nine boat rescues. Additional crews have been deployed from Brisbane and central Queensland as flood water continues to move through the area. A 40-year-old man was rescued after a car was swept away in the early hours of Saturday morning at Booubyjan, near Gympie in Queensland’s south-east. It’s believed he and a 14-year-old girl managed to get out of the car before it was swept away in flood waters near the Burnett Highway and Murgon Gayndah Road. Police said the man was found clinging to a tree but the girl remains missing. The state disaster coordinator, Brendan Moon, said ongoing road closures had impeded the search for the missing teenager. He said there had been a “high intensity” operational response from Bundaberg to Kilcoy over the weekend, with 16 tasks that required air support and 11 people transported by air. All were in a stable condition but there remained “grave fears” for the teenage girl. “This is a very, very difficult environment,” Moon said. “We are unable to get in there and conduct the search appropriately at the moment. It’s going to take some time for us to do that.” Palaszczuk said her thoughts were with the family of the girl. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Gympie mayor Glen Hartwig said “very significant damage” had already been discovered as rains eased, bringing hot and humid conditions. “I’ve been in this area for 40 years, and we haven’t seen anything like it,” he said. “We’re just waiting for the water to start to subside. The areas of Kilkivan and Theebine copped a torrential drenching that we probably haven’t seen before.” The main water pipeline in Gympie was fractured due to road corrosion. “There will be massive amounts of damage to road infrastructure and bridges,” Hartwig said. “We’ll be stuck into that as the water subsides.” Narramore said the threat of heavy rainfall had eased and flood-affected areas should remain mostly dry in the coming days.Thanks for following along – this blog is now closed. You can catch up with the latest coronavirus coverage here. We have also launched a new live news feed here with all the current developments. Here is a comprehensive recap of some of the main developments so far today. Europe: Greece sets 1 February deadline for booster jabs. Those who have not received their coronavirus booster jabs will be barred from most indoor venues. France should not impose mandatory vaccination and would not be the most efficient way to encourage people to get vaccinated, a government spokesperson said. More than 105,000 people took to the streets on Saturday in protest. Downing Street is facing calls to ensure that Boris Johnson will be personally interviewed by the Sue Gray inquiry about alleged No 10 gatherings during the first lockdown, after it emerged he may have been present at a “bring your own booze” party that month. Boris Johnson has been warned by a Conservative rebel ringleader he faces a massive revolt from his own MPs if he does not end all coronavirus restrictions this month. Germany will study how reliable rapid antigen tests are in detecting the fast-spreading Omicron variant, the health minister, Karl Lauterbach, said on Sunday. More than 150,000 people have died in the UK from coronavirus since the start of the pandemic. Covid should be treated as an endemic virus similar to flu, and ministers should end mass vaccination after the booster campaign, the former chairman of the UK’s vaccine taskforce has said. Lateral flow tests in the UK will remain free, education secretary Nadhim Zahawi insisted amid reports they could be scaled back despite soaring Covid cases. London’s public health chief said the Omicron variant “may have passed its peak” in the UK capital. The boss of one of London’s busiest hospitals has said he is worried about losing staff when new rules come in requiring them to be vaccinated, BBC News reports. Asia: The US and Japan have reached an agreement to keep American troops within their bases amid concerns over a surge in Covid cases that has been linked to US military bases. Three people were arrested for breaking India’s Covid measures after police raided a dog’s lavish birthday party in Gujarat’s Ahmedabad city. The Philippines reported a record number of daily infections with 28,707 new cases, up from 26,458 cases the previous day. Tianjin, a major Chinese port city near the capital Beijing, has begun mass-testing its 14 million residents after a cluster of 20 children and adults tested positive for Covid-19, including at least two with the Omicron variant. Africa: Africa has registered a total of more than 10m cases since the start of the pandemic, according to figures from the Africa Centres for Disease Control. South Africa, Morocco, Tunisia, Ethiopia and Libya are among the countries with the highest number of cases on the continent. Middle East: The dissident Iranian poet and filmmaker Baktash Abtin, 48, died after contracting Covid-19 in a hospital in Tehran after being released on a furlough from prison. Abtin was serving a six-year sentence for “anti-government propaganda” and “actions against national security”. Kuwait and Qatar reported record daily Covid cases over the weekend. Kuwait reported 2,999 new cases on Sunday and Qatar on Saturday reported 3,487 new cases. Americas: Brazil’s health regulator Anvisa asked president Jair Bolsonaro to retract statements he made criticising the Covid vaccination for children. Australia on Monday surpassed 1 million Covid cases, with more than half of them recorded in the past week, as the Omicron variant ripped through most of the country driving up hospitalisation numbers and putting a strain on supply chains. Having successfully kept a lid on its virus caseload through aggressive lockdowns and tough border controls earlier in the pandemic, Australia is now suffering record infections as the country begins to live with the virus after higher vaccinations. New South Wales and Victoria reported about 55,000 new cases between them, as total Covid-19 infections in Australia touched 1.03 million since the first case was recorded nearly two years ago. Other states and territories will report their numbers later in the day. A total of 2,387 deaths have been registered so far, though the death rate during the Omicron wave has been lower than during previous virus outbreaks, with 92% of people over 16 double dosed and the booster programme picking pace. The rising hospitalisation numbers forced officials to reinstate some restrictions in states, meanwhile staff shortages due to isolation rules or people out sick have hit businesses. Authorities have cut mandatory isolation times for close contacts and narrowed the definition of close contacts but were still reviewing the rules for furloughing workers that have widened supply chain gaps. From Monday, Pfizer’s Covid vaccines will be offered to 2.3 million children aged five to 11 years old, amid reports of stock shortage of shots, which authorities ruled out. Samantha Lock back with you on the blog taking over from my colleague Helen Livingstone. Here’s a quick snapshot of how Covid is unfolding across Australia. The state of NSW has recorded 20,293 new Covid cases and 18 deaths including a child aged under five while Victoria reported 34,808 cases and two deaths. The Covid vaccine for children aged five to 11 is also being rolled out across the nation. Good morning, this is Helen Livingstone taking over the blog in Sydney. Though we’ll also be following the essentials from the Novak Djokovic court hearing here, please check out our dedicated blog run by Josh Taylor. Of course don’t get too wrapped up and forget to follow our Covid updates! If you’ve just joined us, here is a quick snapshot of all the most recent coronavirus news stories from around the world: Downing Street is facing calls to ensure that Boris Johnson will be personally interviewed by the Sue Gray inquiry about alleged No 10 gatherings during the first lockdown, after it emerged he may have been present at a “bring your own booze” party that month. Boris Johnson has been warned by a Conservative rebel ringleader he faces a massive revolt from his own MPs if he does not end all coronavirus restrictions this month. Germany will study how reliable rapid antigen tests are in detecting the fast-spreading Omicron variant, the health minister, Karl Lauterbach, said on Sunday. Italy reported 157 coronavirus-related deaths on Sunday, down from 184 the day before, the health ministry said, while the daily tally of new infections fell to 155,659 from 197,552. The UK reported 141,472 new coronavirus cases and 97 deaths in the latest 24 hours, according to the government’s Covid dashboard. Downing Street is facing calls to ensure that Boris Johnson will be personally interviewed by the Sue Gray inquiry about alleged No 10 gatherings during the first lockdown, after it emerged he may have been present at a “bring your own booze” party that month. The inquiry, into allegations of social mixing bans being broken in No 10, was widened this weekend to include reported gatherings from May 2020, amid reports that an official emailed Downing Street staff inviting them to socially distanced drinks. No 10 did not deny on Sunday that the prime minister and his wife attended the event on 20 May, which is said to have been organised by a senior civil servant in Johnson’s private office, Martin Reynolds, with food and wine set out on tables. It comes after the Guardian reported a “wine and pizza” party in Downing Street in the garden and inside No 10 on 15 May, with staff drinking late into the evening after a press conference that day. After No 10 insisted staff were working, the Guardian obtained a photograph of the prime minister and his wife sitting with officials at a table with wine and cheese, with 15 other staff in the background and bottles of wine visible. Reports on Sunday that free lateral flow tests could be axed under a strategy of living with Covid within weeks were met with a swift backlash. The government promptly denied the suggestion that free tests could soon be scrapped. The story highlights a gulf in opinions on what “living with Covid” might look like, with some saying we will achieve this only through continued caution and others equating the phrase to ditching all Covid measures and partying like it’s 2019. Wherever your instincts lie, it is not surprising – or even undesirable – that the mass testing of asymptomatic people is being reviewed. The policy was rapidly brought in at a time when, faced with a new, highly infectious variant of unknown virulence, it made sense to throw everything we had at Omicron to slow down transmission and to minimise disruption caused by essential workers having to self-isolate. With case numbers wildly outstripping the UK’s laboratory testing capacity, lateral flow tests continue to be vital for tracking case numbers. Boris Johnson has been warned by a Conservative rebel ringleader he faces a massive revolt from his own MPs if he does not end all coronavirus restrictions this month. Mark Harper, chair of the lockdown-sceptic Covid Recovery Group, also said the Prime Minister could even face a leadership challenge if the Tories do badly in May’s local elections. The former chief whip’s intervention came after a poll of Conservative members suggested nearly half believe Chancellor Rishi Sunak would make a better leader. Mr Johnson suffered the biggest revolt of his premiership last month when 100 backbenchers defied him over Plan B restrictions in a Commons vote. Mass Covid testing and vaccination should be ended for all but the most vulnerable after the booster campaign has been completed, the former chairman of Britain’s vaccine taskforce has said. Dr Clive Dix has called for an overhaul of the current Government strategy in the coming months, claiming the impact of cellular immunity on fighting the virus may have been downplayed. Covid should instead be treated like flu or a heavy cold among younger people who have been fully jabbed, the former vaccines tsar said. Speaking to C4 News, Dr Dix claimed that mass vaccination has outlasted its main purpose, which he said was to curb the spread of infection. Germany will study how reliable rapid antigen tests are in detecting the fast-spreading Omicron variant, the health minister, Karl Lauterbach, said on Sunday. “We do not know exactly how well these tests work for Omicron,” Lauterbach said on public broadcasting channel ARD, adding the results of the assessment would become available within the next few weeks. It was clear, however, that “the alternative not to test at all ... would be far too dangerous,” said Lauterbach, a scientist and physician. Earlier, he had told a Sunday newspaper that Germany must revamp its Covid vaccination strategy to tackle the Omicron variant and to ensure it could develop a new vaccine rapidly if it faced a more deadly coronavirus variant in the future. New measures for dining out and bar visits were brought in only last Friday, Reuters reports. Italy reported 157 coronavirus-related deaths on Sunday, down from 184 the day before, the health ministry said, while the daily tally of new infections fell to 155,659 from 197,552. Italy has registered 139,038 deaths linked to Covid-19 since the initial outbreak in February 2020, the second highest toll in Europe after Britain and the ninth highest in the world. The country has reported 7.4m cases to date. Patients in hospital with Covid-19 – not including those in intensive care – stood at 15,647 on Sunday, up from 14,930 a day earlier. There were 142 new admissions to intensive care units, down from 154 on Saturday. The total number of intensive care patients increased to 1,595 from 1,557. A total of 51,950,528 first doses of Covid-19 vaccine had been delivered in the UK by 8 January, government figures show. This is a rise of 30,713 on the previous day. A total of 47,677,951 second doses have been delivered, an increase of 45,468. A combined total of 35,499,486 booster and third doses have also been given, a day-on-day rise of 225,541. If you’ve just joined us, here is a quick snapshot of all the most recent coronavirus news stories from around the world. Africa has registered a total of more than 10m cases since the start of the pandemic, according to figures from the African Union’s health watchdog and seen by Agence-France-Presse. South Africa, Morocco, Tunisia, Ethiopia and Libya are among the countries with the highest number of cases on the continent. For the second day in a row, the Philippines has reported a record number of new Covid-19 cases. Health officials today confirmed 28,707 new infections, up from 26,458 cases the previous day. A senior government official confirmed an increase in hospital beds and medical resources in and around the capital Manila have been ordered. A senior UK cabinet minister has suggested it would be helpful to cut the isolation period to five days to ease workforce shortages. The education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, played down suggestions that the government was imminently about to start charging for free rapid Covid tests which would lead to fewer infections in the community being caught. Daily coronavirus infection rates reported by Kuwait and Qatar soared past previous peaks recorded in the summers of 2021 and 2020. Kuwait reported 2,999 new cases today, setting a record for the fourth straight day and far exceeding a previous high of 1,993 recorded last July. Greece has announced that people who have not received their coronavirus booster jabs by 1 February will be barred from most indoor venues. In an interview, health minister Thanos Plevris said anyone who does not have a booster shot will “not be able to have the privileges and advantages as to access indoor and other activities that are for the fully vaccinated”. A London hospital leader has said he may lose 1,000 staff to the Covid vaccination mandate. About 10% of the 14,000 staff at King’s College hospital are yet to be fully vaccinated ahead of a mandate for all NHS staff who work directly with patients that comes into force on 1 April, Prof Clive Kay said. Tianjin, a major Chinese port city near the capital Beijing, has begun mass-testing its 14 million residents after a cluster of 20 children and adults tested positive for Covid-19, including at least two with the Omicron variant. The citywide testing, which began on Sunday, is to be completed over two days. A mandatory vaccination order would not be the most efficient way to encourage people to get vaccinated, a spokesperson for the French government has said. People in France must currently show either proof of vaccination or a negative test to enter restaurants, bars or use inter-regional trains. But with Omicron cases surging, parliament is debating legislation that will drop the test options. The US and Japan have reached an agreement to keep American troops within their bases amid concerns over a surge in Covid cases that have been linked to US military bases. Starting Monday, US military personnel are confirmed to base facilities except for “essential activities”, a statement from the US Forces in Japan and the Japanese foreign ministry said. Ireland’s health service is “under stress”, the head of the Irish Health Service Executive Paul Reid has said. Between 14,000 and 15,000 healthcare staff are on Covid-related leave, which is the equivalent of approximately 12% of all healthcare staff in Ireland. That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, for today as I hand over the blog to my colleague Charlie Moloney. Thank you for reading and keep safe. The UK reported 141,472 new coronavirus cases and 97 deaths in the latest 24 hours, according to the government’s Covid dashboard. In Italy, it is now obligatory for people aged 50 or over to be vaccinated against Covid-19. Greece is pondering a similar move. In France, which has seen record numbers of positive cases, President Emmanuel Macron has also announced that he wants to “piss off” the unvaccinated, while Austria is contemplating a law to make the vaccine mandatory for all its citizens. By contrast, in the UK, Boris Johnson has confined himself to accusing anti-vaxxers of talking “mumbo-jumbo”. But is that enough? Should the UK take a harder line on those who refuse to be vaccinated? After all, this is a virus that threatens to overwhelm the NHS. As doctors continue to point out, hospital beds are now filling up with more and more seriously ill Covid patients, many of whom are unvaccinated. So, should vaccines against Covid be made mandatory, not just in certain workplace settings but for all individuals? Rain Newton-Smith, chief economist at the Confederation of British Industry, said reports suggesting free lateral flow tests in the UK could be axed would “make no economic sense”, adding: Free lateral flow tests are a vital weapon in the UK’s Covid defences – they are central to keeping the economy open and allowing the UK to live confidently with the virus. Hong Kong has detected a second untraceable Covid infection over the weekend. Health officials reported 33 confirmed cases today, 27 of which were imported. Among the six remaining cases, five were linked to imported infections, while one was classified as possibly import-related. As Bloomberg reports, the cases are a worrying trend for officials who have upheld a “Covid zero” strategy, sacrificing the city’s status as an international hub to bring in some of the world’s harshest measures and isolating itself from the rest of the world. “Now it’s living with the worst of both worlds,” it writes, after a couple of imported infections triggered renewed measures. The government has banned indoor dining after 6pm and closed swimming pools, sports centres, bars and clubs, museums and other venues. Expatriates who travelled home for Christmas have also been unable to return to Hong Kong, after authorities fearing the highly contagious Omicron variant suspended flights from eight countries, including the UK and the US. Here’s more on those earlier comments by Prof Clive Kay, chief executive of King’s College hospital in London, that he may lose 1,000 staff to the Covid vaccination mandate. Speaking on the BBC’s Sunday Morning programme, he said his organisation was working urgently to encourage staff to come forward for vaccination to avoid redeploying or losing them. About 10% of the 14,000 staff at King’s College hospital are yet to be fully vaccinated ahead of a mandate for all NHS staff who work directly with patients that comes into force on 1 April. Losing more than 1,000 staff would be the most extreme outcome and there had been an increase in the number of people who still required vaccination coming forward, Kay said. “I don’t want, at this stage, to predict or give any numbers. We’re having conversations with staff, line managers are having conversations with staff, we have a helpline,” he said. “Ultimately if individuals choose not to, it’s their choice, their personal choice. Read the full story by my colleague Hannah Devlin below: Daily coronavirus infection rates reported by Kuwait and Qatar have soared past previous peaks recorded in the summers of 2021 and 2020, Reuters reports. Kuwait reported 2,999 new cases today, its fourth day of case numbers surpassing a high of 1,993 recorded last July. Qatar on Saturday reported 3,487 new cases - almost 10% of those tested - exceeding a previous high of 2,355 seen in May 2020. Qatar has reintroduced measures limiting home gatherings to 10 vaccinated people, as well as barring unvaccinated people from entering shopping malls and restaurants and reducing capacity limits for some commercial establishments. Schools have reintroduced distance learning until at least 27 January. Saudi Arabia has also seen a rapid increase in cases since the start of the year, although still below the numbers seen in June 2020. Ireland’s health service is “under stress”, the head of the Irish Health Service Executive Paul Reid has said. His warnings come as a further 21,384 cases of Covid were reported by the Department of Health, a day after Ireland reported a record 26,122 new cases. As of 8am on Sunday, 984 people were in hospital with the virus, up 67 in the last 24 hours. That is the highest number of people in hospital since the surge last January. Reid said yesterday that between 14,000 and 15,000 healthcare staff were on Covid-related leave, which is approximately 12% of all healthcare staff in Ireland. The rapid spread of Omicron has smashed into Thailand’s economy in the middle of the peak new year holiday season and ruined any hopes that it might help save stricken tourist areas, South China Morning Post reports. On the Thai resort island of Pattaya, one businesswoman said she has been forced to let go more workers with each new coronavirus wave. “I’ve lost over 100 employees now,” she told the paper. Thailand has been forced to suspend its “Test &amp; Go” quarantine-free entry scheme indefinitely. Now, travellers must undergo a 14-day quarantine, or enter under a “Sandbox” scheme via Phuket, which allows fully vaccinated tourists to stay for seven days before being cleared to move around the country. Hotel operators have complained the scheme’s suspension has effectively wiped out new bookings for February and March, setting their recovery back by months. About 20-25% of Thailand’s economy depends on tourism; the country was ranked eighth globally in international tourist arrivals in 2019. But passengers on international flights dropped 95% in September 2021, compared to the previous year and hotel occupancy rates were at just 9%. A leading statistician has ruled out a “big rise” in UK Covid hospital admissions and deaths. Speaking on Times Radio, Prof Sir David Spiegelhalter said case rates may be stabilising across the country. He said: The cases are not going up as fast as they were and may have stabilised over the whole country, but at very high levels and they’re not going to come down rapidly. Despite this, he said daily infection rates could still be hitting around 500,000. Asked whether the prime minister had taken a “gamble” in resisting lockdown measures in England over the festive period, he replied: I mean, it was a gamble, and you know, all I think the best we can say is he may have got away with it, but we’re going to have to see the next few weeks. Greece has announced that people who have not received their coronavirus booster jabs by 1 February will be barred from most indoor venues, Agence-France-Presse reports. In an interview with Ant1, health minister Thanos Plevris said: From February 1, anyone who has not taken the booster dose after a seven month period (from the second dose) will be considered unvaccinated. The certificate will be valid, because it is a European certificate valid for nine months, but they will not be able to have the privileges and advantages as to access indoor and other activities that are for the fully vaccinated. Since mid-November, unvaccinated people have been largely barred from indoor spaces, including restaurants, cinemas, museums and gyms, even if they test negative for Covid-19. The boss of one of London’s busiest hospitals has said he is worried about losing staff when new rules come in requiring them to be vaccinated, BBC News reports. King’s College hospital’s chief executive, Clive Kay, said 10% of his staff of 14,000 were still unvaccinated. He said staff were “not being forced” to have the jab, but instead “being encouraged”. He added: There’s a possibility if they choose not to be vaccinated they could be redeployed. And if we can’t find that opportunity to redeploy them then the consequence is that they will [not have a job]. Asked how many frontline staff he could lose under the law change, he replied: I am confident that we are already seeing a number of staff choosing to be vaccinated. I don’t want at this stage to predict or give any numbers. A leaked briefing from the UK’s Health and Security Agency (UKHSA) shows a backlog of 250,000 PCR tests this week. The Sunday Times’ Shaun Lintern said the backlog affected 4,600 care homes and 70 prisons. In some cases, testing was so delayed in labs that they became void, he said. The US and Japan have reached an agreement to keep American troops within their bases amid concerns over a surge in Covid cases that has been linked to US military bases. Starting Monday, US military personnel are confirmed to base facilities except for “essential activities”, a statement from the US Forces in Japan and the Japanese foreign ministry said. The allies will share information and cooperate on coronavirus measures, “given the extraordinary virulence of the Omicron variant spreading throughout Japan,” the statement said. Japan’s prime minister, Fumio Kishida, has come under increasing pressure to address outbreaks that began at US military facilities last month and have since spread to the local civilian population. The Netherlands’ new finance minister Sigrid Kaag has said she will miss the ceremonial inauguration of the new Dutch government on Monday after testing positive for Covid. She tweeted today: “I have tested positive for Corona. It will be a slightly different start than I had hoped for. “My installation will take place digitally. Luckily I feel fine.” A mandatory vaccination order would not be the most efficient way to encourage people to get vaccinated, French government spokesperson Gabriel Attal said. People in France must currently show either proof of vaccination or a negative test to enter restaurants, bars or use inter-regional trains. But with Omicron cases surging, parliament is debating legislation that will drop the test options. President Emmanuel Macron this week said he wanted to irritate the unvaccinated by making their lives so difficult they would get the jab, Reuters reports. Here’s a useful thread on case rates in England and in particular, London, by Oliver Johnson, professor of information theory at Bristol University. He points out that the seven-day average across England is down but data from London suggests the Omicron wave has not dropped as scientists had hoped. Although the situation “could all be very much worse”, he warns that recorded deaths – which have been a mess because of holiday reporting – will likely get worse for a while. Overall, he estimates that England could reach 25,000 Covid deaths in the six months since the so-called “Freedom Day”. He concludes: Everything could be worse, it isn’t as bad as it has been in the past, but it’s not nothing either, and it may not be reasonable to expect that everything sorts itself out in the next couple of weeks. Three people have been arrested for breaking India’s coronavirus measures after police raided a dog’s lavish birthday party. The gathering in Gujarat’s Ahmedabad city was held to celebrate the second birthday of Abby, an Indian Spitz, and was attended by its owners as well as their family and friends. According to police, the birthday event cost 700,000 rupees (nearly £7,000) and featured an elaborate birthday cake, a performance by a popular folk singer and giant photo cutouts of the canine guest of honour. Social media footage from the event showed a crowd of people dancing in front of an ornate stage in defiance of local social distancing rules and without masks. The video went viral and was seen by Gujarat police. “We got information about a big party going on, so we raided the venue,” police inspector V.D. Zala told Agence-France-Presse. “As per Covid protocol, it is necessary to take permission before organising a party. The organisers are responsible for ensuring social distancing among guests.” The three men arrested for their role in staging the event were later released on bail. Covid should be treated as an endemic virus similar to flu, and ministers should end mass vaccination after the booster campaign, the former chairman of the UK’s vaccine taskforce has said. With health chiefs and senior Tories also lobbying for a post-pandemic plan for a straining NHS, Dr Clive Dix called for a major rethink of the UK’s Covid strategy, in effect reversing the approach of the past two years and returning to a “new normality”. “We need to analyse whether we use the current booster campaign to ensure the vulnerable are protected, if this is seen to be necessary,” he said. “Mass population-based vaccination in the UK should now end.” He said ministers should urgently back research into Covid immunity beyond antibodies to include B-cells and T-cells (white blood cells). This could help create vaccines for vulnerable people specific to Covid variants, he said, adding: “We now need to manage disease, not virus spread. So stopping progression to severe disease in vulnerable groups is the future objective.” Read the full article here: More on the Philippines, after the country set a record for new 28,707 Covid infections for a second consecutive day. A senior government official confirmed an increase in hospital beds and medical resources in and around the capital Manila have been ordered, Reuters reports. Nearly 60% of the cases recorded today came from the capital region, which has seen a steady increase in admissions in recent days, although government data showed hospital capacity still below critical levels. Health authorities have also been instructed to push vaccination rates outside the region, acting presidential spokesperson Karlo Nograles said in a statement. According to figures from the African Union’s health watchdog and seen by Agence-France-Presse, Africa has registered a total of more than 10m cases since the start of the pandemic. As of Saturday 10,028,508 cases have been reported by the African Union’s 55 member states, data by the Africa Centres for Disease Control shows. South Africa, Morocco, Tunisia, Ethiopia and Libya are among the countries with the highest number of cases on the continent. The total recorded Covid-19 death count in Africa stands at 231,157, the CDC said. Wales may reach its peak of infections in around two weeks, the Welsh first minister Mark Drakeford has said. Modelling shows there will be a “relatively rapid decline” after this point and the government should then be able to step down its coronavirus measures, he said. Drakeford defended a recent comment that the UK government was the “outlier” in not introducing further restrictions, adding: Wales is following the same path of putting protections in place that is being followed by Scotland, Northern Ireland, and not just devolved governments in the UK, but governments across Europe and across the world. The questions as to why the UK government has decided not to follow that course of action are for them to answer, not for me. In the spring of 2020, Hart Island, a mile from City Island in the Bronx, was a focal point of grief in New York. It was here, at the city’s public cemetery or potter’s field, the final resting place of more than a million people, that officials ordered trenches dug to accommodate those the coronavirus was expected to kill. The trenches were never filled. Many bodies were returned to funeral parlours or stored in mobile freezers on Randall’s Island, better known for music festivals and the Frieze art fair than cold storage of corpses. Last week, as New York was once again in the grip of a pandemic spike, the ferry jetty was devoid of morbid feelings, even with infections running at a 35% positivity rate, close to five times the peak of last winter. “We haven’t seen anyone here – or any of the trucks coming like they used to,” said one Hart Island worker. The winter Covid wave has hit the Bronx hard. The borough has the city’s highest positivity rate, in some neighbourhoods near 50%. But for many this wave feels different, not least in the way leaders and health officials are treating it. Read the full story here: Russia reported 16,246 new Covid cases in the latest 24 hour period, health officials said, bringing the country’s total number of cases to 10,650,849. A further 763 deaths of patients with coronavirus were also confirmed, bringing the total death toll to 316,163. Lateral flow tests will remain free, the UK’s education secretary Nadhim Zahawi has insisted amid reports they could be scaled back despite soaring Covid cases. The Sunday Times had reported that prime minister Boris Johnson would announce that free tests would be axed and limited to high-risk settings and for people with symptoms. But speaking to Sky News’ Trevor Phillips this morning, Zahawi said he was “slightly puzzled” by the report and that tests would continue to be available for free. He said: I saw that story this morning, which I was slightly puzzled by because I don’t recognise it at all. This is absolutely not where we are at. For January alone 425 million lateral flow tests (are) coming in and they will continue to be available for free. I don’t really recognise where that story is coming from. Asked whether there are plans to stop lateral flow tests being free, Zahawi replied: “Absolutely not.” London’s public health chief has said the Omicron variant “may have passed its peak” in the UK capital. Speaking to Sky News’ Trevor Phillips this morning, Prof Kevin Fenton said: Data from the ONS (Office for National Statistics) suggests that the peak may have occurred at or just about the New Year period. We’re seeing reductions in overall case rates across the city and the prevalence of infection within the community. But he warned infection levels are still “very, very high” and that more than one in 10 Londoners are still infected with the disease. It means we’re not yet out of this critical phase of the pandemic, although we may well be past its peak. For the second day in a row, the Philippines has reported a record number of new Covid-19 cases. Health officials today confirmed 28,707 new infections, up from 26,458 cases the previous day. The total number of active cases reached 128,114, the highest in more than three months. This comprises 4.3% of all confirmed cases. Earlier this week, the country’s president Rodrigo Duterte ordered the arrest of unvaccinated people who violate stay-at-home orders aimed at curbing “galloping” cases driven by the Omicron variant. Tianjin, a major Chinese port city near the capital Beijing, has begun mass-testing its 14 million residents after a cluster of 20 children and adults tested positive for Covid-19, including at least two with the Omicron variant. The citywide testing, which began on Sunday, is to be completed over two days. Residents have been advised to stay at or near home to be available for the community-level nucleic-acid screening. They have been told that until they obtain a negative test result, they will not receive a “green” code on smartphone Covid-tracing apps that nearly all people in China are now required to present when using public transport and in other situations. China has stepped up its zero-tolerance Covid-19 strategy in the run-up to the Winter Olympics, which open on 4 February in Beijing. The Chinese capital is 150km (90 miles) north-west of Tianjin and connected by a high-speed rail link that takes less than one hour. Elsewhere in China, millions of people are being confined to their homes in Xi’an and Yuzhou, two other cities that are farther away but have larger outbreaks. The city of Zhengzhou, a provincial capital 70km (40 miles) north of Yuzhou, is also conducting mass testing and closing schools starting Monday. China reported 165 confirmed coronavirus cases for 8 January, up from 159 a day earlier, its health authority said on Sunday. Hello and welcome to The Guardian’s rolling coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Léonie Chao-Fong. Here’s a rundown of all the most recent news from around the world: Tianjin, a major Chinese port city near Beijing, has begun mass-testing its 14m residents after a cluster of 20 children and adults tested positive for Covid-19, including at least two with the Omicron variant. Residents have been told that they must obtain a negative test result in order to receive a “green” code on smartphone Covid-tracing apps in order to use public transport and in other situations. The Philippines broke its own record for the highest single-day tally of new Covid-19 cases on Sunday, with 28,707 new infections reported by the health department. Acting presidential spokesperson Karlo Nograles has reportedly denied rumours that a “total lockdown” will be imposed in the country. Cutting the self-isolation period to five days would be “helpful”, the UK’s former vaccines minister Nadhim Zahawi has said. Zahawi became the first government minister to publicly support the reduction of the Covid isolation period from seven to five days, amid staffing pressures across many private and public sectors. The dissident Iranian poet and filmmaker Baktash Abtin, 48, has died after contracting Covid-19 in a hospital in Tehran after being released on a furlough from prison where he was infected twice, Iranian news agencies said on Saturday. Abtin was serving a six-year sentence for “anti-government propaganda” and “actions against national security”. Moderna donated 2.7m doses of coronavirus vaccines to Mexico, after the country exceeded 300,000 test-confirmed coronavirus deaths this week. The Mexican government said the doses will go to teachers as the country tries to return to fully in-person learning. More than 150,000 people have died in the UK from coronavirus since the start of the pandemic, according to government figures. Britain on Saturday became the seventh country to pass the milestone after the US, Brazil, India, Russia, Mexico and Peru. Scotland’s first minister Nicola Sturgeon has warned Boris Johnson that axing universal free lateral flow tests would be an “utterly wrongheaded” approach to dealing with coronavirus. Her warnings came after reports that tests could be limited to high-risk settings – such as care homes, hospitals and schools – and to people with symptoms. More than 105,000 people took to the streets across France on Saturday in protest against the introduction of a new coronavirus pass that would in effect ban unvaccinated people from public life. Interior Ministry officials said 34 people were arrested and 10 police officers were injured after the protests turned violent in some places. The US has administered more than 518m doses of coronavirus vaccines as of Saturday morning and distributed 639.7m doses, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. Please do get in touch with me on Twitter or by email if you have anything to flag you think we should be covering.Bob Saget, the actor and comedian most famous for his role in the much-loved 80s sitcom Full House, has died at the age of 65. The Orange County sheriff’s office confirmed Saget’s death on Twitter on Monday, saying he had been found unresponsive in his hotel room at the Ritz-Carlton in Orlando, Florida on Sunday. The sheriff’s office confirmed that no cause of death had been determined, saying in a statement there were no signs of foul play or drug use. Saget was partway through a standup tour and had performed a show in Jacksonville on Saturday night. Comedians and actors rushed to pay tribute on Monday. Jon Stewart remembered him as “just the nicest and funniest”, while podcaster Marc Maron tweeted: “Truly one of the nicest guys and so funny. Very sad.” Comedian Drew Carey wrote: “Well this one hurts. I loved Bob Saget. He gave me so much encouragement when I first started out. He was a real friend to me too. Not just a mentor. I always looked up to him. He was SO damn funny and so kind.” Comedian Kathy Griffin wrote: “You couldn’t find a nicer or sharper wit than Bob Saget. Shocked and devastated.” Whoopi Goldberg paid tribute to Saget’s “huge heart and abject lunacy” and Jason Alexander said “he was kind and dear and cared about people deeply ... the definition of ‘a good egg’”. Born in Philadelphia in 1956, Saget got his big break with his most famous role as the widower Danny Tanner on Full House. In the popular sitcom, which ran from 1987 to 1995, Tanner enlists his brother-in-law and a friend to help him raise his three children. Saget later reprised the role for a Netflix reboot, Fuller House, which ran for four years until 2020. John Stamos, who played Danny’s brother-in-law Jesse, tweeted: “I am broken. I am gutted. I am in complete and utter shock. I will never ever have another friend like him. I love you so much Bobby.” Saget was also the host of America’s Funniest Home Videos from 1989 to 1997, played a parody of himself in both Entourage and Louie, and provided the voice of the future Ted Mosby on sitcom How I Met Your Mother for almost a decade. He played another widower, this time in sitcom Raising Dad, between 2001 and 2002. Actor Kat Dennings, who played his daughter on the show, called him “the loveliest man”. “I just can’t believe it. What a wonderful guy. He always went out of his way to make me comfortable and talked nonstop about his kids. Such a loss,” Dennings wrote on Twitter. As a counterpoint to his recurring role as wholesome dads, Saget was also famed for his raunchier standup routines, writing a memoir and comedy tour that were both titled Dirty Daddy. Saget recently spoke about the death of comedian and close friend Norm Macdonald, whose famously cheesy routine on the Comedy Central Roast of Bob Saget was widely shared after Macdonald’s death at the age of 61. “I can’t accept that he’s gone, and that’s the shock that we’re going through,” Saget said in a video posted on his YouTube page. “Sixty-one … what do we do with that when we lose someone, especially before their time?” Saget is survived by his wife and three children.When the federal government decreed that Australians should “live with Covid”, the safety of older people living in aged care homes was once again not on the Coalition’s radar. In yet another predictable disaster, Covid has spread like wildfire in aged care homes. On Christmas Eve, 105 aged care homes around Australia had an active outbreak. Two weeks later (7 January), the number of homes with an outbreak had exploded, more than quadrupling to 495. There are 168 outbreaks in New South Wales, 133 in Victoria, 69 in South Australia, 110 in Queensland, 12 in Tasmania, two in the ACT and one in Northern Territory. There are currently 1,465 residents and 1,875 staff who are positive for Covid. A single case – either resident or staff – has caused many aged care homes to lock residents in and families out. Although aged care providers claim lockdowns are done to “save lives”, what type of life is it when you are unable to be with the people you love? For about one third of residents, this was their last Christmas. It is heartbreaking that so many were unable to spend the holidays with their families. And in some homes, residents are confined to their rooms during a lockdown. This is not only profoundly damaging to their mental and physical wellbeing, but is also potentially illegal. With a chronic shortage of staff in many aged care homes, families are more concerned residents will die of neglect than Covid. Will staff have time to help residents eat their meals, ensure they drink, walk them to the toilet and provide social stimulation? Rather than mandate a national criteria for who can enter an aged care home during an outbreak, the federal government allows providers to make their own rules. The federal government has a “hands-off approach”, treating each aged care home as an individual business. As a result many aged care homes are a law unto themselves. They impose their own rules about who can and can’t enter their home, irrespective of the public health orders and the peak bodies’ industry code for visiting residential aged care homes. So what has gone so terribly wrong during the latest Omicron wave? Why are so many aged care homes in lockdown? The strollout of vaccine boosters to residents is one key failure. Two months ago, on 8 November, the minister for health and aged care, Greg Hunt, announced the beginning of the booster program in aged care homes. The boosters would be provided by “in-reach clinics delivered primarily by vaccine administration providers under contract arrangements with the commonwealth”. Rather than rely on the existing structures that successfully administer the annual flu booster to residents – with local GPs visiting the aged care homes – the federal government outsourced the Covid booster rollout to private companies. Although accurate numbers are difficult to ascertain, these “in-reach clinics” had only visited around 50% of aged care homes before Christmas. And then one of the private companies, Aspen Medical, took holidays over the Christmas break. Despite all the evidence to the contrary, the minister for aged care services, Richard Colbeck, put a positive spin on the failure of the booster program: “We’re probably – we’re a bit ahead of where we thought we’d be when we started the program in early November.” This absurd statement indicates Colbeck does not recognise the importance of boosters to protect residents when community transmission rates are high. For example, three residents died recently during an outbreak in Bene aged care in St Agnes in South Australia. Can Colbeck confirm whether residents at this aged care home have received a booster? A second failure involves rapid antigen tests. Nearly five months ago, on 15 August, Hunt announced RATs would be available to aged care homes. “We anticipate that regular use of RAT to screen aged care employees and visitors will provide much greater reassurance,” he said. Rapid tests are key to ensuring the safety of both residents and staff. Many of the lockdowns could have been avoided if all staff had taken a rapid antigen test before each shift since August. While taking a test may be inconvenient and time-consuming, it is infinitely preferable to putting residents and families through the trauma of a lockdown. According to the Department of Health website: “Kits are now available for screening workers and visitors in aged care environments to help prevent outbreaks, or contain the spread of outbreaks.” Yet some aged care homes have not had free access to the national stockpile of rapid antigen tests, while others homes have. On 23 and 24 December 2021, in response the increase of Omicron infections in NSW, a surge deployment of rapid antigen tests were distributed to primary health networks in NSW for distribution to aged care homes in their regions. Once again, this was too little and far too late. The most recent data also highlights the fact that some aged care homes have had a significant increase in residents testing positive over the past fortnight, while others have been able to contain the spread. This suggests some homes have a good “pandemic plan” and others don’t. In addition, several aged care homes have had numerous outbreaks. St George aged care centre (NSW), for example, is currently experiencing its fifth outbreak, while others have had none. Has the regulator assessed the infection control protocols and staffing levels at homes with numerous outbreaks? Not taking such a step seems a most basic dereliction of duty from a regulator. The lack of leadership and the “hands-off approach” of Hunt, Colbeck and the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission during the pandemic has had heartbreaking consequences for many residents and families around the nation. Sooner or later our federal government must be held to account for the numerous preventable tragedies that have occurred in the aged care sector. Dr Sarah Russell is a public health researcher and aged care advocateA three-year-old with a rare genetic condition has become the youngest person to die in New South Wales after contracting Covid-19, as the state government considers fines for people who do not register positive rapid antigen tests through a new app to be released this week. On Monday NSW recorded 18 deaths from the virus, the second day in a row on which it has broken the previous record for the deadliest day of the pandemic. Of those, five were unvaccinated, including a man in his 30s and a three-year-old with a rare genetic condition who was not yet eligible for the jab. The child was born with a rare condition known as Niemann-Pick, a terminal illness which, the ABC reports, had left him with a short expected lifespan. While deaths and hospitalisations continue to rise amid the Omicron surge, the official case numbers in NSW fell for the second day in a row to 20,293. But health officials concede that number is a significant under-representation. As the NSW government has urged people to avoid queues for PCR tests and opt instead for rapid antigen tests, the positivity rate from the former has continued to increase, up to 24% on Monday. That is likely to change from this week, when the government follows Victoria’s lead in requiring people to record positive rapid antigen tests with the government. On Monday NSW premier Dominic Perrottet confirmed the government was considering introducing fines for people who do not register the positive tests. “By later this week I’m advised by NSW Health and Service NSW that we will have a system in place which allows people to register their positive rapid antigen tests,” he said on Monday. “We’ve made the decision as a government that we’ll mandate that requirement [and] we will have something to say about that later this week.” With only three weeks until schools in NSW resume after Christmas holidays, reports on Monday suggested the government would use rapid antigen testing on students in cases where someone in the cohort tests positive for Covid-19. If a student returned a negative test after an exposure, they would be allowed to return to class immediately. But on Monday Perrottet insisted no decisions had been made about the plan, saying the issue would be discussed at a national cabinet meeting this week. “There’s been no government decisions … the Department of Education obviously is working through those plans and we’re in the process of finalising those plans [but] nothing becomes government policy until the government makes a decision,” he said. The government introduced new rules on Sunday allowing close contacts of cases to exit isolation if their job is critical for food supply or emergency services, but on Monday Perrottet said the government was “completely focused” on maintaining food supply and essential services. As the number of people hospitalised with Covid-19 in NSW passed 2,000 on Monday, department deputy secretary Susan Pearce confirmed that patients including some in ICU wards had begun being transferred to private hospitals across Sydney in a bid to ease pressure on the health system. The measure was also used during the Delta wave of infections, and Pearce stressed it “should not be seen as a failure of the public hospital system”. “We’ve been open about the fact we intended to do this and it is not a large number but it is enough to take the pressure off,” she said. “We’re talking about tens of patients not hundreds at this stage. At Nepean [hospital] over the weekend it was 12 to 15, not a large number … We have overall still capacity across our hospital system but it is a relief valve that exists and it is a way we can manage through these next weeks.”Two of New Zealand’s most prominent Covid-19 experts have warned that the country is unprepared to prevent the health system from being overloaded by an Omicron outbreak, with likely fatal consequences. Otago University’s Dr Nick Wilson and Dr Michael Baker also said it was only a “matter of weeks” before the highly transmissible variant seeped into the community due to border failures. Wilson said that despite New Zealand’s high vaccination rates, the number of adults who had received a booster dose of the vaccine – essential for minimising the effects of Omicron – remains dangerously low, and noted that the vaccine rollout for children between five and 11 still had not begun. New Zealand received its first shipment of Pfizer’s paediatric vaccine only at the weekend, and intends to begin child vaccinations from 17 January, despite some comparable countries beginning their child vaccine rollout late last year. Omicron’s short incubation period also means New Zealand’s system for identifying and containing new community cases would be much less effective. Wilson panned the country’s traffic light system – which replaced the more stringent alert-level system last year – as “not fit for purpose” with Omicron due to its tolerance for relatively significant social interaction for vaccinated people when Covid is in the community. Baker agreed, calling for the government to rapidly reinstate an amended version of the alert level system. “The traffic light system won’t help us very much because it was never designed to dampen down transmission, it was only designed to nudge people towards vaccination,” Baker said. Until these weaknesses were fixed, he said, “we need to hugely turn down the tap of people arriving in New Zealand”. Wilson agreed: “The priority is to have a tighter border so that we don’t have to vaccinate kids and conduct a booster program during an outbreak.” The pair called for a “significant tightening” of the number of New Zealanders entering the country. Over the weekend, 64 positive Covid cases were recorded within New Zealand’s oversubscribed managed isolation facilities (MIQ) for incoming travellers, many of which were expected to be Omicron. Wilson said he was “perplexed” that poor ventilation and shared spaces within MIQ had not been fixed and that the resulting “high risk” of an Omicron outbreak was “unacceptable”. To relieve the pressure on MIQ, Wilson said, the government ought to require rapid antigen testing for travellers immediately prior to allowing them on flights, and cap the number of travellers coming from high-risk countries such as the UK, where Omicron rates have skyrocketed. Such measures would be controversial. The government is facing significant pressure from advocacy groups like Grounded Kiwis to make it easier for overseas New Zealanders to return home. The country’s borders have been shut since March 2020. Spokesperson Martin Newell said Grounded Kiwis strongly agreed with universal rapid antigen testing for travellers and strictly limiting travellers’ exposure to each other. However, he emphasised that “you can’t deny the right of New Zealanders to be able to return to their country”. Wilson, however, said: “The priority for the government has to be on protecting the 5 million New Zealanders in New Zealand.” The Covid-19 response minister, Chris Hipkins, has been approached for comment.Close contacts of Covid cases employed in critical supply chains will have their isolation requirements scrapped, in an attempt to address workforce shortages that have hit the food industry. Announcing a shake-up of isolation requirements on Monday, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, said the requirements would not apply to customer-facing roles, but those working in “critical supply chains”. All states and territories, except WA, are expected to sign off on the changes on Monday, with NSW and Queensland already announcing similar changes over the weekend. “Those who are driving the truck to deliver the food, those who are stacking the shelves at night, those who are in the distribution centres, those who are in the abattoirs, those who are in the manufacturing places that are producing food,” Morrison said. The changes will bring the food distribution industry and emergency services in line with requirements that already apply in some states’ health and aged care sectors. Anyone who tests positive or who is symptomatic will not return to work. The prime minister said national cabinet would assess extending the relaxed isolation requirements to other sectors, including aviation and potentially hospitality, but the disruptions to food supply chains and emergency services needed to be acted upon “immediately”, ahead of a meeting of national cabinet on Thursday. He also said the country now had no choice but to “push through” the Omicron wave, saying the alternative was a return to lockdowns. “I mean, you can just shut everything down and lock everybody away, and there will be no food on the shelves, and there’ll be no children getting taught, and there’ll be no one providing health care. “So that’s obviously not a practical way to move forward. And so what we have done as a government has always sought to balance the various demands and pressures on the system with the health imperative.” The new isolation changes were agreed to by the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee, which is comprised of state and territory chief health officers and the chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly. Kelly said that discussions with Coles and Woolworths on Sunday had indicated that absenteeism was running at between 30 and 50%, and the supermarkets “could not operate in those sort of circumstances”. “So that’s the sort of issues we’re dealing with and we need to move fast to take these risk based approaches,” Kelly said. “This is a reasonable step in relation to the increased transmissibility of the Omicron variant and the expected high number of incident cases in the community, and with the majority of those … mild illness,” Kelly said. “The provision to allow greater flexibility in balancing the need to reduce transmission against the detrimental loss of workforce is an appropriate measure.” In relation to the pressures being felt by the hospitality sector and other businesses, Morrison said the government would make changes “one step at a time”. “As the case numbers continue to rise the volume of cases will of course have an inevitable impact on the workforce, and so we are looking to maximise those people who remain in the workforce.” The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet said the government was focused on the issues in food supply chains, but he was aware of similar concerns in the hospitality sector that would also be considered. “We will work with our health teams in relation to that, but we need to prioritise here and ultimately our number one responsibility is to keep people safe. “But as we move through this period I would expect further adjustments will get made as we have from time to time … obviously we have been in contact with the hospitality industry and completely understand their concerns.” With the peak of the Omicron wave still several weeks away, Morrison also said he was confident that all states would resume face-to-face learning in term one, and was hopeful that states and territories would “harmonise their back-to-school plans”. “Our objective is go back, stay back, day one, term one,” Morrison said. “The idea is once we go back, we stay back, and we get certainty around that issue, and so we’ll be working through those issues this week and to get further certainty and harmonisation between the states and territories. “It’s obviously a key issue for parents as they think about their children going back to school in a few weeks’ time.” The secretary of the department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, Phil Gaetjens, is working with the states to develop a consistent approach, despite Queensland already indicating it will delay the start of the school year until 7 February for most students. Kelly said that the discussion about children and Covid was “difficult”, but he emphasised that the vast majority of cases in young people were mild. “It’s related to balancing the wider aspects and the importance of face-to-face learning in schools with the risk of Covid,” Kelly said. “There are many other reasons why children should be in school … in the widest terms, including mental health, developmental health, physical health outside of Covid. So these are tricky things to talk through, but we are talking through them.” On Monday, the vaccine rollout for children aged five to 11 also commenced, with the head of the government’s vaccine taskforce, Lt Gen John Frewen, insisting that appointments and supplies were available, despite reports of parents struggling to access the jabs. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning He said there would be 2m doses available by 21 January, with 8,000 places participating in the paediatric vaccine program. “The message again is there has been very strong take up on bookings and I do commend parents for their determination and willingness to bring their kids forward to get vaccinated,” Frewen said. “If there have been frustrations around getting appointments for some, then please if you can’t get an immediate appointment with your primary healthcare provider if that is your GP, then please do try the pharmacies, please do try the state hubs. “There are additional bookings coming online every day and there will be more and more opportunities over the weeks ahead.” Australia’s booster program is also under way, with about 250,000 shots being given on a daily basis.Jessica Kahl has been finding solutions to complex problems for as long as she can remember. But she didn’t realise her childhood interests held clues to her future path. Kahl is an award-winning engineer and the founder of Dream Big Australia, a not-for-profit that champions gender equality in the fields of science, technology, engineering, arts and mathematics (STEAM). But when she was growing up in Rockhampton, in regional Queensland, an engineering career felt like a distant prospect. “I was always entrepreneurial as a kid, making things and tinkering,” she says. “But there was no engagement, no aspiration about what women should do. I was in maths class and had just finished an equation and one of my friends said: ‘Why don’t you do engineering?’ “Looking back now, it feels unreal that as a young girl, you would not know what engineering is. I didn’t do maths, physics or graphics, which are the recommended subjects. There were a lot of barriers that deter people before you even step into a career.” When Kahl enrolled to study civil engineering she was enthralled. However, as a woman from regional Queensland, the only female graduate in her university cohort, and a practitioner in the civil engineering industry, Kahl experienced the barriers faced by women in significantly male-dominated industries. The impact of dealing with inappropriate behaviour helped her understand that the opportunities for women to speak out were limited, and importantly how this undermined educational and professional success. Kahl started visiting schools in her first year at university to showcase projects in which she was involved. Fuelled by a passion to make engineering appealing to ambitious young women like herself, in 2015 she founded Dream Big Australia. She believes the acronym STEM, conceived in the 1990s by the US-based National Science Foundation, can foster a masculine culture. It also fails to make space for essential attributes such as imaginative thinking and the ability to connect with other people. At Dream Big, she added an ‘A’ for arts. The power of this move came to light at Australia’s first STEAM Day, in 2019, and attracted an audience that was 100% female. “By putting the ‘A’ into STEM and calling it STEAM, we made it more inclusive,” she says. “We found that women who are attracted to the fields need permission to express their creativity.” Kahl says STEAM is also about equipping the next generation of engineers with skills for the future. “[The future] will be all about digitisation, automation, predictive maintenance,” she says. “But the one thing you can’t replace is empathy, which is highly correlated to the arts, hence adding the A.” At Dream Big, which has hosted more than 25 events across regional centres such as Gladstone, Bundaberg and Mackay, preparing for the future isn’t just about changing the language. It’s also about cultivating confidence in young women by pairing them with industry mentors and experts through programs aimed at female university students, such as STEAM Ahead. “STEAM Ahead provides value, not just to women and their development but to the industry – it’s also about [building] a sustainable talent pipeline,” Kahl says. “Looking into 2022, we want organisations to come on this journey with us.” For Kahl, who is a project manager at the Queensland government-owned water service provider, Sunwater, the art of dreaming big is also about gaining the knowledge and insights to live her values. In 2019, she took a pivotal step in this direction when she won a Responsible Leadership Scholarship to undertake an MBA at Griffith University. According to the 2020 International Student Survey, 49% of students say quality teaching is one of the most important factors they consider when choosing a course. Kahl appreciates not only Griffith’s high-quality teaching, but the range of perspectives to which she’s been exposed, thanks to an intellectual diversity that fosters innovation and creative spark. “The people in the MBA that you connect with, it’s like being at the United Nations,” she says. “There are so many wonderful thoughts and ideas and engaging conversations that inspire you to step up.” It’s also helped her look beyond conventional business wisdom, thanks to a community-based leadership lens that has been foundational to her work with both Sunwater and Dream Big. “[We learn] how to create circular and ecocentric economies,” she says. “A lot of organisations talk about playing to win – but is this the same as making an impact? [If you’re playing to win], you can end up doing things that don’t progress the organisation in the right direction.” Ultimately, she says, her MBA is giving her the knowledge to realise her purpose, which is shaped by a deep commitment to making engineering more equitable and attracting talented women who will go on to enrich the field. “The Griffith MBA has been rewarding and tangibly practical,” says Kahl, who is in the process of expanding Dream Big Australia nationally, and was nominated for the 2021 Young Australian of the Year award. “One of my proudest moments is seeing women who had been through the Steam Ahead program – a number of them were interviewed by industry partners and two of them got hired. It is living our vision, creating stepping stones. The MBA is real life. It is backed up by theory. You execute it and you get results.” Learn more about an MBA at Griffith University and live your values.Rescuers are still searching for a 14-year-old girl reported missing in Queensland flood waters, as the state emergency service begins the lengthy process of assessing hundreds of homes and businesses for damage. Flood waters on the Fraser Coast town of Maryborough, 250km north of Brisbane, peaked at 9.96 metres on Sunday night – below the level of the devastating 2013 flood. The city centre was protected by a levee until 2am when an underground stormwater mechanism failed, allowing flood waters to surge up through the drains. Local police superintendent Michael Sawrey said it would take several days for the waters to fully recede. More than 1,000 people have been isolated by the floods, which followed ex-tropical cyclone Seth dumping 600mm of rain on the Wide Bay-Burnett region in two days. Sawrey said the number of people isolated gave an indication of the number of homes affected, but the exact number of those damaged would not be known until emergency services move in and conduct rapid assessments of homes and businesses. “The clean-up will take a while, as you would have seen,” he said. “The water was slow rising, and with that, it’s normally slow getting away. But … you can see from last night even how much water has gone down. So that’s a positive thing for Maryborough.” Sawrey said water police and police divers were continuing to look for the girl, who was swept away in flood waters at Booubyjan, near Gympie, on Saturday. “Unfortunately at this stage, we haven’t found the missing 14-year-old girl and we have grave concerns for her, but we’re putting in whatever efforts we can to try to locate her,” he told reporters on Monday. “It is an extremely difficult area surrounded by water, which has created hindrances to our search effort.” The prime minister, Scott Morrison, speaking in Canberra, said his thoughts were with the 14-year-old girl’s family. “I have a daughter who’s 14 years old, so I can understand the terrible, terrible time that family must be going through at the moment,” he said. He also gave his condolences to the family of a 22-year-old man, who was found dead in flood waters near Gympie on Saturday. A father and daughter who survived two nights clinging to a tree near Gympie were airlifted to safety by a rescue helicopter on Sunday afternoon. “The father explained to the crew that his car had been caught between two sections of floodwaters on Friday night and water began filling the car,” RACQ LifeFlight said in a statement late on Sunday night. “He and his primary school-aged daughter climbed on to the roof of the vehicle but were swept into the water in the darkness.” The father then swam to his car, grabbed a rope, and used it to tie himself and his daughter to the tree. When the waters subsided on Sunday they climbed the 10 metres down to the ground and raised the alarm at a nearby homestead. State disaster coordinator Steve Gollschewski said the father and daughter’s rescue gave crews hope for the missing teenager. “While we have very grave concerns, we are hopeful … we saw yesterday a pair of people come out after an extended period in a tree,” he said. “They were able to be supported when they came out after what was probably a pretty terrible experience for them, but they are safe.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning No others have been reported missing as a result of the flood. The Bureau of Meteorology said the flooding would move farther upstream as waters washed out toward Fraser Island. Falls of between 50 to 700mm were recorded north and north-west of Gympie over the weekend. Financial support via the disaster recovery payment will be available for people in the Bundaberg, Gympie and Fraser Coast regions from Tuesday.The Power of the Dog and Succession were the big winners at an unusual, stripped-back Golden Globes. Traditionally, the ceremony is a glitzy telecast with A-listers in attendance but after a year of controversies surrounding diversity and amoral practices, the Hollywood Foreign Press Association lost its footing in the industry, with publicity firms, studios and celebrities choosing to distance themselves. Sunday night’s event took place at the Beverly Hilton hotel in Los Angeles, with no stars or audience, and just select members and grantees. Results were announced via social media. The acclaimed Netflix drama The Power of the Dog was named best picture – drama, while Jane Campion became the third woman to win best director. Kodi Smit-McPhee also won best supporting actor for his performance in the film. Will Smith was named best actor in a drama for King Richard, while Nicole Kidman won best actress in a drama for playing Lucille Ball in Being the Ricardos. It was Kidman’s fifth win from 16 nominations. Steven Spielberg’s acclaimed remake West Side Story dominated the musical/comedy categories, winning best picture, best actress for Rachel Zegler and best supporting actress for Ariana DeBose. Andrew Garfield was also named best actor in a musical or comedy for Tick, Tick … Boom!. On the television side, HBO’s hit drama Succession picked up awards for best drama, best actor for Jeremy Strong and best supporting actress for Sarah Snook. The network also saw freshman series Hacks named best comedy and its star Jean Smart win for best actress in a comedy series. Jason Sudeikis was named best comedy actor for Ted Lasso, while O Yeong-Su won best supporting actor for Netflix’s breakout hit Squid Game. MJ Rodriguez became the first trans woman to win the award for best actress in a drama series for Pose. “This is the door that is going to open the door for many more young talented individuals,” she wrote on Instagram. “They will see that it is more than possible.” Kate Winslet was named best actress in a limited series for the acclaimed crime drama Mare of Easttown while Michael Keaton was named best actor in a limited series for Hulu’s opioid drama Dopesick. Barry Jenkins’ period drama The Underground Railroad also won for best limited series. Other winners included Japan’s Drive My Car as best film not in the English language, Encanto for best animated feature, Kenneth Branagh’s Belfast for best screenplay, No Time to Die for best original song and Dune for best original score. Staff members representing various non-profits supported by the Hollywood Foreign Press Association were on hand to announce winners. Arnold Schwarzenegger and Jamie Lee Curtis appeared via video to talk about the HFPA’s philanthropic efforts. “I am proud to be associated with them in this venture,” Curtis said, while Schwarzenegger praised the organisation’s support of diverse voices. The event required proof of vaccination and a negative PCR test. Attendees were also required to be masked and socially distanced at all times. After a series of Los Angeles Times exposés revealing a lack of diversity in the HFPA’s voting membership and a number of “ethical lapses”, the past 12 months have seen high-profile actors including Tom Cruise and Scarlett Johansson speak out against the association, as well as NBC deciding not to broadcast this year’s ceremony. Attempted repair work has included “overhauling” previously restrictive bylaws, implementing changes with regards to code of conduct and ethical practices, and bringing in a diverse set of 21 new members. “Last year the Hollywood Foreign Press Association was challenged to change – and we did,” said Helen Hoehne, its president. “Both internally, within the Association, as well as adding 21 members to bring fresh perspectives. “We are on a journey of change and we’re not going to rest. We are going to be outspoken about what we’re learning and challenge others to join us.” Kyle Bowser, senior vice-president of the NAACP Hollywood Bureau, spoke of a joint five-year initiative to increase diversity, equity and inclusion. “Imagination is the currency that sustains and propels the entertainment industries,” he said during the ceremony. Last year’s televised ceremony suffered a catastrophic 60% drop in viewers. Sunday’s Critics Choice awards had been expected to act as an unofficial replacement, with celebrities in attendance and a televised ceremony, but the event was postponed as a result of an increase in Covid-19 cases. This year’s Oscar nominations are due to be announced on 8 February, with the ceremony taking place on 27 March.Authorities in Kazakhstan have said 164 people were killed in the unrest that rocked the country in the past week, including three children. The health ministry said 103 of the deaths were in Almaty, the country’s largest city and the centre of the violence. After the worst violence in independent Kazakhstan’s 30-year history, the situation in Almaty and other cities was largely calm on Sunday. Authorities said they had recovered control and life would slowly get back to normal in the coming days. In Almaty, authorities announced that some public transport would resume on Monday. However, the deputy defence minister, Sultan Gamaletdinov, said on Sunday that a “counterterrorist operation” was still under way and would continue “until the terrorists are completely eliminated and the constitutional order is restored in the republic of Kazakhstan”. The number of people detained by police continues to rise, with police giving an updated figure of 6,044. The president’s office said law enforcement agencies had seized back control of administrative buildings, with Russian-led troops guarding key facilities. There was fresh international condemnation of the government’s handling of the crisis on Sunday, as France said that European foreign ministers would this week consider possible measures in response to the crackdown. “[They will discuss] measures which Europe could take to send a message: that you cannot crush a people, protesters, rebelling against the cost of living,” the French European affairs minister, Clément Beaune, told CNEWS. The US secretary of state, meanwhile, criticised the shoot-to-kill order that President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev said he had issued. “That is something that I absolutely reject. The shoot-to-kill order, to the extent it exists, is wrong and should be rescinded,” Antony Blinken told ABC. “We have real concerns about the state of emergency that was declared.” The protests began last Sunday in the west of the country over a steep rise in fuel prices, and quickly spread to Almaty and other cities, driven by years of pent-up frustration. On Wednesday, violent clashes began, and groups of men seized the airport and stormed government buildings. Many on the ground reported that violent organised groups seemed to have taken over the protest. Tokayev fired two more top security officials on Sunday, stepping up a purge of the country’s security agency. The sacked officials, Marat Osipov and Daulet Ergozhin, were deputies to former intelligence chief Karim Massimov, a two-time prime minister who has been arrested on suspicion of treason. The president’s website gave no explanation of the sackings in a terse statement late on Sunday. On Friday, Tokayev gave a hardline address in which he said he had ordered law enforcement bodies to shoot to kill without warning, and said Almaty had been attacked by a group of 20,000 “bandits and terrorists”. Erzhan Kazykhan, a presidential adviser, made a video address in English on Sunday, accusing some in the west of misinterpreting events. “Regretfully, peaceful demonstrations in Almaty and some other regions were hijacked by perpetrators and both local and external terrorist groups speaking foreign languages,” he said. Authorities have not yet released any evidence proving the involvement of either “terrorists” or foreign forces. On Sunday, local television showed a video confession of a bruised man, who said he had been paid to travel from neighbouring Kyrgyzstan and take part in violence. However, viewers in Kyrgyzstan quickly identified him as a well-known jazz musician who frequently toured Kazakhstan, and expressed doubts that he could have been a rioter. Reports of possible infighting within the Kazakhstani elites driving part of the violence appear to be more plausible. Karim Masimov, the head of the security services and a former prime minister, was first removed from office and then arrested during the week on suspicion of treason. No details have been released of what Masimov is alleged to have done. Some sources have pointed to recent disagreements between Tokayev and figures close to his predecessor, Nursultan Nazarbayev, who ruled the country from independence in 1991 until 2019 and handpicked Tokayev as his successor. Nazarbayev holds the honorific title of leader of the nation, and the country’s capital was renamed Nur-Sultan in his honour in 2019. He was removed by Tokayev as head of the National Security Council this week. Many of the protesters chanted, “Old man, out!” in reference to Nazarbayev, while in the city of Taldykorgan, a statue of him was pulled down. Anger has focused on the considerable wealth amassed by his family and his continuing influence over the political scene. Nazarbayev’s press secretary has claimed the previous president is in the country and is backing Tokayev, but Nazarbayev has not spoken or appeared in public since the unrest began. Former prime minister Akezhan Kazhegeldin said Tokayev needed to dispel doubts about who was really in charge. “I think a lot of people in social networks, critics, continue to say he’s a nominee of Nazarbayev, that Nazarbayev is standing behind his back and manipulating him,” he said. “Now he has complete formal executive power, the question is how he will deploy it. He needs to take command.” On Wednesday, Tokayev called on a Russia-led military alliance, the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), to send troops into the country. This was agreed in a matter of hours, and a force reportedly numbering about 2,500 mostly Russian troops is now on the ground. Tokayev, Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, and the leaders of the other CSTO nations – Belarus, Kyrgyzstan, Armenia and Tajikistan – are due to hold a video conference on Monday. Tokayev was likely to name new government members when he addressed parliament on Tuesday, his spokesman said. Reuters contributed to this reportEach morning, from the moment when Joan Moliner unfolds his bicycle for the ride to work to Barcelona city centre, he is on a mission, one eye on the road, the other on builders’ skips. His quarry, if that’s the word, is cement floor tiles. All over the city, 19th-century apartment blocks are being made over into luxury flats. In the process, a vital part of Barcelona’s heritage – its decorative tiled floors – is ending up in a dump. Conservation of the architectural heritage rarely extends beyond listing the facade, despite the wealth of interior detail in buildings erected at a time when Barcelona was a mecca for artists and artisans. “I see these old buildings as a conversation between all the different parts – the walls, the floors, all the details,” says Moliner. “Preserving the facade and nothing else doesn’t make much sense. It’s part of our evolution as a society that we’re throwing away.” Moliner, who when he gets off his bike at the end of his commute works as an employment adviser, picked up his first tile seven years ago. Stirred by the memory of the tiled floors in his parents’ house, he started collecting manufacturers’ catalogues and researching the history. Every tile tells a story, he says, surveying the 1,600 of them stacked up on his terrace. One such story is Antoni Gaudí’s Panot, a hexagonal tile featuring marine creatures manufactured by Escofet, Barcelona’s biggest tile company. It was originally intended for his Casa Batlló, but was eventually used on the floor of the Casa Milà on the nearby Passeig de Gràcia. In 1997, as a tribute to its most famous architect, the city relaid the elegant boulevard’s pavement with a reproduction of the Panot. The tiles Moliner collects came about thanks to the creation of cheap and versatile portland cement in the early 19th century by the Englishman Joseph Aspdin and were used to floor most of the buildings constructed in Barcelona from 1870 to 1950. Easier to lay, they did not need to be fired and could be produced by hand by a team of four artisans working a hydraulic press. Furthermore, they could be printed with any pattern, freeing artists from the rectilinear restraints of mosaic to produce the images of flora and fauna that are a trademark of modernisme, the distinctly Catalan version of art nouveau. “Escofet was one of the first manufacturers to employ artists to design the tiles,” says Moliner. The advent of the hydraulic cement tile coincided with a massive building boom in Barcelona, when it broke out of the confines of the medieval city to create the grid-like Eixample (Extension), where the Catalan bourgeoisie flaunted wealth that was often made off the back of slave labour in the textile and sugar industries. Moliner believes it’s important to conserve this part of the city’s heritage, even if the tiles can’t remain in situ. “There’s been talk for a long time about putting them in a museum, but nothing’s come of it so far.” He says he’s not interested in making money from his passion. However, he is hoping to collaborate with a centre for disabled people where they could refurbish, frame and perhaps sell the tiles. Meanwhile, he uses an app to recreate entire floor patterns based on the tiles he finds matched to catalogues and then puts them on Instagram at rajolesdebarcelona. “I got around 3,000 likes almost overnight so obviously it’s not just me who finds this interesting. “What I like is that it’s all handmade,” he says. “The tiles are handmade, they were laid by hand and then someone digs them up by hand and throws them out and I clean them by hand. I feel this connection with over a century of manual labour.”It was 7.55am one February day in 2018 when members of an elite Italian police squad raided the Naples office of small news website. The previous day it had revealed links between elected politicians and organised groups in an illegal waste dumping racket, and its staff already at their desks looked on incredulously as the officers searched through their files. The story sent shock waves through the political establishment and helped make fanpage.it what it is today: one of Italy’s most successful news sites. “That day was a turning point,” said Sacha Biazzo, the journalist behind the investigation, who, with a hidden camera and the support of a former mobster, filmed meetings between members of the Neapolitan mafia and politicians. “Since then, people realised we weren’t just a small online news and gossip outlet. They began to view us as an investigative website that could strike at the heart of political power. Readers began to deliver pizzas to our office as a gesture of gratitude for what we had done.” Nearly four years on, and now with 67 journalists and editors, Fanpage has become a thorn in the side of politicians, mobsters and common criminals, and gets 3 million unique visitors a day. When it was founded in the early 2000s, the outlook was completely different. “At the beginning, Fanpage was just a Facebook page containing general news and videos on a range of topics,” said Francesco Cancellato, its editor-in-chief. “Over time, the publisher realised that we could aspire to do something different, so he started hiring journalists to write the first articles. From a Facebook page, Fanpage became a news outlet with few opinion stories and a lot of news that ranged from gossip to crime. Then we opened an investigative team […] our goal was to bring new leads to the attention of the authorities investigating corruption and criminality.” Nicknamed Backstair, the Fanpage investigative team is staffed by undercover journalists with hidden cameras whose assignments can last up to two years. Its stated goal is to “reach the highest levels of power without succumbing to vertigo” and “plumb the depths of the darkest corners of society … filming everything, verifying it all and publicising the truth.” In a digital age that has presented challenges to some traditional models of journalism, Fanpage is breaking some of the biggest scandals involving the church, politicians, businessmen and criminals. In 2017 a Fanpage journalist posing as a seminarian recorded an elderly priest’s account of sexual abuse of dozens of hearing-impaired people in an institute in Verona. This October a series of video investigations on the relationship between rightwing political parties and neofascist movements, including alleged financial contributions, was awarded the European Award for Investigative and Judicial Journalism, and led to an MEP from the far-right Brothers of Italy party being placed under investigation by the Milan prosecutor’s office. The MEP said in a statement suspending himself from the party that he had never received illegal funding and did not hold racist, antisemitic or extremist views. Corrado Formigli, a TV host who rebroadcast the investigation on his PiazzaPulita talkshow on the TV channel La7, said Fanpage’s strength was its long-term commitment to stories. “It has created an investigation team capable of working on a project for months, if not years, which is very difficult today given that newspapers and television are often forced to deal with current affairs,” he said. “Behind Fanpage’s use of hidden cameras there is a deep, thorough work which involves creating a false identity for the undercover journalist and a patient approach to sources. The end result is extraordinary and it works great.” Over the last four years dozens of people involved in illicit activities have been arrested after Fanpage investigations and numerous politicians have resigned. The site continues to turn a profit and has opened newsrooms in Rome and Milan. What makes Fanpage even more remarkable is its southern Italian origins. It was founded in Naples, the biggest city in one of Europe’s most disadvantaged regions, plagued by high unemployment and enduring social and economic challenges. “From Naples, Fanpage has not only reported on the south’s problems, it has also hired many young southern Italians, many of whom struggled to find a job in Italian mainstream journalism,” said Adriano Biondi, who started at Fanpage as an intern and is now its deputy editor. “The south, and Naples in particular, are some of the most culturally fertile areas of Europe. There is an enormous untapped resource in terms of human capital, especially among women. If we consider education, women have higher levels than men in Italy, yet Italian women have some of the highest unemployment rates in Europe.” The majority of Fanpage’s journalists and editors are under 30. The oldest is 44. Most of Fanpage’s unique visitors are in their 20s. Fanpage’s success is based on not just hiring young people, but also its ability to speak to them. From the beginning it invested heavily in its social media profile. Its YouTube community equals that of La Repubblica and Corriere della Sera combined, and it is also the only Italian news website with more than 500,000 TikTok followers. “Fanpage’s merit is that of having reached that vast demographic of young, disillusioned readers who didn’t follow the established dailies because they had no intention of reading the daily news,” said Annalisa Girardi, 27, the deputy political editor. “We knew that if we wanted to include them, we had to speak their language. Covering political or financial issues means having an awareness that there are readers who may have never heard some of the technical terminology.” Cancellato said: “Our main concern is never to grow old. We mustn’t make the mistake of growing old with our readers. We have no intention of taking over La Repubblica or Corriere. We’re Fanpage, we’re something else, and our desire is to change the way news is done in Italy.”The garden looks monochrome in a pale grey mist, the hawthorn outside my kitchen window two-dimensional. A lone blackbird is up early to feed on the berries strung like beads along spiny branches. I hold my breath as a shadowy hare lopes along, and I can just make out the bouncing white rumps of two roe deer. Otherwise, everything is still. As the day warms, the berries colour to a dull red and more birds arrive. At one time I count a fluster of seven blackbirds, wings flapping, tails dipping as they teeter on twig ends to snatch with pincering beaks. On other days there have been winter visitors from Europe, redwings and fieldfares, or our native plump wood pigeons flashing white neck patches, drawn by the haws that are rich in antioxidants. This little tree is barely twice my height yet it feeds so many. A grey squirrel pauses to snack on its daily run along the dry stone wall. Heaps of chewed berries on the ground show where mice have fed. In spring, hawthorn leaves are the first to emerge in the valley, followed by blossoms, plentiful in nectar and pollen for bees and hoverflies. Parties of long-tailed tits move restlessly between the garden trees, gathering other species of tits into their circus act. My little hawthorn is a favourite place to feed as they swing through it, picking off aphids, spiders, tiny insects and moth caterpillars. Today among the blackbirds there’s a goldcrest, and on the mossy stones below, a wren, as fast and slight as a blown leaf. I’ve photographed the angular branches backlit by the west, when ice balls knock together against a pink sky, or lurid sunsets flame in late summer. In the flower borders, I find spiky seedlings, progeny to make a note of and transplant somewhere new in winter. This then is my paean to the hawthorn. January is a good month to plant a bare-rooted tree, costing little, quick to establish while dormant. The blackbirds are joined by a song thrush, brown spots on its creamy white breast, and I’m struck by what a difference one small tree can make. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThe AFLW will be without two of its biggest stars for the rest of the season after scans confirmed the worst-case scenarios for Isabel Huntington and Bri Davey, who both suffered ACL injuries during the opening round over the weekend. Huntington, the No 1 pick in the 2017 draft, is now facing a third knee reconstruction in her short Western Bulldogs career while Davey, last year’s AFLW best and fairest winner, will undergo her second ACL surgery on the same knee having first injured it in 2018. A third big name, Brisbane’s Kate Lutkins, is facing a nervous wait on her own scan results after injuring her knee on Sunday. Scans showed Huntington ruptured her right ACL graft and damaged her lateral meniscus after her knee buckled as she changed direction in the Bulldogs’ loss to Melbourne on Saturday. The standout junior lost the 2018 and 2019 seasons to similar injuries before she returned to win the 2020 Rising Star as a defender. “We are absolutely devastated for Izzy – she is a much-loved figure at the kennel, and everyone is well aware of her injury battles, so we’re just heartbroken for her,” Bulldogs women’s football boss Debbie Lee said. “She worked extremely hard this pre-season to get herself ready for this year, so it’s a real shame her 2022 campaign has been cut short. “Izzy is a true professional though, and having been through this twice before she will know what’s required of her. As a club, we’ll continue to support her and the family in any way we can.” Magpies co-captain Davey left the field in tears late in the fourth term of Sunday’s 19-point victory over Carlton at Ikon Park and after will not return until next season at least, after scans confirmed she had ruptured her ACL and had a medial collateral ligament tear in her right knee. Collingwood’s head of women’s football, Jess Burger, said the entire program was “heartbroken” for Davey, who won the club’s best and fairest medal and was named captain of the All-Australian side last year. “It’s very hard to see our captain go down with such a cruel injury, let alone someone who is at the top of their game,” Burger said. “There is no doubt her injury has been felt not just within our team, but across the entire AFLW community. “She’s recovered from this injury before and knows what it takes to get herself back to being regarded as one of the competition’s best. Bri will continue to play a key role in leading this team from the sidelines this season and our entire program will wrap our arms around her during this difficult time.” Both players will consult with their surgeons this week.The judge hearing Novak Djokovic’s case has queried “what more” he could have done to prove his medical exemption and criticised the Australian government for reneging on a deal to give him more time to defend his visa from cancellation. Judge Anthony Kelly said he was “preoccupied” and “somewhat agitated” by the issue of why Australian officials did not accept an exemption document provided by the world No 1 male tennis player from a qualified physician, backed up by an independent Victorian government panel. The federal circuit court began to hear Djokovic’s case on Monday morning, allowing him temporarily out of detention to view the hearing away from the Park hotel in Melbourne, where he is being held. The expedited hearing comes ahead of a looming Tennis Australia deadline of Tuesday for Djokovic to be included in the draw to play the Australian Open. Djokovic is seeking to win a record 10th Australian Open which would be his 21st open grand slam title, the most ever for a male player in singles. He now finds his fortune at the whims of Australian administrative law which advocates have long complained is stacked against those seeking to regain visas, including the refugees held at the Park hotel, in detention for up to nine years. Djokovic arrived in Australia late on Wednesday evening before his visa was cancelled at 7.29am on Thursday morning on the basis he may be a threat to health and safety because he was unvaccinated. Djokovic’s counsel, Nicholas Wood, told the court the Serbian tennis star had done his “level best” to provide everything to substantiate his exemption that he recently had Covid-19, including uploading a medical exemption from the chief medical officer of Tennis Australia before travelling. Kelly interrupted to comment that the status of Djokovic’s medical exemption “preoccupied” him, describing it as a “relatively significant fact” that Djokovic had obtained an exemption from “a professor and eminently qualified physician”, which was further approved by an independent expert panel established by the Victorian state government. “That document was in the hands of the delegate [who cancelled his visa]. The point I’m somewhat agitated about is: what more could this man [Djokovic] have done?” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Wood said that Djokovic had been “utterly confused” when interviewed on Thursday morning, pointing to a note he received before travelling from the home affairs department that his claim for an exemption had been assessed and accepted. The department argues that response does not amount to an assurance his medical exemption would allow him to enter Australia. Kelly noted Djokovic was “effectively incommunicado” from 4am when he was asked to switch his phone off until 7.42am when he was told of the cancellation, as the department reneged on an agreement to give him until 8.30am to consult Tennis Australia. The Australian government has argued visa-holders cannot be allowed to “filibuster” by refusing to completely respond to a notice to cancel a visa. Wood submitted that Djokovic had wanted to wait for a particular time to speak to Tennis Australia and the judge appeared to accept he had done so to “effectively take up the opportunity … to provide [authorities] anything further [they] might want”. Kelly noted that Djokovic was urged not to get in touch with his lawyers, which Wood said occurred on the “spurious rationale” it would be in his interests to complete his interview without them. In its written submission the Australian government argued that any failure to consider further representations from Djokovic is immaterial. Wood labelled that view “erroneous” unless the delegate had a closed mind about the case. Kelly suggested on one view the interview could be seen as an ex-post-facto justification for the cancellation decision. The Australian government submitted that recent infection with Covid-19 by itself is not enough for a medical exemption, and the evidence established that Djokovic “has recovered” and is therefore not entitled to one. Through counsel, Christopher Tran, it submitted that Djokovic had given a response to the notice to cancel the visa in the interview and there was no denial of procedural fairness. Tran said Djokovic may have felt “pressured” to respond, but urged the judge not to find that was Border Force officials’ intention. The hearing continues on Monday afternoon, with further submissions from Tran. The morning’s remote hearing suffered technical outages in webcasting that triggered adjournments or closed it from public view. Earlier on Monday, Wood accused the delegate of the home affairs minister of a “paucity of evidence” for the decision to cancel Djokovic’s visa, and warned that any defect in reasoning should see it reinstated. Legal experts have warned even after the expedited hearing, there is no guarantee Djokovic could secure a court order restoring his visa in time to play, and he could also face his visa being revoked again. In written submissions the home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, has asked the court, if it sides with Djokovic, to quash the original decision but not to order his release. The government submitted it had the power to make a fresh cancellation decision and noted “other powers” including re-detention. Wood sought an interlocutory injunction to release Djokovic pending the result of the case. Kelly noted on Thursday Tran had ruled out deporting Djokovic before the result.Britain faces a housing crisis in the wake of the pandemic as confusion about planning rules and shortages of staff undermine government targets to build 300,000 homes a year, according to a House of Lords committee. A retreat from housebuilding by smaller companies must be tackled by ministers to reduce the shortage of homes, the cross-party group of peers said. “Too many people currently live in expensive, unsuitable and poor-quality homes, and housing supply needs to be increased now to tackle the housing crisis,” the committee said in its report, titled Meeting Housing Demand. The housing secretary, Michael Gove, is expected to set out the government’s plans to kickstart housebuilding after the industry suffered the twin blows of Brexit, which reduced the amount of skilled labour available, and the upheaval caused by the pandemic. Gove has indicated he will encourage employment and housing in the regions as part of the government’s levelling up agenda, though this is likely to be a long-term project. Baroness Neville-Rolfe, chair of the Lords’ built environment committee, said: “The government’s ambitious target of 300,000 new homes a year will only be met if it takes action to remove the barriers for housebuilders, particularly for SMEs, which 35 years ago built 39% of new homes but now build just 10%.” The committee was critical of a U-turn over proposed reforms to planning rules that would have divided areas into zones, some of which are reserved for conservation and others that have few or no rules holding back developers. Ministers abandoned the proposals after the Liberal Democrats overturned a 16,000 Tory majority in the Chesham and Amersham by-election, which local Conservative leaders blamed largely on a rejection of the planning scheme by local voters. Uncertainty and delays to planning reforms have had a ‘“chilling effect” on housebuilding and created uncertainty for housebuilders and planners, Neville-Rolfe said. The former minister and Tesco board director said local authorities needed to adopt local plans to indicate where new developments could go ahead. She said less than 50% of local authorities had adopted or updated their local plans in the last five years, leaving developers in the dark over what land was available for new building. But she warned that any reform of the planning system “will only work if local planning authorities have the resources and staff”. Local authorities have complained that after 11 years of austerity measures, which has forced them to push through 40% cuts to day-to-day budgets, planning departments are only a fraction of the size needed to assess applications. Nevertheless, they say, more than 1.1m applications have been agreed, but private developers have failed to begin building. “It was probably what surprised me most during our investigation. Not so much the shortages of bricklayers and skilled construction workers, which is acute and well known, but the lack of skills in planning after years of not training people,” she said. Neville-Rolfe urged ministers to take into account an ageing population that will mean that by 2050, one in four people in the UK will be aged over 65. “The country needs more specialist and mainstream housing suitable for the elderly,” she said.How does a song by an unknown band get to be listened to 6.5m times? It was hard enough to determine in the olden days, before streaming existed, when we still said “popular” instead of “viral”; it is absolutely baffling now. If anyone knew, Facebook would have written an algorithm for it. That hasn’t stopped critics twisting and turning to account for the success of Chaise Longue, by the Isle of Wight duo Wet Leg, which was hotly followed by their astronomically successful follow-up singles, Wet Dream and Too Late Now. They haven’t even released an album yet. Is it because they are, as one reviewer put it, witty and sexy, and indie rock normally isn’t? Everyone loves them, from Florence Welch to Hayley Williams to Iggy Pop. Is it because they have been compared to the likes of Violent Femmes and Björk? They have certainly unleashed an (often contradictory) avalanche of they-remind-me-ofs, not because they are derivative; but because they put everyone in a good mood. We all reach wildly for the first or last band that put us in a good mood. Rhian Teasdale and Hester Chambers, 28 and 27 respectively, talk to me over a video call, which I am not keen on anyway, but on this occasion is about as hilarious, frustrating, charming and elusive an experience as Wet Leg themselves. They are sitting against a glass-bricked wall; there is a dog around, but it never comes into view: it is all pretty indie. Chambers has an incredibly high, quiet voice and she wraps her blond hair around her face like the French Lieutenant’s Woman. Teasdale has the most exquisite, whimsical manners. At one point, a passerby comes up to them to ask whether they are doing a TikTok. “No,” she says, with endless patience. “We’re doing a … conversation.” It is frustrating, because it transpires that they are in Streatham, south London, about two miles from my house. I could have cycled to meet them in less time than it would have taken to ask Chambers to get her hair out of her mouth. They describe their musical influences, from the time they first met, doing a music BTec on the Isle of Wight: Patrick Watson, Arts the Beatdoctor, “a lot of Nordic stuff,” as Chambers puts it, Laura Marling, And So I Watch You from Afar. “I was able to answer this one really well, because I was talking to my friend about what music we used to listen to when we were 17 and I thought: ‘Wow, I was so zany,’” says Teasdale. Chambers couldn’t disagree more. “Oh my gosh, no! Not that zany’s a bad thing. It’s not really my lexicon. It’s a good word, though.” “Lexicon is also a good word,” says Teasdale. The lyrics of Chaise Longue are intensely likable (“Is your mother worried? / Would you like us to assign someone / to worry your mother?”), even if all the kids I have met have the wrong end of the stick and think it is a song about academic failure, mixed with some not-so-subtle innuendo: “I went to school and I got the big D.” In fact, the full line runs: “Mummy, Daddy, look at me / I went to school and I got a degree / All my friends call it the big D.” But maybe the kids are perceptive because the pair couldn’t stand academic life. Teasdale only got to the BTec via dropping out of her A-levels. “Just teenage angst, probably. ‘What’s the point?’ I just really didn’t get on with it. I didn’t really have any friends. My mum tried to get me to join the merchant navy.” Of course, the move was fortuitous, since it was at Isle of Wight College that Teasdale met Chambers, but it wasn’t the start of an academic late-flowering. They both went on to start a music degree, drop out and describe it as a disaster. They can smile about it now, but at the time it was terrible (to quote a band they really don’t sound anything like). “I found it really hard to reject it,” Teasdale says. “I tried to go back again and again, because that’s what you’re fed as the only option, otherwise you’re working a dead-end job. I couldn’t see anything beyond that.” Chambers, who has a shy, winning fatalism, says: “I dropped out in the first year, which was sad. I was really bummed out. It’s just not what I wanted to put my brain into. I’m not a very academic person.” The visual narrative they create in two of their videos, Chaise Longue and Wet Dream, seems true to type; Teasdale’s gaze is direct and challenging, Chambers hides under a hat. It reminds me of something, this anti-go-getting, dropping out, failing again, failing better: the 90s, when not everyone was on the same conveyor belt, when no one had heard of self-actualisation. Keeping a knowing distance to preserve an essential self used to be a fundamental currency in pop culture, then it fell away. But I really love it. Both women grew up on the Isle of Wight. Teasdale’s parents were “boat people”, she says, which makes them sound like yacht owners. In fact, they met in the merchant navy, her father an engineer, her mother … “I don’t actually know what she was doing there.” Chambers’s parents run a jewellers, where Chambers occasionally still works. “It’s such a fantastic job; I really fell into the family business.” They didn’t start making music together until after they had given up their degrees, when they were 22 and 23. Chambers says to Teasdale: “For me, it was being in the room with you, another woman, and no boys around. That was the moment when I went: ‘Woah, look at us, look at us making music together.’” Teasdale was puzzled that they hadn’t started doing it earlier. The origin story they have settled on is that they made a decision to start a band at the top of a ferris wheel. But I refuse to ask them about that because it’s just too manic pixie dream girl and I don’t want to encourage that. They are called Wet Leg because they wanted a name they could spell with emojis. Like a lot of their lyrics, it simultaneously makes sense and doesn’t, because those emojis could mean “wet leg” or “tsunami robot” or “rain chicken”. Anyway, that brought them to the summer of 2018, when they got a gig on the local stage at the Isle of Wight festival, playing to “one man and his welly boots”, Chambers recalls. “We didn’t have enough songs to play a full set,” Teasdale says. “A lot of the performance was songs that we wrote in such a short time to fill up the set. Some of them were just silly songs we wrote so we could get a wristband to go in. Some of them didn’t survive.” On the attitude this low-stakes period inspired, Chambers adds: “It was fun. We were like: ‘Cool. First, pancakes for the dog – let’s make some more pancakes.’” What it wasn’t was a clear career path. “I just wanted to do it for the fun of it,” says Teasdale. Chambers carried on working in the jeweller’s; Teasdale did a season selling ice-cream, then went to London – worked at an ice-rink, did a stint as a wardrobe assistant for adverts. It wasn’t until the pandemic, when they were both back on the island, living with their parents, that they became ambitious in any recognisable sense. Even then, you would only just recognise it. “It was really sheltered,” Chambers says. “It was dreamy, especially if you remember the weather,” Teasdale continues. “It was like the school holidays when you’re a kid, just thinking: ‘Wow, all this time to play around.’ We took up longboard dancing and roller skating. I’d say we shut out the outside world.” Longboard dancing is as it sounds, dancing on a long skateboard: you have to watch a video to understand how hyper-fey it is, whimsy on stilts. They were, nevertheless, “productive by accident”, Chambers says, working on demos, making the Chaise Longue and Angelica videos, finding a manager via Teasdale’s then boyfriend, who sent their demo to people at Domino Records, who wanted to meet them. But “we were just absolutely silly”, Chambers says, not without satisfaction. “We were like: ‘Sorry, we don’t have time – we’re just rolling around in the grass doing teddy bear rolls with the guitars.’” A couple of other labels did manage to persuade them to meet; the pair took them to the Spyglass pub in Ventnor, on the south coast of the island. No offence to the town, which is the indie centre of the island, but this is a brutal way of saying: “We’re not really fussed whether we meet you or not” – it doesn’t even have a train station. Lovely boozer, though. They ended up meeting Domino in the end, and signed with them in November 2020, but it wasn’t until they played Latitude, one of only a few major festivals to go ahead in 2021, that they realised they were now a legit band. “We turned up, saw Dream Wife about to go on stage, Lucia and the Best Boys, all these really cool people milling about,” says Teasdale. “And we thought: ‘What the hell are we doing here? We’re just little country bumpkins from the Isle of Wight.’ “It was so unexpected that the tent was so rammed. And, even more unexpectedly, we had people actually dancing. And singing – singing the words to Chaise Longue back at us. It was our first time seeing that people had actually listened to it and we’d been in the tiniest little bubble world. It didn’t really compute, initially. It still doesn’t, really.” Teasdale adjusts the set slightly: “I think we come across as a real band now.” Chambers looks at her, as if to say: “If you like, buddy.” “We’ve certainly bonded really well as a band,” Teasdale says. “Yeah,” Chambers finally concedes. There remain a few known-unknowns. How will their first album, due for release in April, be received? What toll will gigging take once it is fully up and running again, not fits and starts of cancellation and rebooking? Teasdale says: “Playing more shows, we’re meeting a lot of people who are in a similar position to us, and we’ve had some really nice conversations.” I thought she meant about mediating life’s beautiful futility through synth-rock, but it is more concerning: “What to eat when you’re on the road that’s not a cold Greggs sausage roll. How to pack your suitcase. Stage fright. Mental health.” Chambers is still based in the Isle of Wight, although only technically, as she is not there very much. Teasdale doesn’t really know where she lives. They give off the strong sense that, ideally, they would go on a world tour just so they don’t have to decide. But there are also some known-knowns: since they first began, people have really, strongly liked their vibe. That self-effacing but stubborn surrealism, the melodic idiosyncrasy: they have taken their friendship and set it to music. Wet Leg’s UK tour begins on 16 January. For more information, go to wetlegband.comThe inner planet Mercury is currently at its greatest eastern elongation, meaning that it is relatively high in the evening sky. This makes it as easy as it is ever going to be to spot the planet. Although the moment of greatest elongation occurred on 7 January, the small rocky planet hasn’t yet dropped in the night sky, so the view is still good on Monday night. The chart shows the view looking south-west from London at 1700GMT on 10 January, but you should start looking 15 minutes earlier, because the longer you delay, the lower the elusive planet sinks towards the horizon. A good way to orient yourself is to find Jupiter first – it is conspicuously bright in the sky at present. Then scan diagonally downwards. Mercury is close to Saturn in the sky, and the three planets will make a more or less straight line. Saturn will be fainter than Mercury, so you may spot Mercury first. From Sydney, Australia look to the west at around 2030AEDT. Mercury will be about seven and a half degrees above the horizon, which is a degree or so higher than it will appear from London. For reference, the full moon is half a degree wide.An updated government app will use barcodes to encourage families to switch to healthier food as part of efforts to tackle Britain’s child obesity crisis. The new feature, announced on Monday as part of the Better Health campaign, will scan selected shopping items and suggest alternatives with less saturated fat, sugar or salt. Families using the NHS Food Scanner app will also be shown a “Good Choice” badge for items which could help improve their diet, the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) said. It follows a record rise in obesity among 10- to 11-year-olds, with surveys suggesting that parents have been giving more unhealthy snacks to their children since the start of the pandemic. Lockdowns, school closures and sports activities being suspended meant many children spent less time doing physical activity than usual in the past year. Increased screen time may have also increased children’s exposure to adverts for unhealthy food and takeaway services, potentially influencing food choices. The latest data suggests one in four children of reception school age are overweight or obese and this rises to four in 10 in Year 6, according to the DHSC. A new survey conducted jointly by the department and Netmums, a UK parenting website, suggests nearly six in 10 parents have given their children more sugary or fatty food since the start of the pandemic. Public health minister, Maggie Throup, said that the “pressure” faced by families throughout the pandemic meant dietary habits had “drastically changed” as a result. “The new year is a good time for making resolutions, not just for ourselves, but for our families. Finding ways to improve their health is one of the best resolutions any of us could make,” she said. Alison Tedstone, chief nutritionist at the DHSC, said advertisements promoting unhealthy food to children were contributing to the problem. “It’s not surprising that parents say they’ve often found it hard to resist pestering from their children for more unhealthy snacks, and that is why the NHS Food Scanner App is a great tool to help families make quick and easy healthier swaps,” Tedstone said. “It’s so important that children reduce the amount of sugary, fatty and salty foods they eat to help them stay healthy and reduce the risk of health problems such as diabetes and tooth decay.” Girls Aloud singer Nadine Coyle, who has backed the campaign alongside dietician Linia Patel, said: “As a busy working mum, I find it hard to say no to my kid’s demands and often give in to snack pressure – even though I know it’s not that good for them. I had no idea some foods were so high in sugar, saturated fat and salt – so it’s great that the app gives you alternatives.”Soaring energy bills rooted in a global gas supply crunch have focused minds on the age-old problem: how can we better store power? Attention has turned to the closure of the Rough gas storage facility in the North Sea in 2017, which left the UK with only enough storage to meet the demand of four to five winter days. But while gas is being phased out, Britain’s growing reliance on renewables, such as offshore wind and solar, does not solve the problem of intermittency – what happens when the wind does not blow or the sun does not shine. The key to securing enough affordable, low-carbon energy is more storage to make the most of the renewable energy available. A storage boom has been forecast over the coming decade as governments race to meet their climate targets. Within the next five years, the International Energy Agency (IEA) expects global power storage capacity to expand by 56% to reach more than 270 GW by 2026, driven by a growing need to create flexible electricity systems which rely more on renewable sources. Well-established lithium-ion batteries are expected to dominate, according to a report by Bloomberg New Energy Finance, but their capacity is measured in hours rather than days. New energy technologies, which can store energy for longer periods, have found renewed favour within the power industry as the winter energy crisis has unfolded. Here are four long-range energy storage options which could help to keep the lights on in the future: ‘Gravity’ storage Hydropower has acted as a form of energy storage in the UK for decades. The principle is simple: electricity is used to pump water upwards into a reservoir when the market has ample power available. When electricity supplies become tight the water can be released at short notice to flow over a generating turbine to create electricity for the grid to use. A new breed of pumped storage could play an even greater role than the giant hydropower plants of the past. Engineers believe they could unlock hundreds of potential sites across the UK, which would be quicker and cheaper to build than traditional hydropower dams. By using a mineral-rich fluid, which has more than two-and-a-half times the density of water, projects could generate the same amount of electricity from slopes which are less than half as high. Typically, pumped hydropower is stored within the range of five to 175 hours, compared with the most-used lithium-ion battery technology which can usually store less than four hours’ worth of electricity, according to the IEA. One report by the Paris-based agency found that India dominates the expansion of pumped hydropower storage thanks to projects using its existing large reservoirs. Another form of “mechanical energy storage” which could play a greater role in the future involves harnessing “gravity energy” to create electricity by using electric winches to hoist 12,000-tonne weights to the top of a disused mine shaft when there is plenty of renewable energy available, then dropping the weights hundreds of metres down vertical shafts to generate electricity when needed. These innovative storage projects are unlikely to replace the UK’s need for batteries, but they could help the country meet its climate targets at a lower cost. Concentrated solar power storage In the heat of the Nevada desert US engineers have already begun pioneering new technology which stores energy generated by renewables as heat. The Crescent Dunes project uses the heat of a vast solar farm, concentrated using mirrors, to heat molten salt to temperatures of up to 560C. The salt is able to maintain this temperature until electricity is needed. Then, the heat is used to run a conventional steam turbine which generates enough electricity to power 75,000 homes long after the sun has set. The IEA expects China to lead the expansion of concentrated solar power storage thanks to a generous subsidy scheme, which is poised to continue until the end of this year. Beyond China, the United Arab Emirates is expected to roll out the second-largest volume of new capacity globally. There are also similar projects emerging across Australia. Concentrated solar power is typically stored for between five to 15 hours, according to the IEA, more than three times the duration of traditional lithium-ion batteries. Unlike batteries, which have a finite number of charge/discharge cycles, the molten salt, or molten silicon, can be used indefinitely and can be recycled when the units reach the end of their 20-year service life. Green hydrogen Demand for hydrogen made from water and renewable energy is expected to boom in the decades ahead as governments plan to replace the fossil fuels used in power plants, factories and heavy transport with the clean-burning, green alternative. But green hydrogen can also be used as a form of energy storage. “When the wind is blowing but the grid is oversupplied with renewable energy you can store energy in a battery for about an hour,” said Dr Graham Cooley, the chief executive of ITM Power, which makes the electrolysers used to produce green hydrogen. “But if you want to store energy for days or even months you need something new.” In the past, the UK’s electricity system operator has been forced to pay renewable energy developers to switch off their wind turbines or solar farms to avoid overloading the grid with green electricity when power supplies outstrip demand. But using sunny weekends and windy nights to run electrolysers and create green hydrogen could help countries make better use of their wind and solar farms. Cooley said ITM Power faces growing demand for its electrolysers, which are built at a factory in Sheffield, in part because the cost of producing green hydrogen has come down radically in line with the falling cost of renewable energy. It helps that more energy companies are interested in avoiding the record market price for fossil fuel gas too, he added. ‘Cryogenic’ batteries Within the coming months one of the world’s biggest liquid air, or “cryogenic”, batteries will begin operating near Manchester in the UK after its developers promised it could help store renewable energy for weeks rather than hours. The project is being developed by Highview Power. It plans to use renewable electricity to chill air to -196C, transforming it into a liquid that could be stored in large metal tanks for weeks. When needed, the liquid can be turned back into gas, and used to turn a turbine and generate enough electricity to power up to 200,000 homes for five hours. The full-scale “cryobattery” will have a capacity of 50MW or 250MWh over a five-hour release time, and follows the success of a 5MW pathfinder project built next to a landfill site in Bury, Greater Manchester, in summer 2018. Highview has plans to build its long-duration batteries in the US and Chile, and earlier this year set out plans to develop seven new liquid-air projects in Spain at a cost of about $1bn (£735m). Its UK project will be the first. • This article was amended on 10 January 2022 to correct a misspelling of Graham Cooley’s surname and to clarify that while solar power is stored in molten salt in the Crescent Dunes project, it can also be stored in molten silicon. It was further amended on 14 January 2022 to make clear that the 270 GW capacity refers to power, not energy, and to clarify details about the storage duration of lithium-ion batteries.Ed Miliband has said it “beggars belief” that the government is opposing a windfall tax on oil and gas companies on the grounds that they are struggling, after Labour proposed a £1.2bn levy on producers to help households and businesses with soaring bills. The shadow secretary for climate change and net zero and former shadow business secretary said there was “no greater proof that this government’s incompetence and weak leadership is costing millions of hard-working families”, as energy producers have been making near-record profits because of soaring wholesale gas prices that are driving up bills. Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, set out her plan over the weekend for a £1.2bn tax on producers to fund a £200-average cut to household bills, plus £600 of targeted support for those most in need, but on Sunday the government dismissed this as a solution. Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary and a former oil industry executive, told LBC radio: “What Labour are putting out just doesn’t add up. A windfall tax on oil and gas companies that are already struggling in the North Sea is never going to cut it.” The government has been holding talks with energy bosses before a decision by Ofgem due in February about whether the price cap on bills needs to rise from April to cover the cost of soaring gas prices. However, ministers currently favour some support targeted at the lowest-income families rather than a VAT cut for all, and now appear to have rejected the idea of a windfall tax. Miliband told the Guardian: “This clear confirmation that the Conservatives oppose the windfall tax tells you exactly whose side they are on – and it’s not the British people struggling with their energy bills. “It beggars belief that a cabinet minister believes that we should prioritise oil and gas companies making huge windfall profits that he says are ‘struggling’, rather than the British people who face the true struggle to pay their energy bills. “It is fair and right to ask these companies to make a one-off extra contribution to help so many people who are facing appalling hardship.” After the proposal for a windfall tax to pay for the VAT cut, Labour made a new call for a £600m government fund to help businesses deal with soaring fuel bills, also funded by the windfall tax. The party will on Tuesday force a vote in parliament on support for businesses hit by energy prices rises, calling for the government to scrap business rates, reduce the debt burden that firms are facing and create the £600m contingency fund. Boris Johnson is under some pressure from his own backbenchers to take action over the issue of energy costs hurting households, but there is a split between the right of the party who want to remove green levies and defenders of the net zero strategy who propose carbon taxes on industry. Chris Skidmore, the Tory MP for Kingswood and a former energy minister, told Channel 4 News: “A windfall tax, whether you call it that or you want to call it a carbon tax – [what] I would rather talk about is how we achieve a carbon tax for the future – is absolutely, I think, the right way to go.” The Conservative MP has launched a “net zero support group” to defend efforts to decarbonise the economy against some of his colleagues who are claiming it costs too much.Lithuania has paid more than $110,000 to Abu Zubaydah, the Guantánamo detainee known as the “forever prisoner”, in compensation for having allowed the CIA to hold him at a secret site outside Vilnius where he was subjected to forms of torture. The €100,000 ($113,500) payment comes more than three years after the European court of human rights ordered the Lithuanian government to pay compensation for violating European laws banning the use of torture. It marks a significant shift in the treatment of Zubaydah, who has been detained by the US without charge for more than 20 years. Zubaydah was captured in Pakistan six months after 9/11. The CIA and lawyers for the Bush administration attempted to justify his torture by claiming he was a very senior figure in al-Qaida. It emerged that he was not a member of the organisation and he has never been charged with involvement in 9/11. For much of the time since his arrest, Zubaydah has been held incommunicado, at the insistence of the CIA as part of its efforts to prevent details of his torture from becoming public. Lawyers for Zubaydah believe it is highly unlikely that Lithuania would have made the compensation payment without approval from Washington. “The situation is a lot less incommunicado when you pay €100,000 to someone and the whole world knows about it,” Mark Denbeaux, one of Zubaydah’s legal team based in the US, told the Guardian. “This move is consistent with the idea that the US is softening its position on the detention of the forever prisoners. The US could clearly have kept Lithuania from handing over this money and the question is, why didn’t they?” News of the Lithuanian payment comes just days before the 20th anniversary of the military prison at Guantánamo, which received its first detainees on 11 January 2002. In recent months there have been other signs of a shifting attitude towards Zubaydah and the torture that was inflicted upon him by CIA agents and contractors. In October, the US supreme court heard arguments in a case in which the US government is seeking to block two CIA contractors from testifying in Poland about torture Zubaydah suffered in 2002 and 2003 at a secret or “black” site in that country. In the course of the hearing, several of the justices, including conservatives, broke a legal taboo by openly using the word “torture”. In Zubaydah’s case against Lithuania, which was led on the European side by his lawyer Helen Duffy, the European court of human rights heard that Zubaydah was held at a CIA black site in that country from February 2005 to March 2006. The site, codenamed Violet, was on the outskirts of Vilnius. The most brutal forms of torture endured by Zubaydah occurred in 2002 when he was held at a CIA black site in Thailand. An entire program of torture, euphemistically referred to by the CIA as “enhanced interrogation techniques”, was devised for the prisoner by two psychologists under contract to the agency. Zubaydah was waterboarded – a type of controlled drowning – at least 83 times in August 2002, as well as being placed in a coffin-sized box for days on end. European judges heard that Zubaydah was unlikely to have suffered from the harshest forms of torture while in Lithuania. But he was subjected to techniques that still amounted to torture, lawyers argued, including sensory and sleep deprivation, solitary confinement, loud noise and harsh light. The money transferred by Lithuania is now in a bank account. Zubaydah is unable to receive the sum given his detention in Guantánamo and because his assets have been frozen by the US treasury. A similar freezing of his assets by the United Nations security council was reversed two years ago, after a petition by his lawyers.A gigantic prehistoric “sea dragon” discovered in the Midlands has been described as one of the greatest finds in the history of British palaeontology. The ichthyosaur, which is about 180m years old with a skeleton measuring about 10 metres in length and a skull weighing about a tonne, is the largest and most complete fossil of its kind ever found in the UK. Joe Davis of the Leicestershire and Rutland Wildlife Trust discovered it during the routine draining of a lagoon island at the Rutland Water reservoir in February 2021. The first ichthyosaurs, which are called sea dragons because they tend to have very large teeth and eyes, were discovered by the fossil hunter and palaeontologist Mary Anning in the early 19th century. Dean Lomax, a palaeontologist who has studied the species, said: “Despite the many ichthyosaur fossils found in Britain, it is remarkable to think that the Rutland ichthyosaur is the largest skeleton ever found in the UK. It is a truly unprecedented discovery and one of the greatest finds in British palaeontological history.” Ichthyosaurs, which were marine reptiles, first appeared about 250m years ago and went extinct 90m years ago. They varied in size from 1 to more than 25 metres in length and resembled dolphins in their general body shape. The remains were dug out by a team of experts from around the UK in August and September. Two incomplete and much smaller ichthyosaurs were found during the construction of Rutland Water in the 1970s, but the latest discovery is the first complete skeleton. Mark Evans of the British Antarctic Survey, who has been studying the Jurassic fossil reptiles of Rutland and Leicestershire for more than 20 years, said that even from the first glimpse of the partially exposed fossil it was clear that it was the largest ichthyosaur discovered in the region. “However, it was only after our exploratory dig that we realised that it was practically complete to the tip of the tail,” he said. “It’s a highly significant discovery both nationally and internationally but also of huge importance to the people of Rutland and the surrounding area.” Nigel Larkin, a specialist palaeontological conservator, said: “It’s not often you are responsible for safely lifting a very important but very fragile fossil weighing that much. It is a responsibility, but I love a challenge. It was a very complex operation to uncover, record, and collect this important specimen safely.” The excavation of the remains will feature on BBC Two’s Digging For Britain on Tuesday at 8pm.When Julian Bird was 60, he was diagnosed with cancer of the bladder. He had a series of operations, “all very unpleasant”, and learned that he “was likely to die pretty soon”. After 34 years as a psychiatrist, in that intense state of mind, he began to daydream about becoming a professional actor. The bleak prognosis held for only a few months, and as he recovered Bird reevaluated his life “and what to do with what was left of it”. At the age of 63, he enrolled at the Royal Central School of Speech and Drama. This month, at 80, he is the lead in the play Freud’s Last Session, at the King’s Head theatre, in north London. “I was brought up in a theatre family,” Bird says. His father, Henry Bird, was an artist who designed sets. His mother, Freda Jackson, was an actor, “a name in the 40s, 50s and 60s”. She was the lead in the play No Room at the Inn, about the abuse of evacuees during the second world war, which was so scandalous that she needed police protection when it transferred to the West End in 1946. “There were always women at the stage door wanting to kill her.” Despite this, Bird “always loved theatre”. Indeed, the Drury Lane stage where his mother performed No Room at the Inn was the venue for his fifth birthday party. He was then a newly returned evacuee himself and recalls “being the centre of attention”. There were “all the kids in the cast”, though many were teenagers playing younger children, which must have felt a little strange. An only child, at 13 he went to boarding school. “There were lonely times,” he says. “Every time I returned, there would be somebody else looking after me, a housekeeper/secretary.” He gave little thought to following his mother into acting. When he was seven or eight, he fell ill; the illness was mysterious, with aches and pains. His mother found a doctor in Harley Street and the consultation proved decisive. The elderly physician “was very empathic and wise. He was interested in me as a person,” Bird says. “He got books down off his shelf and invited me to join him in understanding the problem. And that’s very seductive …” Curiously, Bird has no memory of the diagnosis. “But I left that consultation feeling: ‘I want to be like him. I’m going to be a doctor.’” His parents were delighted. Bird studied natural sciences at Cambridge, before going on to medical school in London. He had scarcely dabbled in Cambridge’s drama scene for fear of profiting from his mother’s renown, but in London he directed and starred in a production of The Doctor’s Dilemma. (His mother, in the audience, was complimentary.) By now Bird had become interested in neurology and psychiatry. The neurologist who supervised him was distinguished but dull, while the consultant psychiatrist was charismatic. So Bird became a psychiatrist. I wonder why he was so susceptible to the charisma of the Harley Street medic and the psychiatry teacher. “I suspect it has something to do with my relationship with my father. He was not an emotionally expressive man. He painted. In his studio. Every day. Seven days a week,” Bird says. “Perhaps I wanted, needed, to have a close relationship with a father figure.” As a psychiatrist, in academia and in practice, Bird studied the patient-doctor relationship and his research included roleplay. He enjoyed this “emotionally expressive” dimension, but it was not until he arrived at drama school in 2004 that he saw the connection between psychiatry and acting. Almost immediately, “there was joy, and a realisation that this was the right place … I was hooked.” At drama school, Bird understood, “I am an actor. I can’t understand the notion of retirement. It doesn’t exist. I’m an actor. That’s what I do.” It is tempting to wonder what his mother, who died in 1990, would have made of his career change. He has worked in TV and theatre for the past 15 years. “I would have loved her involvement and appreciation,” he says. There’s a pause. Recently, he has had “a passing thought. Maybe that freedom was partly possible because they both had gone. I was free of their influence.” On stage, Bird says, “I can feel the audience. This focus of attention is very important, and it is a powerful feeling and it gives me power … I feel most real on stage, and connected.” Tell us: has your life taken a new direction after the age of 60?Couples Therapy 10pm, BBC Two Get the popcorn out and take notes: you’re about to be a fly on the wall in a couple’s therapy session. In this US reality series, Dr Orna Guralnik invites couples into the room for an hour at a time. First up, Annie recalls the time she organised husband Mau’s birthday – and he jumped on a plane to Italy instead. Oo-er … Hollie Richardson Junior Bake Off 5pm, Channel 4 Now for some easy-going teatime fun. Harry Hill welcomes 16 kids into the Bake Off tent to put us all to shame with their spatula skills in the first of a new series. The opening heat sees Ravneet Gill and Paul Hollywood judge two cake-based challenges – including a showstopper that depicts the bakers’ proudest moments. HR Inside Art Special: Coventry City of Culture 7pm, Sky Arts The Midlands gets its time in the limelight tonight, with the focus firmly on Coventry – 2021’s city of culture – in this hour-long special. Described as “the city where movement began”, viewers are taken on a tour of its museums and galleries, while remembering the city’s innovation in the transport industry and the history activism that’s taken place here. HR Food Unwrapped Goes Veggie 8pm, Channel 4 Here’s something for anyone who is currently giving up meat for January to chew on. This collection of the show’s vegetarian features sees Jimmy Doherty putting Beyond Burger’s plant-based patties through a taste test, Kate Quilton investigating the versatile jackfruit, and tips for viewers who want to grow their own vegetables. HR Art on the BBC: Van Gogh – Life and Art 9pm, BBC Four Art historian Kate Bryan delves into the BBC’s archives to understand the television history of one of the world’s most famous artists: Vincent van Gogh. From fine art documentaries to dramas such as Doctor Who, Bryan learns that television has long been drawn to the tortured painter, who chased the sun to Provence’s sunflower fields. Henry Wong Euphoria 10.05pm, Sky Atlantic Season two of Sam Levinson’s parent-shocking teen drama has been a long time coming, but now it is back to pick up the story of 17-year-old Rue Bennett (Zendaya, who won an Emmy for her performance) and her battle with addiction. She was last seen hitting rock bottom, making bad choices and whirling into what looked like a highly stylised music video. So, has she found her way back from her relapse? Also reprising their roles in the breakthrough ensemble cast are Hunter Schafer as Jules Vaughn and Sydney Sweeney as Cassie Howard. Dawson’s Creek it is not, with the promise of an even darker feel this time round (Levinson has said it will be a “brutal” season). Hannah Verdier Live sport FA Cup football: Manchester United v Aston Villa 7.30pm, BBC One. A third-round tie from Old Trafford.It was inevitable, but the speed with which it happened was still surprising. After the four protesters who toppled the statue of Edward Colston then helped to heave it into the harbour were acquitted, Conservative MPs, the rightwing press and the prime minister himself unleashed their volley of rage at the verdict. “Vandals can’t change our history,” postured Boris Johnson on the front page of the Daily Mail. A “green light to ransack the past” said the Sun. “A monumental mistake” punned the Telegraph, weakly. If one were a cynic, one would think that the newspaper stories, the statements and the tweets were all sitting in draft form, waiting to be posted, emailed and published. The responses were so rehearsed, so obtuse and so optimised for a polarising landing, that the issue seemed less about Colston’s statue and more about their rigid vision of Britain, a country that – in their eyes – has done no wrong, that owes no apology and should show no humility. Certainly that seemed to be the motivation of Suella Braverman, the attorney general. For as soon as the media screams died down, she made clear her distaste at the trial’s outcome – predicated, lest we forget, on the decision of a properly convened jury of her fellow citizens – by threatening to refer the matter to the appeal court. There was “confusion”, she said. We needed “to clarify the law for future cases”. Clarity, one might suggest, that would better protect that never-to-be-questioned version of Britain. But that version of Britain, in which figures such as Colston are remote characters from the past who have no bearing on our lives today, is a fiction. The Colston statue topplers, and the Black Lives Matter protesters in general, are the ones trying to drag Britain’s view of itself closer to reality, one in which community relations are still strained as a result of deep inequalities that run, like cracks, from the past to the present. Maintaining fictions is hard work, so an army of propagandists must mobilise to spin, yarn and stitch together the lies that make up this permitted view of British history. One that displays the iconography of slavery and of empire in our public spaces and consciousness. The narrative that frames the Colston statue incident – and indeed all arguments about British history – is spun broadly around the clash of two schools of thought. One, an innocent, stoic, impartial one, not invested in any particular ideological narrative, and another that is aggressive and politically motivated. According to this construct, Colston stood peacefully, undisturbed by campaigns to remove or maintain him for years until some protesters, in a rush of blood, tore him down. In this world of neutral arbiters and wild vandals, we are led to believe that Colston was toppled by people who do not trade in logic, and have no respect for dialogue, or interest in peaceful resolution. The truth is that the protesters were motivated by frustration. All the peaceful avenues were exhausted, because those who kept Colston up were pugnaciously committed to the elevation of a statue of a slave trader, rather than considering what he represents in a modern Britain that is as delusional about the moral integrity of its colonial heroes as it is about the health of its race and ethnic relations. It is a trick that is constantly played by those who view British history as an objective and inoffensive series of facts that must be preserved for the record, rather than a living legacy of supremacy, both racial and national, that many are still invested in, and that still resides not just in our streets and squares but in our politics, our education and our economy. Most crucially when it comes to Colston’s statue, it resides in our government. There is no better example of how quickly history is rewritten to suit the establishment than the aftermath of the Black Lives Matter protests in the summer of 2020. What seemed like a moment of profound change was quickly miscast as the opposite, a marker in the sand for what happens when demands for racial equality are taken too far, when they become violent, militant and vandalistic. In that framing, there can be no place for the reality that Colston’s name was already being expunged from Bristol’s public spaces, a process that was citizen-campaign-led, consensual and consultative. There had been frequent rows dragging in historians, schoolchildren, councillors, the mayor and Bristol’s Society of Merchant Venturers – the guild and body that is accused of creating Bristol’s “cult of Colston”. And yet the council says it never considered removing the statue despite “significant community concerns”. This is what we continually fail to understand about the importance of reappraising our history: friction arises not from “woke vandals” but from a state that clings, despite all entreaty and evidence, to a glorification of a past that reinforces and legitimises all the injustices of the present. If those in the government and the media who are so critical of the toppling of Colston were really interested in forging a state of community cohesion, they would acknowledge the moral sins that built Britain’s wealth and empire – past cruelties that still reverberate across social mobility, life expectancy and job prospects. Instead, they fan the flames of a hysterical moral panic that claims the toppling of Colston was about destroying historical fact, rather than being a victory for that truth they work so hard to deny. We will only move forward when the organs of government, from Downing Street to local councils to education boards, resolve to take people’s demands seriously. Otherwise the state, which has now been unmasked as a partisan mediator through its intransigence in Bristol, loses all legitimacy and therefore control. That really would be, as Conservative MPs describe it, a licence to vandalise. Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnist. She has won an inaugural 2021 Silvers-Dudley prize for literary criticism, arts writing and journalismWithdrawing your film from the Oscars would be career suicide for most directors, but in November Asghar Farhadi appeared to do precisely that. Shortly after Iran’s state-controlled film board put his movie, A Hero, up for the best international feature Oscar, Farhadi released a statement on Instagram saying he was “fed up” with suggestions in Iranian media that he was sympathetic to the country’s hardline government. “If your introduction of my film for the Oscars has led you to the conclusion that I am in your debt,” he wrote, “I am explicitly declaring now that I have no problem with you reversing this decision.” Farhadi, it could be argued, can afford to make such a gesture. He has already won two international feature Oscars – for A Separation in 2012 and The Salesman in 2017 – and many more awards besides (A Hero won the Grand Prix at Cannes last year). Such achievements inevitably convey national hero status. At the same time, he seems to have trodden a careful line when it comes to his country’s oppressive regime. Other Iranian film-makers, such as Jafar Panahi and Mohammad Rasoulof, have paid a heavy price for criticising aspects of Iranian society, from prison sentences and house arrests to travel bans. Farhadi seems to have been spared similar treatment. Hence the accusations that he was “pro- government”. In his statement, Farhadi strongly disagreed: “How can anyone associate me with a government whose extremist media has spared no effort to destroy, marginalise, and stigmatise me?” He wrote of how he has had his passport confiscated and been interrogated at airports, been told not to return to Iran, and had remained silent in the face of the government’s “accusations and name-calling”. Until now. Speaking from Paris through an interpreter, Farhadi is not minded to go into further details. “It’s been a very complicated case,” he says. “I’m not sure which translation you’ve read. For people who are not familiar with my country, it might cause misunderstanding, but Iranian people understood it clearly. It was for domestic purposes only.” There is a certain impatience to Farhadi’s tone. He seems resigned to the fact he must always discuss his status as an Iranian film-maker as much as his actual work. But also, perhaps, there is the knowledge that anything he says could be used against him back home. International recognition is “double-edged”, he says. “It protects you in a way, but it makes [the Iranian authorities] more sensitive. Whatever you say, whatever you do, it’s more under the spotlight.” Ironically, A Hero is a film about the media’s role in building up and tearing down heroes. Its subject is Rahim, a divorced father with a winning smile. On a two-day release from prison, Rahim and his fiancee find a handbag containing gold coins. At first they try to sell them, but then Rahim, played by Amir Jadidi, opts to find the owner of the bag and return it. The story gets out and Rahim is hailed as a hero. A TV crew comes to make a story about him in prison and a local charity holds a fundraiser to help pay off his debt. But then a series of half-truths about the incident becomes a tangled web of deceit in which everyone involved finds themselves trapped. “Really,” says Farhadi, “what was at the heart of the film was the sudden rise and fall of a person. And this is something we observe often in our society these days: people who are put under the spotlight very quickly, and they get out of it just as quickly.” Farhadi’s films have a knack of making ordinary life feel like a suspense thriller. They are so realist, they could be docudramas, yet they are full of tension, surprise and mystery. His breakthrough, About Elly, concerns the unexplained disappearance of a woman from a group holiday. The Salesman hinges on a woman’s sexual assault by an unidentified perpetrator. Likewise, in A Hero, Rahim must seek out the mystery woman who has claimed the missing handbag in order to validate his story (he finds a workaround that lands him in even more trouble). “What I’m really interested in, and what I want to deal with, is ordinary, everyday life,” explains Farhadi. “This, for me, is precious. But I also know the danger of it being boring and full of repetitive detail nobody wants to focus on. So it has to be lifelike, but with an element of suspense that intrigues the audience.” As usual in Farhadi’s work, nothing is black and white in A Hero. There are no unambiguously “good” or “bad” characters. Behind his easy nature, Rahim turns out to be a slippery proposition. “As a film-maker, I don’t judge the characters,” Farhadi says. “It’s not that I think they should not be judged: quite the opposite – it’s an invitation to judge. But I leave it open to the audience. I don’t want to impose my view.” Farhadi acknowledges that his films are less overtly political than some of his counterparts’ work. Rasoulof’s recent There Is No Evil was an indictment of the death penalty and conscription. Rasoulof, who was banned from film-making and sentenced to a year in prison in 2020 (but has so far avoided jail time), had to use guerrilla tactics, using false names and scripts, while shooting in remote rural locations. Farhadi, by contrast, is now a global operator. He has also made films in France (The Past) and Spain (Everybody Knows), starring the likes of Penélope Cruz and Tahar Rahim. In Iran, he explains, it depends what kind of film you are making. “If your subject or your way of telling stories is less directly social or political, then it can be less of a problem. You work with the restrictions as you can. But it also depends on whether you want your films to be screened in Iran or not. That has always been my priority.” Still, he does not have it easy. As well as being criticised for being “pro-government”, he is constantly criticised for being the opposite. “It’s always from the hardliners and their media – I’ve been criticised for giving an ‘unrealistic image’ of the country. And I really don’t agree. In spite of the complex situations I describe in my films, there’s always a very noble image of the people, of the characters, of the relationships. I don’t see what ‘unrealistic image’ they’re talking about.” In public life, Farhadi has been outspoken against Iran’s hardline elements. He was one of several film-makers who accompanied Rasoulof to court to appeal against his prison sentence. And, via Instagram, he has made his views clear to the government about everything from the accidental shooting down of a Ukrainian passenger jet in January 2020 to “the cruel discrimination against women and girls” and “the way the country has allowed coronavirus to slaughter its people”. By the same token, Farhadi has taken a stand against western extremism. He refused to attend the 2017 Academy Awards in protest at the Trump government’s contentious travel ban against seven Muslim-majority countries, including Iran. His acceptance speech was instead read out by Iranian-American engineer Anousheh Ansari. “Dividing the world into the ‘us’ and ‘our enemies’ categories creates fear, a deceitful justification for aggression and war,” he wrote. He could have been speaking about either the US or Iran. “There is a strong resemblance in all kinds of extremism,” he says. “They’re more or less all the same.” Farhadi believes culture can be a weapon against that. Regardless of where his films are set, they address universal human qualities and frailties: they create, he says, empathy between the “us” and “them”. That has always been his mission. Does he feel culture is winning that battle? “I don’t know, but I think there’s an element of time. I think the impact of arts and literature and cinema is a long-term one.” He seems to have survived this particular battle: A Hero remains Iran’s international feature Oscar submission. Unlike Rahim, the film’s protagonist, Farhadi’s story is neither morally ambiguous nor a rapid rise-and-fall. Does he consider himself a hero? “Not at all,” he says. “I’ve always said that I’m nothing but a film-maker. I don’t want to be anything else.” • A Hero is in UK cinemas.Top story: what more could he have done, asks judge Morning everyone. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the top stories today. Novak Djokovic has just won his legal battle to enter Australia and defend his Open tennis title after a judge quashed the government’s decision to cancel the player’s visa when he arrived in the country last week. After a dramatic day of legal argument in the federal circuit court in Melbourne, Judge Anthony Kelly also ordered the government to pay the player’s costs, and for Djokovic to be released from the detention hotel where he has languished since last Wednesday. You can read the latest reaction and how the day unfolded at our live blog. The world No 1 men’s player was denied entry to Australia last week amid confusion over the validity of a Covid vaccine exemption granted by Tennis Australia. After hearing arguments from the player’s lawyers earlier today, Kelly queried “what more” the player could have done to prove his medical exemption given that it was provided by a qualified physician and backed up by an independent Victorian government panel. Kelly also criticised the Australian government for reneging on a deal to give Djokovic more time to defend his visa from cancellation. The judge’s ruling means Djokovic will meet tomorrow’s deadline to enter the tournament he has already won nine times. * * * Cladding call – Michael Gove must spend billions more on fireproofing homes across England, campaigners will say today, as they warn that his £4bn move to replace all Grenfell-style cladding does not address other risks facing leaseholders in tower blocks. People living in unsafe properties have been landed with bills of up to £200,000, and campaigners say residents may still have to stump up to fix defective fire doors, flammable balconies and missing firebreaks. Under Gove’s plan, which aims to force developers to pay the £4bn bill but could require funds to be diverted from existing government budgets, only cladding remediation costs will be covered. Campaigners want a change to the law to protect them from all costs caused by fire safety defects that were not their fault. It comes as 19 people died in a fire in a tower in New York in one of the city’s worst fire disasters in recent times. * * * Vaccine push – The UK government is urging all pregnant women to get vaccinated with their first, second or third shots as it highlights the Covid-19 risks to mothers and babies. One study showed that 96.3% of pregnant women admitted to hospital with symptoms between May and October were unvaccinated. The education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, called for the UK to show the rest of the world how to move from pandemic to endemic Covid, and suggested it would be helpful to cut the isolation period to five days to ease workforce shortages. But there are still deep divisions in the scientific community about what “living with Covid” could entail. * * * Power play – Ed Miliband says it “beggars belief” that the government is opposing a windfall tax on oil and gas companies on the grounds that they are struggling, after Labour proposed a £1.2bn levy on producers to help households and businesses with soaring bills. As the political battle builds around cost-of-living issues, the shadow climate secretary said ministers’ rejection of the idea showed they were “weak and incompetent”. With more dependency on renewable power, the UK will need more storage solutions – here are four new technologies that could help pave the way. * * * Dog day – The Power of the Dog and Succession were the big winners at the Golden Globes, which went ahead in Los Angeles overnight with no stars or audience after years of controversy over diversity led to a boycott by celebrities. The acclaimed Netflix drama The Power of the Dog was named best picture in the drama category, while Jane Campion became the third woman to win best director. Will Smith was named best actor in a drama for King Richard, while Nicole Kidman won best actress in a drama for Being the Ricardos. Steven Spielberg’s remake of West Side Story dominated the musical/comedy categories, while on the television side, HBO’s Succession won best drama, best actor for Jeremy Strong and best supporting actress for Sarah Snook. * * * Here be dragons – A gigantic prehistoric “sea dragon” discovered in the Midlands has been described as one of the Britain’s greatest ever fossil finds. The ichthyosaur, which is about 180m years old and around 10 metres long, is the largest and most complete fossil of its kind ever found in the UK. The skeleton was found during a routine draining of a lagoon island at the Rutland Water reservoir in February 2021. Today in Focus podcast Damien Gayle talks about what the case of the Colston Four means for future protests and one of the defendants, Sage Willoughby, describes the jubilant moment the verdict arrived. Lunchtime read: Wet Leg – ‘We’re country bumpkins’ After breakthrough singles such as Chaise Longue and Too Late Now, Wet Leg are set to be one of 2022’s hottest new bands. Zoe Williams talks to Rhian Teasdale and Hester Chambers about their feelgood anthems, their musical influences and turning down record labels to rollerskate. Sport Joe Root hailed a “small step forward” for his injury-hit England team after they clung on for a heart-stopping draw in Sydney, nine wickets down, and avoided the ignominy of an Ashes whitewash in Australia. Mikel Arteta lamented his side’s lack of “purpose and determination” after Arsenal were sent tumbling out of the FA Cup by an impressive Nottingham Forest. Liverpool beat Shrewsbury 4-1, with Kaide Gordon’s equaliser followed by two for Fabinho sandwiching Roberto Firmino’s effort, while a first-half Manuel Lanzini strike and an injury-time finish from Jarrod Bowen gave West Ham a 2-0 win over Leeds United. The Hammers will play Kidderminster next after the fourth-round draw was made. Arsenal’s manager, Jonas Eidevall, conceded that the shock 2-0 defeat of the Women’s Super League leaders at Birmingham City was “100% my responsibility”. Hosts Cameroon beat Burkina Faso in the opening match of the first Africa Cup of Nations to be held there in 50 years. Wasps beat the Premiership leaders Leicester 16-13, with fly-half Jimmy Gopperth kicking the hosts to victory and denying Leicester a record-equalling 16th-straight win. Cameron Smith overcame world No 1 Jon Rahm in a final-round duel at the Tournament of Champions in Hawaii to win the opening US PGA Tour event of the year in record fashion. Business British manufacturers say Brexit will add to soaring costs thanks to extra customs delays and red tape from the UK’s departure from the EU. Make UK said a survey of 228 firms said Brexit had moderately or significantly hampered their business. The pound is on $1.359 and €1.197, while the FTSE100 looks like starting the week flat. The papers The Mail shows the direction of travel in the Tory press with a headline saying “Save us from cost of living crisis, Boris”, and the Express has “PM urged: act now on cost of living squeeze”. It’s a different story in the Mirror, which says the government’s levelling up plan is “Failing on every level”. The Guardian leads with “Gove’s £4bn cladding plan ‘far too little to end fire safety crisis’”. Covid occupies several other titles, with the Times reporting “We’ll avoid Covid crisis, say upbeat NHS chiefs” and the Telegraph leading on “Sunak backs call for 5 day isolation”. The i claims “PM expected to announce ‘living with Covid’ plan by March”, while Metro has “Going, going, Cron”. The Scotsman report “Pupils face months of uncertainty over exams” and the Yorkshire Post warns “‘15 years of rail chaos for North’”. The FT’s splash is “Nato stands ready for conflict in Europe, alliance chief warns Russia”. The Sun’s lead is “Bake orf” about the competition to make a pudding for the Queen’s platinum year. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend.Novak Djokovic will be immediately released from immigration detention in Australia, after the federal circuit court ordered a decision to cancel his visa be quashed. But the Australian government’s counsel, Christopher Tran, has revealed the immigration minister will consider exercising a personal power to cancel Djokovic’s visa meaning he is not guaranteed to stay and compete in the Australian Open. The decision now under consideration to cancel Djokovic’s visa anew would result in him being excluded from Australia for three years – significantly upping the stakes in a bizarre border row that threatens Djokovic’s quest to win the most grand slam singles titles of all time. After a lengthy adjournment on Monday the judge Anthony Kelly read a consent minute agreed between the world No 1 male tennis player and the home affairs minister, Karen Andrews. Djokovic, after being temporarily released from immigration detention earlier on Monday to attend the remote hearing, was present off-screen as Kelly ordered the visa cancellation decision be quashed and costs awarded in his favour. After the decision is quashed, Djokovic must be released from detention within 30 minutes with his passport and personal effects be returned to him. Kelly said it was “unreasonable” for Australian Border Force officials to interview Djokovic on Thursday morning and cancel his visa in circumstances where they had agreed to give him until 8.30am to speak to officials and respond to the proposed visa cancellation. Court documents show Djokovic’s reason for seeking a medical exemption from Australia’s vaccination requirements was that he contracted Covid in mid-December. This was accepted by Tennis Australia and the Victorian state governments medical panels which granted him the exemption on 30 December, but border force decided Djokovic had not satisfied entry requirements. Tran informed the court that the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, would consider exercising a personal power to cancel Djokovic’s visa. Kelly questioned if such a power was exercised whether Djokovic would be removed from Australia and unable to return for three years, which Tran confirmed. “The stakes have now risen rather than receded,” the judge said. “I cannot purport to encroach on the valid exercise of a minister of executive power.” The power states that the minister would have to be satisfied “a ground exists to cancel the visa”, in this case a threat to public health because Djokovic is unvaccinated; that Djokovic can’t dissuade him of this; and that it is “in the public interest to cancel the visa”. Immigration law professor, Mary Crock, told Guardian Australia the Migration Act gives the minister “god-like powers” to cancel visas and if “they really decide to … the power is there”. “Everything that has gone before can be disregarded – it is set up precisely for this situation, to come in and cancel a visa anyway. “The politics behind this is enormous … If the visa is cancelled under this provision – you’re excluded for three years … Australia would be at risk of losing the Australian Open.” Crock said such a cancellation is “not common” and would “definitely end up in court again” – this time to answer the substantive question of whether an unvaccinated person poses a risk, and not just procedural questions. Kelly noted the personal cancellation could be appealed and warned he expected to be “fully informed in advance” if such a decision was taken. Earlier, Kelly queried “what more” Djokovic could have done to prove his medical exemption and criticised the Australian government for reneging on a deal to give him more time to defend his visa from cancellation. In a transcript of Djokovic’s interview with border officials, released after the hearing, the tennis star complained he had been put in a “very awkward position” by demands to substantiate the exemption. “So you’re giving me legally 20 minutes to try to provide additional information that I don’t have? At 4 o clock in the morning?” A spokesman for Hawke told Guardian Australia following the federal circuit court ruling on a procedural ground, “it remains within [his] discretion to consider cancelling Mr Djokovic’s visa under his personal power of cancellation”. “The minister is currently considering the matter and the process remains ongoing.”Q My partner and I own a residential property that we bought in June 2019 at a cost of £217,995. I paid £8,399 in stamp duty which was at the higher rate as I owned (and still own) a buy-to-let property. We have are interested in moving to a new-build property that is priced at £560,000 but it won’t be ready until February 2023 at the earliest. We want to avoid chain-related issues as best as we can, therefore our thinking is to sell our current residential property and move in to rented accommodation. And then, when the new-build property is available for us to reserve, we can do so knowing that we are not part of a long chain which could fall through at any time. My question is – what rate of stamp duty will apply here? Is it the higher rate or would it be the standard rate? I will still own the buy-to-let property at the time of the completion on the new-build property but my understanding is that because I am replacing my main residence (ie we sold our current residential property and replaced it with another residential property), then the standard rate applies. Or, will we pay the higher rate on the day of completion but be eligible for a refund of the higher-rate part of the bill because I sold my previous residential property within three years? VP A Your understanding is mostly correct. Even though you have a buy-to-let property, because you are selling your “main residence” – to use the jargon – and replacing it with another main residence, the standard rate of stamp duty land tax (SDLT). So there would be no need to apply for a refund. The higher rate would apply if you still had your current property on the day of buying the new one. But if you managed to sell your old property within three years of buying your new home, you would be eligible to apply for a refund of the higher-rate part of your SDLT bill. If you don’t manage to sell your old home within the three-year time frame, you have to be able to prove exceptional circumstances. In the words of the government guidance on SDLT, the exceptional circumstances “may be, but are not limited to: the impact of government-imposed restrictions preventing the sale; an action taken by a public authority preventing the sale”.Senator Bernie Sanders has called on Democrats to make “a major course correction” that focuses on fighting for America’s working class and standing up to “powerful corporate interests” because the Democrats’ legislative agenda is stalled and their party faces tough prospects in this November’s elections. The White House is likely to see his comments as a shot across the bow by the left wing of a party increasingly frustrated at how centrist Democrats have managed to scupper or delay huge chunks of Biden’s domestic policy plans. In an interview with the Guardian, Sanders called on Joe Biden and the Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer, to push to hold votes on individual bills that would be a boon to working families, citing extending the child tax credit, cutting prescription drug prices and raising the federal hourly minimum wage to $15. Such votes would be good policy and good politics, the Vermont senator insisted, saying they would show the Democrats battling for the working class while highlighting Republican opposition to hugely popular policies. “It is no great secret that the Republican party is winning more and more support from working people,” Sanders said. “It’s not because the Republican party has anything to say to them. It’s because in too many ways the Democratic party has turned its back on the working class.” Sanders, who ran for the party’s nomination in both 2016 and 2020, losing out in fierce contests to Hillary Clinton and then Biden, is a popular figure on the left of the party. The democratic socialist from Vermont remains influential and has been supportive of Biden during his first year as the party tries to cope with the twin threats of the pandemic and a resurgent and increasingly extremist Republican party. But his comments appear to reflect a growing discontent and concern with the Biden administration’s direction. “I think it’s absolutely important that we do a major course correction,” Sanders continued. “It’s important that we have the guts to take on the very powerful corporate interests that have an unbelievably powerful hold on the economy of this country.” The individual bills that Sanders favors might not attract the 60 votes needed to overcome a Republican filibuster, and a defeat on them could embarrass the Democrats. But Sanders, chairman of the Senate budget committee and one of the nation’s most prominent progressive voices, said, “People can understand that you sometimes don’t have the votes. But they can’t understand why we haven’t brought up important legislation that 70 or 80% of the American people support.” Sanders spoke to the Guardian on 6 January, the same day he issued a statement that the best way to safeguard our democracy is not just to enact legislation that protects voting rights, but to address the concerns of “the vast majority of Americans” for whom “there is a disconnect between the realities of their lives and what goes on in Washington”. He said millions of Americans were concerned with such “painful realities” as “low wages, dead-end jobs, debt, homelessness, lack of healthcare”. In that statement, he said, many working-class Americans have grown disaffected with the political system because “nothing changes” for them “or, if it does, it’s usually for the worse”. In the interview, Sanders repeatedly said that Democrats need to demonstrate vigorously and visibly that they’re fighting to improve the lives of working-class Americans. “The truth of the matter is people are going to work, and half of them are living paycheck to paycheck,” Sanders said. “People are struggling with healthcare, with prescription drugs. Young families can’t afford childcare. Older workers are worried to death about retirement.” Sanders has long been troubled by America’s increasing wealth and income inequality, but he made clear that he thinks it is time for Democrats to take on the ultra-wealthy and powerful corporations – a move he said vast numbers of Americans would support. “They want the wealthy to start paying their fair share of taxes,” he said. “They think it’s absurd that Jeff Bezos and Elon Musk don’t pay a nickel in federal taxes.” He praised Biden for pushing for improved childcare and extending the child tax credit. But he said it would also be good to “show working people that you are willing to step up and take on the greed of the ruling class in America right now.” He pointed repeatedly to the high prices for prescription drugs as an example of “corporate greed”. “There is no issue that people care more about than that we pay the highest prices for prescription drugs in the world,’’ he said, adding that the pharmaceutical industry has 1,500 lobbyists in Washington who “tried everything to make sure we don’t lower the cost of pharmaceuticals”. The senator said: “I think the Democrats are going to have to clear the air and say to the drug companies – and say it loudly – we’re talking about the needs of the working class – and use the expression ‘working class’. The Democrats have to make clear that they’re on the side of the working class and ready to take on the wealthy and powerful. That is not only the right thing to do, but I think it will be the politically right thing to do.” Last Wednesday evening, Sanders did a nationwide live stream in which he talked with the leaders of three long strikes: Warrior Met Coal in Alabama, Special Metals in West Virginia and the Rich Product Corporation’s Jon Donaire Desserts subsidiary in southern California. Noting that hedge funds or billionaires own large stakes in all three companies, he railed against those companies for offering modest raises or demanding that workers pay far more for health coverage even though the owners’ wealth has soared during the pandemic thanks to the booming stock market. “These entities, where the people on top have done phenomenally well, are squeezing their workers and lowering the standard of living for workers who are striking,” Sanders said. “It’s unacceptable.” In December, Sanders went to Battle Creek, Michigan, to support 1,400 Kellogg’s workers who were on strike at cereal factories in that city as well as in Memphis, Tennessee; Omaha, Nebraska; and Lancaster, Pennsylvania. In the interview, Sanders said, “I think the Democratic party has to address the long-simmering debate, which is, Which side are you on? Are we prepared to stand with working families and take on powerful corporate interests?” Sanders voiced frustration with the lack of progress on Biden’s Build Back Better legislation, which the Democrats sought to enact through budget reconciliation, a process that requires only a simple majority to pass. That effort was slowed by lengthy negotiations with the centrist senators Joe Manchin of West Virginia and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona – and then blocked when Manchin said he opposed the $2tn package, sparking leftwing fury and deep frustration in the White House. “We have tried a strategy over the last several months, which has been mostly backdoor negotiations with a handful of senators,” Sanders said. “It hasn’t succeeded on Build Back Better or on voting rights. It has demoralized millions of Americans.” He called for reviving a robust version of Build Back Better and also called for holding votes on individual parts of that legislation that would help working-class Americans. “We have to bring these things to the floor,” Sanders said. “The vast majority of people in the [Democratic] caucus are willing to fight for good policy.” Sanders added: “If I were Senator Sinema and a vote came up to lower the outrageously high cost of prescription drugs, I’d think twice if I want to get re-elected in Arizona to vote against that. If I were Mr Manchin and I know that tens of thousands of struggling families in West Virginia benefited from the expansion of the child tax credit, I’d think long and hard before I voted against it.” Sanders also called for legislation on another issue he has championed: having Medicare provide dental, vision and hearing benefits. “All these issues, they are just not Bernie Sanders standing up and saying this would be a great thing,” he said. “They are issues that are enormously popular, and on every one of them, the Republicans are in opposition. But a lot of people don’t know that because the Republicans haven’t been forced to vote on them.”The first song I remember hearing My Bonnie Lies Over the Ocean, from a multi-coloured vinyl kids’ album. I liked it so much, I dressed up like the kid in the John Lewis advert and danced around the sunroom to the song in a bedspread and headdress to entertain my mother’s knit and natter group, but they just looked puzzled. The song I inexplicably know every lyric to I grew up in Kettering. We didn’t have culture. The nearest we got was Andrew Lloyd Webber. I went to see Jesus Christ Superstar, got the album, then the sheet music. So I probably know every word. The first single I bought Emma by Hot Chocolate, from Woolworths. I liked the lyrics: “I’m gonna write your name high on that silver screen.” The song that’s my karaoke go-to I avoid karaoke at all costs. The last time I did it was at theological college. We pulled in at a pub in a post-industrial town in West Yorkshire, but they didn’t want Christmas carols, so I ended up singing Olivia Newton-John’s part from You’re the One That I Want. A fellow ordain from Liverpool called Degsy was John Travolta. The song I can no longer listen to This Charming Man. Much as I like the song, Morrissey has ceased to be charming for me. The best song to play at a party I really like Making Plans for Nigel by XTC. It would probably get me to go home sooner, which I’m always looking for at a party. The song I last streamed A Hymn for St Cecilia by Herbert Howells. On St Cecilia’s day – the patron saint of music – last year, I used the song in morning prayer. It’s such a beautiful setting, I’ve played it five times since. The song I secretly like, but tell everyone I hate I would never admit to liking Phil Collins. No Jacket Required would be the soundtrack of hell, I think. But secretly I like Phil Collins, and secretly I really liked Against All Odds (Take a Look at Me Now). The best song to have sex to Well, it’s been a while. So I’ll say Soul II Soul’s Back to Life (However Do You Want Me). The song I wish I had written Don’t Leave Me This Way by the Communards. We sold an awful lot of records of it, but we didn’t write it. If we had, I’d have a much bigger pension. The song I want played at my funeral All 15 hours of all four of Wagner’s Der Ring des Nibelungen operas. The rerelease of Communards by the Communards is out now.Start now Yes, you can file without penalty until 28 February this year, but leaving it until the last minute is fraught with problems. If you are not registered with HMRC to complete your tax return online, you will need an activation code, which the website says will take up to 10 days to arrive. Even if that is in hand, you need to give yourself time to track down the right facts and figures, and to check that everything is correct. “If you do end up doing it at the last minute you are more likely to make mistakes or miss out vital information,” says Kevin Sefton, the chief executive of the tax app untied. “Plus, if you need to get in touch with HMRC for any reason, it is more difficult the nearer the deadline you are.” Make a list of your income streams … Sefton advises writing a list of where your money comes from: “This could be money you earn through an employer, through self-employment, rental income, bank or building society interest or any recent dividend payments.” The online form will prompt you to remember a lot of this but it’s worth going through your bank statements to see where money has come in from during the tax year in question. Pull together annual statements for savings and current accounts, and any dividend statements. Terrible savings rates mean that you might not have to pay any tax on that income: if you otherwise earn less than £12,570 you can earn up to £5,000 in interest without being taxed. Above that, there are allowances for those earning less than £17,570, and a personal savings allowance, too. The personal savings allowance means basic rate taxpayers get their first £1,000 of interest tax-free, while higher-rate payers get their first £500 untaxed. … And any outgoings You might be able to offset some of your outgoings against earnings. If you have made a capital gain through selling shares or an investment property, you can use losses from the same or a previous tax year to reduce it – you will need to register both on your form. For the self-employed, there are business expenses that can be claimed for including the cost of equipment and clothing. “Small business owners and the self-employed are often hesitant about claiming their full expenses, says Lee Murphy, the managing director of the Accountancy Partnership. “But this can mean paying more tax than you should.” If you are an employee but have been forced to work from home because of the pandemic, you can make a claim for some of the associated expenses. For the 2021-22 tax year you can make an immediate claim for relief on £6 a week expenses online but if you did not do that for 2020-21 you do it in the employment section of the form. Gather the information If you have filed online before, a lot of the data will be saved in your account, including your unique taxpayer reference and national insurance number. If you are using the service for the first time you will need to dig out these details before you start. The online service gives you a list of the paperwork you might need to complete your form – this includes your P60 from your employer, if that applies, a P45 if you have left employment in the last year or a P11D or P9D, which shows any benefits and expenses you have been given through work. You will also need to find your tax code – this should have been sent to you by HMRC. Remember to declare Covid schemes The 2020-21 tax return will be the one in which you need to declare any help you received during the first year of the pandemic. HMRC says that more than 2.7 million people claimed at least one self-employment income support scheme payment before 5 April 2021 and these need to be declared before the deadline. The online service asks about Covid support and provides a section for you to fill in. Include charitable giving Higher-rate taxpayers who have given money to charity out of taxed income may be able to reduce their bill by claiming gift aid. You will need to have claimed gift aid when you made the donation, which would have boosted the charity’s coffers by 25p for every £1. On your form you claim the difference between basic and higher-rate tax. If you made a payment of £100 and the charity claimed 20%, you can claim the extra 20% of the total – £25. Regular monthly donations count, as long as you have signed up for gift aid, so include them. It’s possible you have forgotten how generous you were more than a year ago, so take a look back through emails – maybe search for the word donation or for the names of sites such as JustGiving, which you may have made a payment to. You can claim relief on donations made this tax year (you will need to remember not to claim them again). Check your partner’s earnings if you claim child benefit If you or your partner claims child benefit then HMRC will be interested in both partners’ earnings. If one partner earns more than £50,000 it will want some of the benefit paid back – the charge is tapered so that by the time one person earns £60,000 the whole lot must be repaid. The form asks if either of you claimed the benefit, and if your income is higher or lower than your partner’s. It makes no difference whether you are married or not. Get help There are lots of guides on HMRC’s website and elsewhere online, so if you are unsure how to fill in a particular part of the form you should be able to find advice. It’s pretty unlikely you will find someone to take on your tax return this year, but if your financial affairs are complicated, it might be worth getting in a professional for next time – if you are self-employed you can even claim for the cost of employing your accountant. Don’t fall for rebate scams Once you have filed you can relax – but keep your wits about you. A common scam features a text or email telling people they are owed a tax rebate, and with the subject on your mind this could be the easiest time of year to fall for it. Ignore any messages asking you to give details to get your money back.When Dieynaba Sidibé discovered graffiti, it was love at first sight. She was 17 and had already begun experimenting with painting and drawing. “It was on TV. I was sitting in my living room and I saw people doing big walls and I thought, ‘This is what I need’,” the Senegalese artist says, one hoop earring shaking as she laughs. “I don’t like small things. I was doing big canvases, and I said to myself: ‘A wall is a bigger surface for expression’.” Her parents wanted her to focus on her studies, but Sidibé, who adopted the name Zeinixx, sought out Senegal’s budding graffiti community, finding her way to the Africulturban cultural association – a nonprofit in Dakar’s Pikine suburb that promotes urban culture through festivals and skills training. There, she persuaded one of the country’s pioneering artists, Oumar Diop, AKA Afia Grafixx, to mentor her. “I already had my basic drawing skills because I used to draw Mickey Mouse, McDonald’s logos, and things like that, and I drew on the walls of my room,” Zeinixx, 31, says. “Grafixx showed me what graffiti was – how to write, how to do lettering – and I started to get interested in hip-hop culture. Now, here I am, 14 years later.” Zeinixx is Senegal’s first female professional graffiti artist and a core member of its male-dominated hip-hop scene. She is also a slam poet, singer, and entrepreneur. In August, she launched Zeinixx Entertainment, organising visual arts workshops for young people. “My refrain is to tell young people: ‘Don’t let others choose for you what you would like to do tomorrow’,” she says from the Africulturban centre, where she runs communications and is preparing for her next project at a girls’ high school in Dakar. “For me, it’s essential to be able to make your own decisions,” she says. Senegal is in many ways a conservative country, but also has a long history of art, music and poetry. Traditionally in this part of west Africa, the artistic caste of griots were responsible for storytelling through music, spoken word, and dance. Senegal’s first president, Léopold Sédar Senghor, was a poet. And last year, a Senegalese writer, Mohamed Mbougar Sarr, won the prestigious Goncourt literary prize. “All this is the common point that unites us, that brings us all together,” says Zeinixx, who colleagues refer to as the “first lady” of graffiti. “It’s this need to express ourselves, this need to share things and to do beautiful things, whether it’s audiovisual or something physical like dance, or something else.” Hip-hop took root in Senegal in the 1980s with some American influence. But it has maintained its own distinctive flavour. “It’s a culture that has a lot of virtues and principles, like peace, love, and harmony,” Zeinixx says. “Here in Senegal you’ll find [the traditional Wolof and Pulaar oral poetry] tassou, kebetu, and pekan – these genres are not hip-hop but they have similarities.” Graffiti, one of the four main elements of hip-hop culture, is more accepted in Senegal than in some other countries. “In the United States, for example, there is a special brigade that tracks down graffiti artists. We’re not like that,” she says. “Here, it’s a country where you do graffiti and a policeman stops to say ‘Respect man, that’s nice!’ […] So I think we found a way to make it our thing, our microphone, to get messages out.” Senegalese graffiti is typically socially conscious messaging, Zeinixx says. “You speak directly to the people with messages like, ‘Stop throwing rubbish in the streets,’ or something like ‘thiono dou reer’ [hard work always pays off],” she says. “They’re actually messages of hope.” She and her fellow graffiti artists once came across a dilapidated wall, covered in rubbish and urine, in Dakar’s Colobane neighbourhood. They cleaned it up and covered it with the message: “Be the protector of your environment.” “For a long time, the wall remained clean,” she says. Zeinixx’s messages are often for and about women. Last month, she participated in a campaign as part of the annual UN initiative 16 Days of Activism against Gender-Based Violence. At her first workshop, Graff’All, in October and November, six of the 14 participants were women. “It was important that they could see me in the room very, very often, and it was important that they could hear from me,” she says. “We are still in a very masculine environment … and the rare women we find in this environment, most of the time, they don’t really assert themselves.” What she is doing is huge, says Fatou Warkha Sambe, a prominent Senegalese feminist and journalist. “We need women everywhere, in every domain. And she’s a pioneer, so I admire her.” Another recent workshop, Taaru Mbedd (beauty in the street), paired 15 young artists with mentors for four days of discussions before they painted the walls of the French cultural organisation the Institut Français du Sénégal à Dakar. Inspired by the theme djoko, which means connection or communication in Wolof, their work will be exhibited there until April. Zeinixx asked the trainee artists to bring their families to the exhibition’s opening. In her speech, she pointed to her mother in the audience and said, “If what we are doing is a bad thing, my mother would not be here.” She told them that, as Senegal’s first woman graffiti artist, she has travelled to Australia, Belgium, France, Switzerland and the US. “I’ve represented Senegal all over the world, and it’s graffiti that got me there,” she said. Afterwards, she says, several parents called to thank her for reassuring them. “Lately, the activities she has been leading, the workshops – we see young girls interested in graffiti because she has started to really influence girls,” says Babacar Niang, AKA Matador, a graffiti artist, dancer, rapper, and early member of Senegal’s hip-hop community, who founded Africulturban. “It’s great, because it’s not a man’s domain: if you have it in you, you should be able to do it. Her project must continue because the girls need these spaces to express themselves, to blossom,” he says. Niang has known Zeinixx since she was a teenager and says she always had talent. “In the beginning, we had to insist that she focus on her studies, but once she had finished school and we couldn’t ask her not to come, she began to integrate more with us,” he says. “Graffiti wasn’t very developed in Senegal at the time, and then to have a girl who wanted to do it, it was huge.” Zeinixx has a straightforward message for young women. “It’s to tell the girls to be focused on what they want to do, what they want to become … to set goals that they will achieve,” she says. “Don’t ask, ‘Can I do it?’ When in your head you say, ‘I’m going to do it,’ normally you can.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Whether you have a newborn or know someone who does, a good baby monitor can be both freeing and reassuring, helping keep an eye on the little ones as they rest. But with so many to choose from with varying brands, capabilities and prices, it can be hard to know which work best in practice. So we put nine of the best baby cameras to the test across three different categories for travel or home. Here are the ones that delivered. Best wifi-free camera for travel Babysense V43 split-screen monitor Price: £139.99 With a sturdy parent unit and two cameras for split-screen capabilities, the Babysense V43 performs impressively pretty much across the board. The parent unit is user-friendly with responsive buttons and a logical, well-labelled menu. The built-in lullabies are a little old-fashioned and tinny, and while it displays room temperature it does not show the time. The Babysense is wifi-free, making it safe from remote hackers. Its 300-metre wireless range means the parent unit, which can be used on battery or mains, can be taken outside ready for warmer months. Notably, none of these features waned or stalled when two cameras were connected during testing. Settings for each camera can be tailored individually, and switching between camera feeds is almost instantaneous. Up to four cameras can be used with one parent unit with additional purchases. The battery lasts about 10 hours in eco-mode, which pauses sound and video on the parent unit if the camera detects no sound for 30 seconds. A spare or replacement battery costs £5.99. The base of each camera has a pleasant orange night light, while the lens pans, swivels 360 degrees and zooms quickly and smoothly. The motor, while not silent, did not disturb a sleeping baby. Panning is controlled via the parent unit, meaning there is no need to fiddle with camera angles once initial setup is complete. The cameras can be wall-mounted using the screws and wall plugs included, but easily lifted away for travel purposes. Many monitors designed with travel and flexibility in mind sacrifice screen size, but that is not the case here. The 5in screen has good picture quality, which is extra clear when close up to faces or objects. There is no delay in movement or audio on the unit, although two-way talk mode sounds somewhat walkie-talkie-esque. There’s no need to worry about software updates as there is no app, which also makes the Babysense a smart option for those looking to avoid checking their phones during the night too. Verdict: A comprehensive package that offers genuine flexibility, with smooth panning, speedy connection and an impressive range without the need for wifi. Runner-up: VTECH VM3254 Price: £50 The VTECH VM3254 offers a compact, wifi-free package, making it suitable for travel, and the picture quality is good, particularly close up. The talk function, however, is far too quiet and the button layout on the parent unit isn’t particularly easy to navigate. Our runner-up, the VTech VM3254 is still an excellent option for the price, but note the battery cannot be replaced and it is not repairable. Best wifi camera for home Kodak Cherish C525 Price: £159.99 This baby monitor may not be made by the Kodak of old, but at least it lives up to picture quality of the brand name. Via either phone app or parent unit with 5in screen, the Cherish C525 displays not just the baby’s features or silhouette, but even subtle facial expressions during the day with lifelike colour, which cannot be said for competitors. Night mode is also excellent, while movement and audio come through with minimal delay and the two-way-talk sound is crisp. Not only does the camera zoom and swivel 360 degrees at an almost imperceptible volume, the parent unit can handle split-screen viewing with up to five paired cameras with additional purchases. There is a fair selection of pleasant-enough lullabies, white noise and heartbeat sounds, plus room temperature monitoring. Special milestones and events can be captured and stored either on an SD card or in the cloud. The Kodak smart home app for Android or iPhone is easy to navigate and intuitive but the parent unit is less so. While the keyboard can be backlit, which is handy for night-time check-ins, its icons are not labelled and the buttons are fiddly, so you need to learn how to navigate it efficiently. Despite this drawback, the parent unit, antennae and handy flip-stand are sturdy, and the device is neither fragile nor too heavy. It has two factor authentication for extra security when accessing the app and requests authentication if you attempt to log in from a different location than usual. Alternatively, the camera and parent unit – though not the app – can be used without an internet connection. Out of the house, both the camera and parent unit can run on battery power for a few hours. The units are generally repairable and replacement batteries are widely available too. Kodak will support apps for the Cherish for a minimum of three years after the model is discontinued. Verdict: Outstanding picture quality sets this monitor above the rest, while most additional features are well executed. Runner-up: Motorola VM65X Connect video baby monitor Price: £249.99 With stylish rose gold detailing on the parent unit, a sleek camera and a sturdy over-cot stand, the Motorola is an attractive package. However, it is more expensive, the picture quality is less sharp, the colours are not as true and there is a slight crackle to the voice when speaking to the baby. The battery can’t be replaced either. The best premium system Nanit Pro Price: £299 The Nanit Pro’s 1080p HD camera, app and breathing band is a comprehensive and well-executed baby monitoring system for parents who wish to cover every possible base. There is no parent unit, but the app is efficient and streamlined making checking in on the baby easy. The camera’s stream goes live in the app within 3 seconds with little in the way of delay, and switches between day and night mode automatically. The camera has a good zoom and field of view over the cot but does not swivel. That means there is no disruptive motor to worry about, and as it will be either attached to a wall or floor stand (£80 additional purchase) it won’t get knocked over by rambunctious pets or other children. As for security, Nanit encrypts your data, protects accounts with two-step verification and has various settings for controlling when and who can see the feed from the camera. The app shows room temperature and humidity, while five buttons allow users to quickly snap a photo, play music, white noise, birds or wave sounds, listen to or talk to the baby and switch on a nightlight. The nightlight is particularly good. It shines upwards with adjustable brightness so you can see the cot and immediate surroundings without disturbing the baby or others in the room. The Nanit comes with a year of basic “Insights” including special milestones and memory videos, sleep tracking and quality analysis, and breathing monitoring using a soft, electronic-free band wrapped around the baby’s torso, which sounds an alarm if an issue arises. Insights are only stored for two days, which costs £5 a month after the first year or £10 a month for 30-day storage. One breathing band for babies up to 15kgs is included, and swaddles or pyjamas for older children are available. The camera is repairable and the app is available on a wide range of Android, iOS and iPadOS devices. Verdict: A comprehensive, efficient system that fulfils its myriad promises to reassure even the most anxious of parents. Runner-up: Owlet Baby Monitor Duo Price: £389 The Owlet is as sophisticated as the Nanit in many ways, with a sleek camera, excellent picture quality and user-friendly app. But it uses a “smart sock” to monitor breathing and oxygen levels, which children could disturb or kick off, sounding the alarm and terrifying parents in the process. There is also a noticeable delay in both the video and sound in comparison with the Nanit too, and while replacement parts are available the batteries cannot be replaced and the devices are not repairable.I don’t know about you but, personally, I want to start my year watching other people who have demonstrably made a mess of their lives. So I am thankful to the BBC for snapping up Couples Therapy (Monday, 10pm, BBC Two), the 2019 Showtime series that is custom-made for the early days of the year when you want to see other people weep on a sofa in front of their partner. Is it sick of me to want to watch that? Very possibly, very possibly. But one episode of this and you will be as terminally horrible as I am, too. The format, but quickly, because the clue is in the title: a diverse cast of couples have for some bewildering reason agreed to have their journey through therapy recorded and televised, overseen by relationship expert and very empathetic nodder Dr Orna Guralnik. In the wrong hands, this would be a schlocky inversion of First Dates, where you see people tentatively break up instead of play footsie. But it is shot so sumptuously and gorgeously (and all the couples are so casting-agency perfect) that I had to pause a couple of minutes in to check I wasn’t actually watching some weird under-the-radar legacy TV show scripted by a genius. But no, no. That is a real man, in a short-sleeved shirt with strange buttons on the sleeve, saying: “I am the easiest person to deal with. All I want is … zero responsibility, and all the sex I want without any work.” Watching Couples Therapy, you soon suss out, is like watching a game of football as a complete neutral. When you don’t have any attachment (or resentment) to either team, you can enjoy the spectacle for the sheer thrill of the action, and choose who you prefer just by who is playing well. The episode opens with Annie and Mau. At the two-minute mark I have no skin in the game, at the three-minute mark I’m shouting at the referee, and by four minutes I’m somehow starting an entire anti-Mau personality online and making memes about him getting kicked in the head. It’s very strange, watching couples spar as an abstract observer: I can see both sides of the immovable obstacle in Lauren and Sarah’s relationship, but I can’t untangle the many threads to decide who is right enough to make the whole thing move in their direction. I am pulling for Elaine and DeSean to figure things out, but I am frustrated by their inability to listen to each other. How any therapist on earth doesn’t just descend every session into yelling: “BE NORMAL! STOP BEING STUPID!” I do not know. This doesn’t make it clearer. That, actually, is the only moment when Couples Therapy trips over itself. In a bid to build a more 3D image of its only sustaining character, Dr Guralnik, we watch as she travels to her own therapist and they have a too-therapy-y conversation about how being a therapist is a burden and a gift and a stress and a hardship. That is all fair and good, but it’s not as good TV as watching Mau try to explain how getting a dominatrix for his birthday was a great present but not the right one. Couples Therapy is best because the dialogues people have in therapy are so weird and removed from real conversation – the most intimate and revealing chat you’ll ever have in your life, but spoken with the uneasy tone you use to say: “Sorry, can you just repeat your name again?” to someone at a party – and veering away from that seems like a waste of TV minutes. But there are times when it can be startlingly powerful television. The thing is, you’ve seen therapy and breakups and confessions before, but either through the lens of scripted dialogue – clever back-and-forths with a storyteller’s flair for slow reveals – or Love Island-style knowing reality TV. To watch the real thing – the speed at which people talk, the way they spool out confessional until they are telling the deep foundations of their personality out loud – is really something else. There’s a scene in the first episode where you see the exact moment a couple realise they have to break up, and nothing – not your real-life breakups, not any breakups your friends have had, not anything you’ve ever seen on television or film – prepares you for the quiet, heavy, solemn moment two brains realise their hearts are no longer aligned. Is it normal to want to watch this? No. Is it amazing anyway? Oh, absolutely yes.In October I was involved in a minor accident driving my old, but beloved, BMW 740 (1997). The vehicle I hit had slammed its brakes on, and, although the driver called the police, he was subsequently arrested for being on drink or drugs. Ever since, I have been battling my insurer, Privilege, to receive a reasonable payout. On the basis of a series of photos, it decreed the car is a category B write-off – so badly damaged it should not be allowed back on the road. I have challenged this as I would like to have it repaired. I have asked that it actually inspects the car, rather than assuming it is structurally damaged. Privilege has refused to do this and has told me that, even if I send my own engineer who finds it can be restored, it will not change its mind. Its attitude has been that the company now owns my car, and that is that. The courtesy car I was offered for two weeks has been taken back. I have really looked after the car since I bought it in 2000 and it has only covered 105,000 miles. It is a design classic but the company has offered a derisory £4,150 for it. I feel very badly treated. DF, Altringham = Sadly, this story gets worse. Even after I had suggested to the company that the only reasonable outcome was that it send an independent engineer to examine the car, it was, according to Privilege, accidentally sent to be scrapped. This was done without your permission and even after the executive team had become involved in your complaint. The company, part of the Direct Line group, has defended its original decision not to send someone to examine the car and said its engineers acted professionally. As well as sending the car to be scrapped – which it has apologised for – it has refused to increase its £4,500 valuation. After my intervention, it agreed to refund your £350 excess, and to pay a further £210 towards taxi costs as a (rather lacklustre) gesture of goodwill. Once an extra sum is added for petrol taken from the car (don’t ask) is added, it brings your total payout to just short of £5,000. You believe the car is worth closer to £6,000, and have sent examples of the few similar cars currently for sale. I am not sure it is worth £6,000 but agree that the way that Privilege has dealt with your claim has been high handed from the start. Having sent your car to be scrapped while negotiations were ongoing, the company has seemingly denied you the opportunity to challenge its decisions. If you still want to pursue this, I would hire a specialist insurance expert, Motor Claim Guru, Tim Kelly. He says he still may be able to get your car back, will examine it, and ultimately act on your behalf with Privilege. Whether the value of this claim will justify his fees is another matter, but he is highly recommended. Alternatively, the Financial Ombudsman Service (FOS) will look at your case for free, but it will take months to come up with a decision. “If your vehicle was scrapped without your consent, we’ll look at how this affected you. We might tell your insurer to compensate you for any distress or inconvenience that this caused, as well as for any items that were inside the car when it was scrapped,” it advises. The online reviews from others who have claimed from Privilege do not make pretty reading. I’d be interested to know other readers’ experiences – good or bad? Email the usual address. Going abroad soon? Here’s a PCR warning A lot of people seem to have had their festive holiday plans thrown into chaos after they unexpectedly failed the pre-departure PCR test demanded by their destination country. It appears that these tests are returning positive results for those who had Covid several months before. The government advises that people who previously received a positive result do not take another PCR test within 90 days, for this reason. However, proof of recovery certificates are accepted by a small group of countries in lieu of a negative test. They are available via the NHS app. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include a phone number. Letters are subject to our terms: gu.com/letters-termsAt least superficially, works of medical recovery share much common ground: the bleep of life support, the arduous rebuilding of one’s new normal. But cult US musician Mark Lanegan is no Michael Rosen, the beloved children’s author whose fight with Covid is justly famed as a heroic tale: the unimpeachable battling the unimaginable and emerging a trenchant critic of the government’s failures. Rosen eventually swapped a wheelchair for a stick, one he wrote a children’s book about. There is no Sticky McStickstick in Devil in a Coma, the slim but powerful volume detailing Lanegan’s own Covid ordeal, just the metaphorical two-by-four with which he beats himself. The author of roughly half a dozen solo albums, plus a healthy body of collaborative works that includes fronting grunge outliers Screaming Trees and time spent in Queens of the Stone Age, Lanegan is an antihero who would be the first to say he is probably undeserving of our sympathy. His celebrated 2020 memoir, Sing Backwards and Weep, is one of the bleaker tales of rock’n’roll excess ever committed to print. Prompted into existence by his friend, the late chef Anthony Bourdain – Lanegan and QOTSA’s Josh Homme did the theme tune for Bourdain’s final series, Parts Unknown – Lanegan’s first memoir detailed a life of substance misuse and the interpersonal catastrophes that flowed from them, chief, among many, the loss of Lanegan’s close pal Kurt Cobain. Lanegan emerged from that first unsparing account chastened and self-aware; his gallows humour and trenchant wisdom made him a charismatic raconteur who stood outside the more conventional literature of drug glorification or rock myth-making. He also seemed absurdly immune to death, a characteristic that the musician refused to mine for macho points but, rather, regards as some imponderable state of undeserved grace. No sooner had the accolades dried on that memoir than Lanegan, relocated to Ireland, land of his great-great-great-grandfather, to escape Covid, contracted Covid. In denial at first, he falls downstairs. Unable to breathe, deafened, with deep welts on his scalp and a useless leg, he is committed to hospital and put in an induced coma on kidney dialysis. His wife learns that Lanegan holds the hospital record for surviving longest in this parlous state. At one point, she refuses to allow the doctors to perform a tracheotomy that would have ended his singing career. Three weeks later, he comes to. Semi-consciousness is almost worse. With his system inured to opiates from long spells of addiction, the pain relief and sleeping pills the hospital can muster amount to chicken feed. They struggle to find usable veins; Lanegan’s offer of his jugular is turned down by a young physician. His long stay in a County Kerry hospital is “like a jail cocktail with a viral chaser”, worse, he says, than the psychiatric ward he was once committed to in Italy while withdrawing from heroin, worse than the time he’d nearly had his gangrenous leg amputated, worse than when, as a child, he was in a full body cast after falling off a bridge. He suffers hallucinations, insomnia, he can’t eat much apart from milk. His past comes back to torment him with a vengeance, in visions and dreams: Covid, in short, feels like karma. As with Sing Backwards and Weep, Lanegan’s prose combines naturalistic speech and a kind of lucid lyricism: “I’d taken my share of well-deserved ass-kickings over the years but this thing was trying to dismantle me, body and mind, and I could see no end to it.” A number of poems that process his frustration, the fever dreams and events from Lanegan’s complicated, past break up the chronological account (he has published a collection of poetry, Leaving California, and a collection of lyrics, I Am the Wolf). A passage that ponders the idea of Covid as a conspiracy is presented as evidence of the dark places to which the disease sent Lanegan’s addled mind. In some ways, the section sits a little uncomfortably inside a book that has nothing but bottomless gratitude to the Irish health service that cared for him. Still, there is always much to admire in Lanegan’s writing even when it is hard to agree with everything he thinks. This slight but weighty volume only adds to the man’s muscular and vivid – in every sense of the word – body of work. • Devil in a Coma by Mark Lanegan is published by White Rabbit (£12). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyWomen’s safety campaigners have called the Home Office’s backing of an app that allows users to track their friends’ journeys home “insulting to women and girls”, arguing that it does nothing to tackle the issue of men’s violence against women. The new app provides anyone walking home at night with a monitored route on their phone. If the walker moves more than 40 metres from the route or stops for more than three minutes, the app asks if they are OK. If there is no reply, nominated “guardians” – normally friends and family – receive a notification on their phones to say there has been a deviation. They can then check on the person in question and alert the police if they are unable to do so. The Home Office minister, Rachel Maclean, said such schemes should be part of a wider plan to make streets safer for women and girls. “We need a whole-of-society approach to tackling violence against women and girls, and I welcome initiatives from the private sector that deliver on this aim,” she said. Anna Birley from Reclaim These Streets, which was set up after the murder of Sarah Everard, said safety apps did nothing to tackle the underlying problem of men’s violence against women. “The Home Office backing of this app is insulting to women and girls,” she said. “We already share our location, we already ask our friends to text us when they get home, we already wear bright clothes, stick to the well-lit routes and clutch our keys between our fingers. “It still isn’t enough. Women and girls, and the steps that we take to stay safe every day, are not the problem. The problem is that male violence makes us unsafe.” The free, not-for-profit app, Path Community, is being trialled by about 500 people including Metropolitan police officers in Southwark and Lambeth in south London. It creates routes avoiding unlit streets, alleys or areas known for antisocial behaviour and users can mark where they feel unsafe. Harry Mead, the creator, told the Guardian that anonymised information can then be shared with local councils and police to establish problem areas that may need more resources. The platform was also developing an education platform, he said. “The underlying issue of men’s violence is the core problem and everyone has to help tackle it,” he said. “The app is designed to help with immediate concerns and help users feel safer. Path is our attempt to do our bit.”. Domestic violence campaigners have also raised concerns about safety apps that track movement being misused by abusers. They could “potentially extend an abuser’s reach beyond the home, controlling women in spaces they previously felt safe and free”, said the chief executive of Women’s Aid, Farah Nazeer. The Home Office and police and crime commissioners needed to work with the women’s sector to remove barriers to their safety, she said. “There is so much work to be done to increase survivors’ confidence in reporting abuse to police, tackle misogyny with public awareness and education and, of course, provide adequate funding to services supporting survivors,” she said. Mead said developers were very conscious of the issue of potential misuse and had designed the app to be as private as possible while providing maximum safety. Tracking only lasted for the duration of a set journey and users would always be contacted first to check if they were OK before a guardian was notified while a toggle to turn live tracking on and off was being developed, he added. The shadow minister for domestic violence, Jess Phillips, said: “This seems like a sticking plaster instead of dealing with the actual problem that is men’s violence against women.” A spokesperson for the Home Office said its Tackling Violence against Women and Girls strategy launched last year included initiatives and funding to target potential perpetrators and protect potential victims, including the pilot of the StreetSafe online tool, which allows the public to anonymously report areas where they feel unsafe.At the curtain call, Hugh Jackman put his arm around Kathy Voytko, an understudy suddenly thrust into the role of leading lady Marian Paroo in The Music Man. “Kathy, when she turned up to work at 12 o’clock, could have played any of eight roles,” Jackman, who plays Harold Hill in the musical, told the cheering audience. “it happened to be the leading lady. She found out at 12 noon today and, at 1 o’clock, she had her very first rehearsal as Marian Paroo.” Voytko had stepped up on 23 December because Sutton Foster tested positive for the coronavirus. But then, on 28 December, Jackman himself announced that he had Covid-19 with mild symptoms and could not go on stage. Regarded as Broadway’s hottest ticket with a top price of $699 a seat, The Music Man is also a barometer of the uncertainty that prevails in the era of the Omicron variant, more contagious but apparently less deadly than previous waves. New York theatre is not closed, its leaders are at pains to point out, but it is not wholly open either, and cast lists on any given night can be something of a lottery. Last month, shows including Aladdin, Freestyle Love Supreme, Hamilton, Harry Potter and the Cursed Child, The Lion King and Tina were forced to cancel performances. The musicals Ain’t Too Proud, Diana, Jagged Little Pill, Trevor and Waitress, and the play Thoughts of a Colored Man, decided to shut down earlier than planned because of infections and weak ticket sales. The fresh surge is cruel timing for Broadway, which reopened with fanfare – and vaccine mandates for cast, crew and audiences – in September after a record 18-month closure because of the pandemic. For a while it seemed the triumph-over-adversity, show-must-go-on spirit was unstoppable. Then Omicron came like a kick in the teeth. Gabriel Stelian-Shanks, artistic director of the Drama League, the only creative home in America for stage directors, recalls: “We weren’t really sure what was going to happen but things were looking good. Audiences were returning. Shows were reopening. We had found a way to do it safely. And as that got into September and October, we realised we were having theatre that was not a superspreader event. “We were feeling very good about it and then, at Thanksgiving, we all learned the word Omicron and the speed and rapidity with which we had to learn how this is different. It almost feels to me like a different epidemic in terms of its incredible ability to be contagious. Omicron is so new that the question for us is: how do we manage a surge?” New York state recorded more than 85,000 new coronavirus cases on the last day of 2021, its highest single-day total since the pandemic began. The Omicron variant has the potential to rip through a cast, orchestra and crew of 200 people. Stelian-Shanks says: “Omicron is a numbers game in many ways about infection and the number of people who have to be in close quarters versus those who don’t. We’re seeing some of those shows simply fall to a probability no one expected. We’re not seeing deaths, we’re not seeing severe hospitalisations, but we are seeing enough infection where we can’t continue with certain performances.” But most shows remain open and at least some of those that do not were struggling and likely to run out of steam even before Omicron. The mood is very different from the dawn of the pandemic in March 2020, when Broadway felt like a ghost town, its playhouses dark and restaurants empty. Stelian-Shanks adds: “I’m deeply pessimistic about January but if we look a little further down the road to spring and summer, the picture is a lot rosier. That is, of course, assuming that the medical experts are right and that Omicron’s going to burn very fast through the population. “If we’re still dealing with Omicron in May then who knows? But I can’t find anyone who isn’t telling me that we’re in a radically different picture with Omicron by the end of February.” Aware of these predictions, some producers have responded by temporarily closing shows in January and February, typically the leanest months to bring in audiences, with a view to reopening in March. Mrs Doubtfire, a new musical comedy at the Stephen Sondheim Theatre, will take “a hiatus” from 10 January to 14 March. Kevin McCollum, its producer, estimates the cost of the hibernation will be around $500,000, whereas trying to keep the show running through the same period would mean a loss of at least $3.5m. “I had to close and then reopen,” McCollum explains. “The good news is we have a very tight group of people who have been working on the show for three years and everybody knows how good it is. I am taking also the calculated risk that we’ll have our company back ready to go in March and of course people need jobs. This is the best thing I can do to create long-term employment. “I think I used the metaphor of trying to plant a sapling in a hurricane. You have to get out of the way of this tsunami of Omicron and come back and replant when everybody is ready to go out again. And that’s what I’m doing for Mrs Doubtfire.” Big musicals need full houses to turn a profit but the pandemic has smashed international tourism as well as domestic consumer confidence, with many people wary of buying an expensive ticket that they might need to cancel at the last minute. Mrs Doubtfire was making $175,000 a day in ticket sales after opening but, once the wave of Omicron-related closures took hold, that dropped to $50,000. The cost of daily Covid-19 testing at the theatre for a full company and staff of 115 people went from $18,000 a week before Omicron to almost $60,000 a week after. And the cancellation last month of 11 performances of the show, based on the 1993 film starring Robin Williams, due to coronavirus infections among cast and crew turned an expected $1.5m earning into a $1.5m loss. McCollum, whose previous credits include Rent and Avenue Q, muses: “We are an industry that is used to being at constant risk and those of us who toil in the theatre have maybe a chip missing: we are resilient against all odds. So it’s painful but that’s no reason not to get up and try again. “The cliche is there is no people like show people and in times of true disappointment we are there for each other. Even though we are colleagues, collaborators, competitors ultimately, we want to know that tomorrow, if we put our our life’s blood into it, could be a better day.” McCollum, also producing the musical Six on Broadway and The Play that Goes Wrong off-Broadway, adds: “The key is to recognise yes, in many ways it’s unfair but that’s no reason to become a victim. You have to pivot and get up and figure it out tomorrow. I think that’s what people love about Broadway and it takes a certain amount of grit and indomitable spirit. Those are two very powerful ingredients.” Playwright Lynn Nottage currently has two projects on Broadway. Clyde’s, a comedy at the Helen Hayes Theater on Tuesday, has survived Omicron relatively unscathed apart from thinned-out audiences. But MJ: The Musical, which features the music of Michael Jackson, was forced to cancel several performances last month due to multiple coronavirus cases within the company. Nottage believes that the media is accentuating the negative but prefers to see the glass as half-full. She tweeted last month: “There’s so much emphasis on what’s closed on Broadway, let’s show some luv to the shows that r still OPEN. PLAYS r out here beating back the virus &amp; the odds.” She adds in a phone interview: “Pre-Christmas and during the fall, it really felt like Broadway was coming back. The restaurants were crowded, the streets were crowded. You felt a lot of energy in the air and some of that hasn’t left. There’s still people very much here eager to get back to business as usual but you can feel the hesitation. “But that said, we were in the theatre on Sunday for MJ and we were almost completely full and audiences that came were ready and were enthusiastic and happy and wanted to be engaged. There are people who are really desperate to get back to theatre.” Nottage, a double Pulitzer Prize winner, concludes: “I’m an optimist by nature so I do believe that when this thing crests, people will come back. We’re going through an unprecedented, difficult moment but the fact is – and I can say this about the two shows I’m involved in – we will weather this storm.”In 1931, the Austrian logician Kurt Gödel published his incompleteness theorem, a result widely considered one of the greatest intellectual achievements of modern times. The theorem states that in any reasonable mathematical system there will always be true statements that cannot be proved. The result was a huge shock to the mathematical community, where the prevailing view was an unshakeable optimism about the power and reach of their subject. It had been assumed that maths was “complete”, meaning that all mathematical statements are either provable or refutable. The 25-year-old Gödel demonstrated this was incorrect by constructing a true statement that was not provable. Maths, he announced, has its limits. The incompleteness theorem transformed the study of the foundations of mathematics, and would become an important result for computer science, since it shows that all formalised systems, such as coding languages, have limitations on what they can achieve. The theorem is also at the heart of today’s puzzle, which we’ll get to shortly. Gödel’s proof of his theorem is based on self-reference: in a formal mathematical setting, the statement ‘This sentence is unprovable” is both true and formally unprovable. The technical details of the proof are hard going. Yet the American logician Raymond Smullyan (1919-2017) devised a brilliant way to convey the gist of the incompleteness theorem using simple logic puzzles about truth-tellers and liars. Today’s teaser, composed in cooperation with Professor Benedikt Löwe of Churchill College, Cambridge, is inspired by Smullyan’s approach. The two tribes of If In the Ocean of Deduction lies the logical island of If. People born here belong to one of two tribes: the Alethians and the Pseudians. The only way to tell an Alethian from a Pseudian is to talk to them. Alethians always speak the truth, no matter what they are saying. Pseudians will always utter falsehoods, no matter what they are saying. At the centre of the island, the Master of the Alethians keeps the Ledger of Identity, a book that lists the names of everyone born on the island together with their tribe. The information in the Ledger of Identity is correct and freely available to anyone who asks. One day, an intrepid explorer arrives on If. She encounters various inhabitants and identifies them as Alethians and Pseudians by asking clever questions. After several successful such encounters, she meets a man called Kurt. The explorer does not know his tribal affiliation, but before she has time to ask him a question, he says “You will never have concrete evidence that confirms that I am an Alethian.” 1. Is Kurt an Alethian, a Pseudian or neither? 2. How might this relate to Gödel’s incompleteness theorem? Please return at 5pm UK for the solutions and a discussion. NO SPOILERS. Instead please post your favourite logic jokes. UPDATE: Read the solution here. Today’s Gödelian puzzle is a pre-celebration of UNESCO’s World Logic Day, which takes place annually on January 14. (The date was chosen since it is both the day Gödel died, in 1978, and the day the logician Alfred Tarski was born, in 1901.) To find out more about World Logic Day 2022 – this Friday – and read a list of all the events planned click here. I set a puzzle here every two weeks on a Monday. I’m always on the look-out for great puzzles. If you would like to suggest one, email me. I’m the author of several books of puzzles, most recently the Language Lover’s Puzzle Book. I also give school talks about maths and puzzles (online and in person). If your school is interested please get in touch.Pharmacists have warned they may not be able to provide free rapid antigen tests to lower income Australians under the national concession card scheme because of supply issues, as the government says it won’t procure extra kits for businesses. The prime minister Scott Morrison on Monday said his government would not be distributing any rapid antigen testing kits to pharmacies as part of the concessional scheme, and that instead he expects chemists to source supplies themselves to meet the additional demand. “They’ll come through the pharmacies and the pharmacy is responsible for securing their private supplies to meet that demand,” Morrison said. Details as to how the scheme will work are yet to be finalised, however it is understood pharmacies will be paid a fee per testing kit they give out under a payment system split evenly between the commonwealth and the local state or territory government. In the days since the scheme was agreed by national cabinet last Wednesday, pharmacies have come to realise they will be required to source the additional rapid antigen tests for concession card holders, but they are unclear as to how much they will be paid for each test. The free testing scheme will be run in contrast to how the vaccine rollout works, where providers order supplies from the government and don’t have to deal with commercial suppliers in the market. Patrick Carrig, who manages Carrig Chemists in Adelaide, is furious at the government. So far, Carrig has only placed one order for rapid tests – on Christmas Eve, just after the South Australian government announced they could be used in the state – and they are still yet to arrive. He is unsure of what demand will be like and is yet to place orders for the government’s free scheme for concession card holders because he wants to understand how much pharmacies will be paid per test and how long they must wait to receive the payment. “We are presumably meant to spend our days scrounging for the cheapest tests so that we can at least break even on the deal,” Carrig told Guardian Australia. “We are expected to source our own tests and then provide them at whatever the government is willing to pay.” Carrig warned that many pharmacies would not have sufficient cash flow to afford large orders of the tests only to give them out for free and wait potentially weeks to receive payment from the government. “They’re expensive. You’ve got to spend thousands of dollars. Not really sure what the price will be, what the government will pay you for each one.” Carrig said if the government did not change its position to also distribute the testing kits to chemists, some business owners may be forced to consider if they can take part in the scheme. “This puts us in a dubious ethical position. If the tests fall under the PBS (pharmaceutical benefits scheme), we’re not allowed to not supply them. But if it’s going to be a separate thing, well, not every pharmacy may be able to afford to do it,” he said. The owners of Bannockburn Pharmacy in Victoria are also concerned as to how they will source rapid tests for the scheme. “It came to our attention late Friday that the Federal Government WILL NOT be providing RATs DIRECTLY to pharmacies to give away for free to concessional card holders as per their announcement last Wednesday,” the pharmacy posted on its Facebook page. “Pharmacies were under the impression that the federal government would be allocating stock they have ordered directly to us pharmacies. “Instead we have been informed the Federal Government expect pharmacies to source their own RAT’s to give away to concessional card holders and then somehow the government will reimburse us to cover our cost of buying them. Pharmacies still haven’t been informed how this will occur,” the pharmacy said, calling on eligible customers who struggle to access a free RAT to contact their local MP. A spokeswoman for the department of health told Guardian Australia “as the PM said today, the government is finalising discussions with the pharmacy sector regarding the implementation of this extended concessional program, and further details will be published shortly”. The opposition health spokesman Mark Butler responded to the “confusion” surrounding the free test scheme for concession holders, tweeting “every rollout the prime minister touches he bungles”. Butler reiterated Labor’s policy, that “rapid tests should be free and accessible for all!”.There are many ways to get some winter heat into your bones. Some countries swear by saunas; others partake of hot springs or sweat lodges. In Britain, however, there is an alternative that doesn’t involve taking your clothes off: the tropical hothouse. Early practitioners of hothouse horticulture faced formidable obstacles: in the 15th century, alchemist George Ripley suffered death for making a pear tree, “fructify in winter”. It was Victorian gardeners, however, who really triumphed, erecting massive structures and growing rarities like pineapples, bananas and even papayas. Not that things always went smoothly, the Palm House at Kew was opened in 1848, but the curators had managed to kill many of the specimens by 1895 (tinted green glass was a bad idea). Since then, science has ironed out many problems and green technology powers a new wave of fine, steamy hothouses around the country. In addition, some of our best Victorian hothouses have been significantly modernised while keeping the original look. National Botanic Garden of Wales, Carmarthenshire Some of the projects begun at the millennium were immediately appreciated: bridges and domes, for example. Others, however, had to wait for plants to mature and are only now reaching their best, among them a fine pair of glasshouses in the National Botanic Garden of Wales. The larger of the two features plants from Mediterranean climates, about 2% of the Earth’s surface, but containing a fifth of the flowering plants found in locations as far apart as South Africa, the Canaries and Croatia. With the temperature generally in the 20s, this is a balmy stroll through the world’s best wine-growing regions. In a couple of minutes you can walk from Australia to Chile. If you’re still a bit chilly, head over to the tropical house, where a biomass boiler keeps things comfortably steamy all year, with bananas and pineapples surrounded by vanilla and strelitzia. The gardens outside were once a famed Regency water garden and, after a £7m restoration, are well worth exploring too. Winter entry: 10am-4pm (last entry 3pm), adult £12.50 Palm House, Kew Gardens, London The epitome of all hothouses is still one of the best. Pride of place goes to the oldest pot plant in the world, the Eastern Cape cycad. Collected in South Africa in 1775, it was sailed back to London where it is currently relaxing after producing a single cone, in 1819. Other specimens include rubber trees, oil palms and cacao trees. If things get too warm, head across to the larger Temperate House, another Grade I-listed marvel. Opened in 1863 and totally refurbished in 2018, it features more than 1,500 species of plant from frost-free regions, including six that are extinct in the wild. One of the rarest trees is another cycad that was moved from the Palm House in 1997 and celebrated by producing a cone in 2004. The tree is actually a cutting taken in 1899 from its only surviving relative, a specimen that grows in Durban’s botanic gardens. Winter entry: 10am-3pm (last entry 2pm), adult £11 The Glasshouse, Wisley, Surrey Another fine addition to Britain’s hothouse collection was erected to celebrate 200 years of the Royal Horticultural Society in 2007. Highlights include insect-eating pitcher plants, ginger flowers, some rainforest giant trees and an Ethiopian black banana. With waterfalls and three different climate zones, the glasshouse manages to pack a lot into an area the size of 10 tennis courts with a 12-metre-high roof. The temperature is never allowed below a summery 20C, with humidity about 70%. Winter entry: 10am-3.15pm (last entry 3pm), adult £14.95 or free to RHS members Belfast Botanic Gardens A gem of Victorian engineering, the Belfast palm house was started in 1839, but things really got moving towards the end of the 19th century, when local gardener Charles McKimm took over. He built up great collections of orchids, chrysanthemums and bananas, and added the wonderful tropical ravine, a multi-level fernery that was twice extended to include a waterfall and a lily pond. In 2018 a major £3.8m refurbishment, included triple glazing and a lift, but also restored many original features that had been lost. Now it’s a delightful mix of old grottoes and new viewing platforms, plus lots of tree ferns, bromeliads and orchids. Winter entry: 10am-3.45pm, free Sheffield Botanical Gardens One of Britains oldest and finest hothouses, Sheffield Botanical Gardens opened in 1836 and seem to have been fighting for survival ever since. Repeated cycles of underinvestment and failure were brought to an end with more than £5m of Heritage Lottery funding plus hefty local financial input, allowing the complete refurbishment of its three magnificent pavilions and the rebuilding of the connecting glass walkways. Replanted in 2003, it is now reaching maturity with tree ferns, various palms and some spectacular flowers – the gymea lily from Australia sent up a six-metre flower stem last year. The layout gives you a nice long stroll through the world’s hot zones at a guaranteed minimum of 10C. Winter entry: 10am-4pm weekends, 8am-4pm week days, free Birmingham Botanical Gardens If the word “hothouse” conjures up visions of steamy verdure, think again. Birmingham’s botanical gardens include an “arid house” that features desert-dwelling plants such as cacti, euphorbias and agave, all kept at a temperature that never drops below 7C. Opened in 1884, it was the third of three large glasshouses; the others feature subtropical and tropical plants. It was in the latter pavilion that two separate tree ferns, one from St Helena and another from Tasmania, got together and produced a hybrid, dicksonia x lathamii, the only one of its kind in the world and now over a century old. There is also a Wollemi Pine, one of the oldest species on the planet, discovered in 1994. Winter entry: 10am-5pm (last entry 4.30pm), adult £7.50 Glasgow Botanic Gardens The history of Glasgow’s beautiful hothouses is almost as bizarre as some of its floral inhabitants. The giant glass dome was first built by the eccentric John Kibble in 1865, then transported by barge to its current site, where it hosted concerts, religious revivals and political rallies before settling down to housing a fine collection of tropical plants close to the heart of the city. It was fully restored in 2006. Specialities include carnivorous plants, orchids and tree ferns. (Edinburgh’s glasshouse is currently under restoration.) Winter entry: 12 noon-4pm, free Eden Project, Cornwall Opened in 2001, Eden’s interlinked plastic domes are hitting their stride in terms of plant growth these days, with about 5,000 species represented, covering climates from steamy to arid and Mediterranean. The rainforest really does capture the atmosphere of the original, down to jungle birds running around the jungle floor. Plants such as cacao, coffee and rubber tell the economic story of the tropics too. Winter entry: 10am-4pm week days, 9.30am-6pm weekends, adult £29.50 Bicton Park Botanical Gardens, Devon One of the world’s first large glasshouses and still one of the most beautiful, Bicton’s palm house utilises 18,000 glass panels in a sensuous curving design that was completed in 1830. Nearby, the tropical house is home to the Bicton orchid, named after the place where it first bloomed, in 1836. There are also arid and temperate houses. Winter entry: 10am-4.30pm, adult £12.95 Cambridge University Botanic Garden As a working garden for Cambridge’s botany department, this horticultural gem has the responsibility for around 8,000 species, and as you might expect, its seven habitats in a glasshouse range offer an education in themselves. Explore themes such as convergent evolution, carnivorous plant diversity and continental drift as you walk from tropical heat through arid zones and into mountainous climates. Among 73 highly endangered species is the titan arum, which throws up a three-metre-tall flower every seven years. Winter entry: 10am-4pm (last entry 3.30pm), adult £7.50 • This article was amended on 17 January 2022. The gymea lily, featured at the Sheffield Botanical Gardens, is from Australia, not New Zealand.Here are the main stories on Monday, 10 January: Novak Djokovic wins a court appeal against his visa cancellation, but lawyers for the federal government flag the possibility that he could still be deported before the Australian Open; There are 5,097 people in Australian hospitals with Covid, prime minister Scott Morrison says; Victoria reports 34,808 new cases, NSW 20,293 cases and a record 18 deaths, Queensland 9,581 cases, South Australia 4,024 new cases, Tasmania 1,218 new cases, the ACT 938 cases, the NT 404 cases, with three cases in Western Australia who were thought to be in isolation while infectious; West Australian premier Mark McGowan says the state did not receive vaccines as promised from the federal government, and says he is planning on introducing tougher protocols soon that will apply to the unvaccinated; New isolation guidelines are introduced for essential supply chain workers; The vaccination program for children aged five to 11 starts, with Lieutenant General John Frewen claiming there is “more than enough” vaccine to go around. We will see you all back here tomorrow. Understandably a lot of reaction to the Djokovic decision ... You can read more of that over here: Perrottet could have showed a little more enthusiasm about the size of the fish Andrews caught on leave, but good to see they had a chat nonetheless: There’s a bit more here on the news from earlier today about the Covid state of play in Western Australia, via AAP: West Australian premier Mark McGowan has flagged harsher restrictions for the unvaccinated as the state forges ahead with its border reopening plan. Three new local COVID-19 cases were reported on Monday, but all were already in quarantine and were not believed to have been infectious while in the community. The state has so far avoided any major outbreaks despite the recent arrival of the Omicron variant and a cluster of cases linked to an unvaccinated French backpacker. McGowan said WA would proceed with reopening its borders from 5 February, but warned the transition would come with harsh restrictions for the unvaccinated, who face being locked out of pubs, restaurants, cafes and gyms. “This policy will come into force as we move closer to easing border controls,” the premier told reporters. “We know that unvaccinated people are well and truly enormously over-represented when it comes to cases, serious illness, hospitalisations, intensive care presentations and deaths. “Far too many resources are being used over east to care for individuals who would not take the basic steps to care for themselves. “If you, for some reason, have not had your first dose yet my advice would be to make a booking today, otherwise life is about to get very difficult for you.” Interim proof of vaccination requirements have already been implemented at pubs, hotels, nightclubs, music festivals and major events. WA’s double-dose vaccination rate for people aged 12 and over has climbed to 86.3%, although the take-up has been much lower in some regional areas. There are particular concerns about the vast Pilbara region where the rate is well below 60%. McGowan said unvaccinated people faced being locked out of the Pilbara, home to some of the state’s most prized tourist attractions. A new app designed to make it easier for people to show proof of vaccination will be launched by the government on Tuesday. More than 5,000 people who attended the weekend’s Fremantle-West Coast AFLW derby were not required to show proof of vaccination but the premier said the exemption granted by the chief health officer was likely to be a one-off. The decision to cancel Novak Djokovic’s visa has been quashed in the federal circuit court. All the details here: Here’s a more fulsome update on the South Australia Covid situation, via AAP: Coronavirus cases in South Australia have fallen with premier Steven Marshall saying recent restrictions seem to be “stabilising” the state’s Omicron outbreak. SA reported 4,024 new cases on Monday, down from 4,506 on Sunday. “So this is really a stabilising of our numbers, in fact we’ve got to go back four days to get a day that was lower than what we had yesterday,” Marshall said. “I think the restrictions that were put in place on 26th of December are now clearly showing we’ve been able to stop that massive escalation that other states around the country are currently experiencing.” Those restrictions include tougher density limits on most venues and a reduced cap on family gatherings. The premier said he still expected the peak in virus numbers towards the end of January but a meeting with modellers on Tuesday would hopefully put a “finer point” on the likely date. “People have said this is going to be short and sharp, I think they’re right,” he said. “This is not going to be something that we’re going to be lingering with for six months or 12 months. “We are cautious here in South Australia but we’re starting to see some real green shoots, some real improvement in our position over two weeks ago.” Despite the drop in cases, two more people have died with the virus, a man in his 90s and a woman in her 80s, taking SA’s total deaths to 18. The number of people in hospital has also grown to 188, with 21 in intensive care and four on ventilators. Including those managing their infections at home, SA currently has 29,489 active cases. Earlier on Monday, a parliamentary committee was told South Australia was considering using rapid antigen testing surveillance of teachers as part of a return to school strategy during the current surge in Covid-19 cases. The state government is due to announce its plans for the new school year later this week, with health officials previously conceding there will likely be some disruptions. Chief public health officer Nicola Spurrier told the committee that SA Health was looking at RAT surveillance for teachers. But she indicated that was unlikely to be extended to students at this stage, despite the fact most primary school children would not be fully vaccinated by the scheduled start date of 31 January. AAP has reported that Australians are now Covid millionaires. Well done us. Give yourself a RAT. That story here: Australia has passed the major milestone of more than one million Covid-19 cases nearly two years to the day since the first case was reported in the country. More than a quarter of Australia’s total cases were recorded in the past four days, largely attributed to the arrival of the highly infectious Omicron variant in December. Compared to the rest of the world, Australia is late to the marker. As of 7 January, the United Kingdom had passed 14 million cases while the United States was nearing the 60 million mark. Yet UNSW infectious diseases associate professor David Muscatello says counting the number of cases is becoming impractical. “You’ll never really know the true number of cases because the only ones we know are the ones we’re testing for,” he told AAP. “With the rate cases are occurring, I think it’s going to be a worldwide trend to move away from counting each one and rather we’ll focus on hospitalisations.” As the peak of the latest outbreak looms, so too does the federal election, where health care is expected to be a key issue. Prime minister Scott Morrison told reporters on Monday: “Omicron changed everything.” “Delta was a completely different variant of this virus, and so, as we have had to do on so many occasions during this pandemic, rules that were written for one situation have to be reconsidered,” he said. Muscatello says it would have been difficult for anyone to predict the arrival of Omicron. “In human history we have never seen a virus evolving in real time, we’ve never had the scientific ability to watch what’s happening,” he said. “Australia has done very well with getting people vaccinated and in the end we’re in the best position we could be.” Former senior federal health advisor Troy Bilsborough says health care influenced more votes than any other issue at the 2019 federal election and he expected the current outbreak to do the same. “We’ve also seen roughly five months between the arrival of new variants like Delta and Omicron, meaning the major parties could be facing a likely May federal election in the midst of a new outbreak, not just this one,” he said. Close contacts of Covid cases employed in critical supply chains will have their isolation requirements scrapped, in an attempt to address workforce shortages that have hit the food industry. Announcing a shake-up of isolation requirements on Monday, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, said the requirements would not apply to customer-facing roles, but those working in “critical supply chains”. All states and territories, except WA, are expected to sign off on the changes on Monday, with NSW and Queensland already announcing similar changes over the weekend. You can read more on that story here: Pharmacists warn they may not be able to provide free rapid antigen tests to lower-income Australians under the national concession card scheme because of supply issues, as the government says it won’t procure extra kits for businesses. The prime minister Scott Morrison on Monday said his government would not be distributing any rapid antigen testing kits to pharmacies as part of the concessional scheme, and that instead he expects chemists to source supplies themselves to meet the additional demand. More on that story here: Australia is spending $3.5b on new tanks, AAP report: Australia will buy 127 tanks and armoured vehicles worth $3.5 billion as the federal government ramps up its land combat capability. Under the deal, the army will receive 75 Abram tanks, 29 assault breacher vehicles, 17 joint assault bridge vehicles and six armoured recovery vehicles. The first vehicles are due to arrive in 2024 and will be able to be deployed from 2025. Chief of Army, Lieutenant General Rick Burr said the tanks would be essential in Australia’s participation with coalition forces. “Because of their versatility, tanks can be used in a wide range of scenarios, environments and levels of conflict in the region,” he said. “This system is the only part of the Australian Defence Force that can successfully operate in medium to high-threat land environments.” Defence minister Peter Dutton said the new tanks would give Australian soldiers the best possibility of success and protection. “The M1A2 Abrams will incorporate the latest developments in Australian sovereign defence capabilities, including command, control, communications, computers and intelligence systems, and benefit from the intended manufacture of tank ammunition in Australia,” he said. “The introduction of the new M1A2 vehicles will take advantage of the existing support infrastructure, with significant investment in Australian industry continuing in the areas of sustainment, simulation and training.” But post-graduate in strategic studies Declan Sullivan has said the Abrams tanks are too heavy for Australia’s needs, labelling the purchase a missed opportunity. “The M1A2 SEPv3 is a continuation of the army’s tank capabilities: fast, powerful, reliable and overkill and overweight for Australia’s needs, with little room to manoeuvre for future developments,” he wrote in the Australian Strategic Policy Institute’s The Strategist in June 2021. Australia purchased 59 Abram M1A1 tanks in 2007 but has not deployed a tank in combat since the Vietnam War. SA Covid data just dropped, with an increase in hospitalisations (188 today, 176 yesterday) but drop in new cases (4,024 today, 4,506 yesterday): A white van has left the Park Hotel after Novak Djokovic was allowed to move to another, unknown address, so he can watch the court proceedings remotely. Guardian Australia cannot verify if the tennis star was inside the van, which had its windows blackened out and left the centre at around 3pm. There were extra police on the scene and a large crowd of media taking photos as it left. On Monday afternoon, Federal Circuit Court Judge Anthony Kelly ordered that the Australian Border Force must allow Djokovic out of the Carlton immigration centre so he can watch the hearing from another location. He will come back to the hotel tonight if his appeal is not finalised. Kelly’s order reads: The respondent, by her servants or agents, including the Australian Border Force, take all steps and do all things as may be necessary to bring the applicant to premises as specified by the applicant’s solicitors on Monday, 10 January 2022 (and each day thereafter, including upon the delivery of judgment), to permit him to remain there until the conclusion of each hearing and to secure his safe return to detention upon the conclusion of each hearing. Tech dramas have plagued the hearing, which is expected to resume soon. For our dedicated liveblog on the Djokovic hearing, click below: McGowan, the WA premier, says the state has had to move some vaccine supply set aside for children to GP clinics to meet demand for appointments after the federal government did not meet its commitments. McGowan said: We are also sharing some of our paediatric vaccine supply with GPs who didn’t receive the supply they were promised by the Commonwealth. It is disappointing this far into the pandemic after assurances were made. We received 33,700 doses on Friday and expect to receive that each week. But we will provide some of the doses where we can to GPs and pharmacies which have not yet received the doses they were expecting from the Commonwealth. McGowan says the state will soon introduce broader restrictions relating to showing proof of vaccination ahead of the state opening to the country on 5 February. He said: I also want Western Australia to understand, the current proof of vaccination requirements will be expanded further in coming days. We are currently finalising a longer term policy which will cover a wide range of licensed events and venues, restaurants as well as riskier environments like indoor fitness centres. This policy will come into force as we move closer to easing ... border controls. McGowan says the vaccination rate in WA has reached 86.3% of those aged 12 and over, with a first dose rate of 93.9%. Western Australia has recorded three new local cases of Covid-19. All three were in quarantine and are not believed to have been infectious in the community, premier Mark McGowan says. One is linked to the Delta backpacker cluster, the other two are household contacts of a returned interstate travellers The state is continuing to ease public health measures following the successful management of an Omicron leak from hotel quarantine, McGowan says. The nation’s peak social services body has called for mutual obligations to be suspended due to the spread of Omicron, saying jobseekers are being placed in danger. In a statement issued on Monday, Cassandra Goldie, the chief executive of the Australian Council of Social Service, said forcing jobseekers to attend provider appointments and other face-to-face activities was “exposing people to unnecessary risks and also placing the whole community at greater risk”. The Acoss statement said Omicron was spreading so quickly and access to tests so limited that jobseekers were “currently being placed in danger while they meet mutual obligation requirements”. Goldie said: We understand job service providers have been directed to be flexible, but our experience shows this rarely translates into universally safe practices. This is why the government must suspend mutual obligations as it has in the past. We should not be worsening the health crisis and placing people at risk. Goldie also called on the government to “urgently address the adequacy of income supports for people who are being repeatedly hit by loss of paid work or inability to secure it”. She said: The most obvious measure is to lift the adequacy or Jobseeker and Youth Allowance and associated key payments, and extend income support to all who need this safety net including those on temporary visas. The government reintroduced mutual obligations in states where they were temporarily suspended in late October. This can include attending meetings with an employment services consultant, and other activities such as training courses or work for the dole. If you’re concerned that you’ve been told to attend a face-to-face employment services appointment and would like to tell your story, please email luke.henriques-gomes@theguardian.com Here is a link to watch the Novak Djokovic court hearing when it resumes in about 15 minutes: And our live coverage is over here: AAP reports that the prime minister believes Omicron is impacting the economy (and not just because the treasurer has Covid). Scott Morrison concedes the highly-infectious COVID-19 Omicron variant is having an impact on Australia’s workforce and consumer spending. But the prime minister believes the economy will bounce back smartly, just as it did when virus lockdowns were removed in the past. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg – from his COVID-19 sick bed – and Treasury are monitoring developments, but Mr Morrison says it is too early to provide an exact assessment Omicron’s impact. “As the case numbers continue to rise, the volume of cases will of course have an inevitable impact on the workforce,” the prime minister told reporters in Canberra on Monday. “This is an incredibly tough time on business. There aren’t lockdowns but there are many people obviously impacted by being close contacts or people being wary, or those indeed who have COVID themselves.” He said it was having a “predictable and understandable” impact on consumer spending. But Opposition Leader Anthony Albanese warned if the government doesn’t get the health outcomes right, the adverse impact on the economy will be stronger. “We are seeing that around the country, we’re seeing that with workers unable to attend work, with shortages on our supermarket shelves,” Mr Albanese told reporters in Townsville. “And it’s extraordinary that in the third year now of this pandemic, the prime minister’s rhetoric is still the same.” Official retail spending figures for November are due on Tuesday, which economists expect to show another strong outcome as a result of NSW, Victoria and the ACT all emerging from extensive lockdowns battling the Delta variant. However, an analysis by ANZ last week showed spending in the week to January 5 has returned to the low levels seen during the Delta lockdowns as consumers showed caution about being in public places as the Omicron strain emerged. Assistant treasurer Michael Sukkar is confident the Australian economy can overcome the Omicron challenge with households having the security of huge savings. Mr Sukkar says new data shows households have built up $48 billion in offset mortgage accounts and more than $170 billion in other savings accounts during the pandemic. “So that’s $220 billion of economic firepower that’s there - it provides a great foundation to continue to support our economic recovery,” Mr Sukkar told Sky News. Meanwhile, the Australian Bureau of Statistics said building approvals bounced back by 3.6% in November after a sharp 13.6% drop in October. The rising number of approvals was driven by the “private sector dwellings excluding houses” component, which increased by 9.7% to 5,315 approvals. Private sector house approvals rose 1.4% to 10,892, following a 3.5% rise in October. “The series has been at historically elevated levels over the past year, largely driven by government stimulus and record low interest rates,” ABS director of construction statistics Daniel Rossi said. “While private house approvals are no longer at record highs, the November result remains 25.8% higher than the pre-pandemic level in November 2019, indicating ongoing strength in the detached housing market.” Housing Industry Association chief economist Tim Reardon believes the boom in detached home building is set to be sustained well into 2023. Two of New Zealand’s most prominent Covid-19 experts have warned that the country is unprepared to prevent the health system from being overloaded by an Omicron outbreak, with likely fatal consequences. Otago University’s Dr Nick Wilson and Dr Michael Baker also said it was only a “matter of weeks” before the highly transmissible variant seeped into the community due to border failures. Wilson said that despite New Zealand’s high vaccination rates, the number of adults who had received a booster dose of the vaccine – essential for minimising the effects of Omicron – remains dangerously low, and noted that the vaccine rollout for children between five and 11 still had not begun. More on this story below: The Northern Territory has recorded 404 new cases of Covid-19 in the past 24 hours, the ABC reports. There are reportedly 26 Covid patients in Territory hospitals, including two people in intensive care. On Sunday, the NT recorded 481 new cases with 24 in hospital and one in ICU. Victoria and NSW will not push back the start of the school year in a bid to get more children vaccinated, AAP report: The two biggest states have backed a federal push for schools to reopen in a coordinated way across the country. Queensland has moved to delay the start of the school term by a fortnight, after health advisers said it would give more time for people to get vaccinated. Prime Minister Scott Morrison revealed on Monday his department boss Phil Gaetjens was working with states and territories to harmonise the start of the school year, laying down some ground rules for the process. Victorian Health Minister Martin Foley called for a uniform reopening to schools, saying children had done it tough over the past two years. “We’ve all done it really hard but kids, in particular, haven’t been able to get vaccinated, they’ve missed a lot of school to protect the rest of the community,” he said. “We want to make sure that their sacrifice, their effort is recognised by getting them back to school as quickly as possible ... but that we do so safely.” NSW Premier Dominic Perrottet said the further availability of rapid test kits would be central to school returning on time. He said he was determined children would be back in the classroom on day one of term one. Queensland’s chief health officer John Gerrard said the delayed start in his state would allow more children to be vaccinated - with the five-to-11-year-old vaccine program starting on Monday - and for adults to get their booster shots. Asked whether parents should be concerned about the health risks of sending their children back to school unvaccinated, Chief Medical Officer Paul Kelly said illness had been less severe in children since the start of the pandemic. “For the vast majority of children who have Omicron it is a very, very mild disease,” he said. “It’s related to balancing the wider aspects and the importance of face-to-face learning in schools with the risk of COVID.” Professor Kelly said there were important issues around mental and physical health to consider when looking at the safe reopening of schools, with advice due to go to a meeting of the national cabinet on Thursday. Mr Morrison said he was encouraged by the fact that Queensland was allowing the children of essential workers to return to school as scheduled. But he warned against other states delaying the start of term one. “As we see the Omicron wave rise, sometimes you do things which just pushes the wave further out. You still get the same outcome.” Here’s a full story via AAP, taking in comments made by the prime minister, Scott Morrison, at a press conference this morning: Prime Minister Scott Morrison has talked down concerns about the rollout of free rapid antigen tests for more than six million concession cardholders, saying they’re not for essential purposes. One Victorian pharmacy northwest of Geelong said pharmacies were under the impression the government would provide the RATs, which they would then distribute to concession cardholders for free. Bannockburn Pharmacy expressed its confusion at the model、 with pharmacies having to source their own stock and distribute the tests to cardholders before being reimbursed by the government. “Pharmacies were under the impression that the federal government would be allocating stock they have ordered directly to us pharmacies,” it said in a social media post. “This would have meant that pharmacies would have received stock around the same time, making it easier for the community (if they hold a concessional card) to know when they could start collecting them.” More than six million concession cardholders will be able to access 10 free tests over a three-month period, with Mr Morrison calling the arrangements with pharmacies straightforward. “They’re used to doing that with many other medicines and they follow a very similar process and that’s why we chose to do it with the pharmacies because they have the systems in place,” he said. But Bannockburn Pharmacy said supply was already uncertain and it didn’t know when the RATs would be delivered or if orders would be delivered in full. “Because pharmacies were under the impression we would be receiving stock directly from the federal government, it means now pharmacies have to go back to suppliers to increase our orders and we don’t know when and if these increased orders will be fulfilled.” The Pharmacy Guild of Australia told AAP it was still working through the details with the government but free tests delivered directly to pharmacies were never the case. The prime minister said the health minister continued to work closely with the guild and an announcement on arrangements will be made shortly. Mr Morrison also said essential tests were still free for Australians. “I want to stress - anyone who is symptomatic or a close contact gets a free test. Always has, always will,” he said. “The additional supplementary tests that people will be getting concessional access to, they are not essential tests. They are discretionary tests.” Opposition Leader Anthony Albanese said the government needed to stop pretending there aren’t issues with the testing regime. “People are queuing because they are sick and then being told to go and get a rapid antigen test which isn’t available and they can’t find,” he told reporters on Monday. “The gap between what the prime minister says will happen and what actually does happen is something that is a cause of much frustration.” Deputy Prime Minister Barnaby Joyce says panic buying and hoarding is leading to shortages of test kits. Mr Joyce said while 200 million tests were on their way, Australians should only buy what they needed. “Don’t take more than what you require because that means someone else misses out.” Mr Joyce said while waiting for stocks to arrive, people should exercise personal responsibility. “If you feel a bit crook ... stay home and be careful as you would do if you had the flu or so many other viruses or diseases you might catch,” he said. “It is more important than a cold, but if you had a cold you wouldn’t go around coughing and spluttering on people.” A previous post incorrectly stated that three Covid-related deaths had been recorded in the ACT today. No deaths were reported. Here’s a short update on how the Kiwis are handling Omicron, freshly filed by the crew at AAP: New Zealand’s border regime continues to defy Omicron as cases of the highly transmissible COVID-19 variant mount in quarantine. On Monday, health officials reported 27 community cases of COVID-19, but 33 cases among international arrivals during the mandatory quarantine stay. Dozens of cases are arriving each day at the border, and are predominantly the Omicron variant, which is yet to spread widely in New Zealand. There have been 273 cases of COVID-19 picked up at the border this year. As of Friday, when 176 had been reported, 127 were identified as Omicron, eight were Delta and the balance were still being investigated. A sizeable minority of the cases are coming from Australia, where the variant is rampant. University of Otago public health professor Michael Baker said every new case contributed to the chance of a leak from quarantine, known locally as MIQ. “We’re getting more than 20 cases a day ... that’s going to put huge strain on the MIQ system, as we know everyone infected that arrives increases the risk of border failure,” he told Radio NZ. The virus has also returned to Wellington, which has not had identified community transmission since August. On the weekend, two cases were reported in the capital with links to a music festival in Tauranga held the previous week. On Monday, another Wellington case was found with links to an out-of-town music festival – a New Year’s Eve event in Auckland. Of the 26 other community cases, most (16) were from Auckland, with handfuls in the Waikato, Bay of Plenty, Hawke’s Bay and Rotorua. There are 35 cases in hospital with the virus, including one in intensive care. The scribes at AAP have provided this update on the Covid situation in Queensland, which includes the quite interesting tidbit that multiple pathology providers have not reported their results, meaning the daily numbers could be significantly higher than reported. They were significantly lower today (,9581) than yesterday (18,000): Queensland’s COVID-19 outbreak is surging on the Gold Coast with case numbers unclear, possibly due to a software glitch. The latest figure of 9,581 cases emerged after more than 21,000 tests in the 24 hours to 6.30am on Monday taking the total number of active cases in the state to at least 90,000. However, the numbers are lower than expected because at least four private pathology labs have been unable to report test results for Sunday, possibly due to a software glitch. There are 419 people being treated for COVID-19 in hospital, with 21 in intensive care and five of those on ventilators. Chief Health Officer John Gerrard says more than half of the ICU cases and a quarter of the ward emissions are on the Gold Coast. “We’ve said from the beginning that this this epidemic would not occur in an even spread and all at the same time across Queensland, and it looks like at the moment the surge is probably occurring on the Gold Coast,” he said. “It’s not surprising, given the sheer number of interstate visitors which would cause seeding events to occur particularly in the area.” Dr Gerrard says due to the state’s high vaccination rate, Omicron was starting to becoming the dominant variant. He said 90 per cent of all cases in Queensland were that variant, with the state experiencing an “Omicron pandemic”. “It will be interesting to see how that differs from what has been seen elsewhere,” he told reporters. “Omicron definitely can still cause severe disease, it’s not trivial.” The state will delay the January 24 return of classes for most students until February 7, with Year 11 and 12 students to start online learning on January 31. Dr Gerrard said the delay will allow children to get vaccinated before February 7, but there will still be a surge whenever children go back school. Children are likely to only experience mild illness, he said, but he’s more concerned about them spreading it to adults. “In reality, the biggest risk is not to the children themselves instead of people around them, to their parents and their grandparents,” the CHO said. “So as much as anything else, [these] two extra weeks give us an opportunity, to others who might be at risk, to get that third dose.” Education Minister Grace Grace said the delay would also help ensure there’s enough staff available when schools return. However, she has warned that the return could be impacted by tight vaccine supplies or high cases among school staff. “Look, I don’t know exactly what’s going to come into the future,” Ms Grace told ABC Radio on Monday. “But at this stage, we’re hoping that we’ll get over the peak of Queensland, that the two weeks will be sufficient and we’ll have face to face (learning) as soon as possible.” A three-year-old with a rare genetic condition has become the youngest person to die in Australia after contracting Covid-19, as the New South Wales government considers fines for people who do not register positive rapid antigen tests through a new app to be released this week. On Monday NSW recorded 18 deaths from the virus, the second day in a row on which it has broken the previous record for the deadliest day of the pandemic. Of those, five were unvaccinated, including a man in his 30s and a three-year-old with a rare genetic condition who was not yet eligible for the jab. The child was born with a rare condition known as Niemann-Pick, a terminal illness which, the ABC reports, had left him with a short expected life span. Read more below: AAP reports that there are grave concerns for a 14-year-old girl missing in Queensland floodwaters as the regional city of Maryborough assesses the damage to its CBD. Water has begun to recede in the city, about three hours’ drive north of Brisbane, after the river peaked at just under 10 metres on Sunday night. A levee was protecting the CBD until an underground stormwater mechanism failed just before 2pm on Sunday, allowing floodwater to surge up through the drains and into the streets. More than 30 inner-city blocks were issued with an evacuation order after the remnants of tropical cyclone Seth dumped 600mm of rain on the Wide Bay-Burnett region in two days. As damage to homes and businesses is assessed, emergency services continue to search for a missing teenager swept away while fleeing a car caught in floodwaters with a 40-year-old man near Gympie on Saturday. “It is an extremely difficult area surrounded by water, which has created hindrances to our search effort,” Wide Bay Burnett District Superintendent Michael Sawrey said on Monday. Water police, divers, volunteers and aerial support are assisting with the search, and Prime Minister Scott Morrison said his thoughts are with the girl’s family. “I have a daughter who’s 14 years old, so I can understand the terrible, terrible time that family must be going through at the moment,” he said on Monday. Mr Morrison also gave his condolences to the family of a 22-year-old man whose body was found in a submerged ute at Kanigan, north of Gympie, on Saturday. Meanwhile, a father and his young daughter have survived two nights spent clinging to a tree before they were rescued over the weekend. An RACQ rescue helicopter crew from Toowoomba airlifted the pair from a homestead in the Gympie region to hospital on Sunday after they were found at around 1pm. “The father explained to the crew that his car had been caught between two sections of floodwaters on Friday night and water began filling the car,” RACQ LifeFlight said in a statement late on Sunday night. “He and his primary school-aged daughter climbed onto the roof of the vehicle but were swept into the water in the darkness.” They were washed into a tree, which they clung to. On the first night, the father swam back to the submerged car and grabbed a rope, which he used to tie himself and his daughter to the tree. After the water subsided on Sunday morning, the pair climbed down more than 10 metres to the ground and made their way to the homestead to raise the alarm. “They had suffered exposure, dehydration and a lot of insect bites,” RACQ LifeFlight said. It was one of at least two flood-related missions in the Gympie region for chopper crews on the weekend. A reminder that all our coverage of the Novak Djokovic federal court hearing can be found here: Here’s the update on the Victorian Covid situation from our friends at AAP: Thousands of Victoria’s essential workers have until February 12 to get their COVID-19 vaccine booster, under a new state government mandate. New pandemic orders which kick in at 11.59pm on Wednesday will demand workers in key sectors – including health and aged care, disability, emergency services and food distribution – get their third dose to continue working. Those eligible for a third dose on or before Wednesday will be given until Saturday, February 12 to get their booster, with workers not yet eligible told to get it within three months and two weeks of their deadline. This means residential aged care workers have until March 1, health care until March 29, and emergency, disability, quarantine, corrections and food distribution workers must get their third dose by March 12. Food distribution workers include manufacturing, warehouse and transport workers but not retail supermarket staff. Workers with a valid medical exemption are also not included in the mandate. It comes as the vaccine rollout for children aged between five and 11 was marred by supply issues on the first day of the program. Royal Australian College of General Practitioners Victorian chair Anita Munoz said supply was coming in “sporadically” with some GP practices given 100 doses a week and others given 100 doses a fortnight. “That is, really, terribly inadequate numbers for general practices to vaccinate kids,” she told AAP. “The supply itself is unreliable and sporadic, and we understand that’s in part because the logistics industry is affected by COVID itself. “But it’s not just that, when supplies finally do arrive they’re coming in in inadequate numbers.” She said the RACGP had given “a lot of feedback” to the federal government about how to ensure the latest vaccine rollout would run smoothly and efficiently. “What we really wanted to avoid was repeating any of the mistakes we needed to learn from last year,” she said. “I am disappointed that these kinds of issues are being repeated.” Those Queensland Covid figures as compared to yesterday: 9,581 new cases (18,000 yesterday, including 4,321 self-reported RAT results); 419 cases in hospital (380); and 21 in ICU (22 yesterday, so down one). Gerrard adds that the Gold Coast is the epicentre of many of the state’s Covid cases: A substantial number of the cases are occurring on the Gold Coast. About half of the intensive care admissions or just over half, 11, out of the 21, and about a quarter of the ward admissions, 101 out of 419 are currently on the Gold Coast. It looks like at the moment the surge is probably occurring on the Gold Coast. It’s not surprising given the sheer number of interstate visitors which would have caused seeding events to have occurred, particularly in this area. We know we have a lot of travellers going to that region but I would also point out that the vaccination rates on the Gold Coast are ... I think the lowest in south-east Queensland at least. He said that of the 11 people in ICU on the Gold Coast, six were unvaccinated. Queensland’s chief health officer John Gerrard says there are 21 Covid patients in the state’s hospital intensive care units, seven of whom are ventilated. There are 419 cases in hospital requiring treatment for Covid. “The intensive care number overall is still a small number by Queensland standards,” he said. Here’s how the ACT is coping with Omicron today, as per the update sent recently by the territory government: New cases in the 24 hours to 8pm yesterday: 938 Active cases: 5,681 Patients in ACT hospitals: 25, including four in intensive care and three ventilated (down from 27, four and four reported yesterday) ACT residents aged 12 and over who are fully vaccinated: 98.5% ACT residents aged 18 and over who have received their booster: 22.5% Thank you Calla for your shift over morning tea. I’ll be with you all until early evening. With that, I’ll hand you over to Nino Bucci. Martin Foley says the “profound increase in hospitalisation numbers” has prompted the chief health officer to recommend mandating a third dose, or booster shot, of Covid-19 vaccine for key workers. The order will be mandated under new pandemic orders, passed by premier Daniel Andrews under the new pandemic legislation last night. The orders will be signed by Foley today. Workers for whom a booster shot will be mandatory are: Healthcare workers Aged care workers Disability workers Emergency service workers People who work in prisons and corrections Hotel quarantine workers Food distribution workers, including manufacturing, warehousing and transport Supermarket and retail workers Abattoir, seafood, and meat processing workers All of these people were required to get two shots under earlier vaccine mandates. Foley said further booster mandates may follow. If people were eligible for their third dose before 12 January, they will be required to get their booster shot by 12 February. If they are not yet eligible for a booster shot, they will have three months and two weeks from the date of their second dose to get a booster shot. That means, given the mandatory cut-off for getting the second dose, that all aged care workers will be required to have their third dose by 1 March, all healthcare workers by 29 March, and all other listed workers by 12 March. About 93% of Victorians over the age of 12 are double-dosed already. But Foley said the Omicron wave had showed “we need to increase our third dose coverage”. Foley added: I should stress that there are significant other sectors of the Victorian community also covered by that first and second mandate for vaccines and we are currently closely examining what further measures, based on this risk, and what consultation and support needs to be provided to those sectors to bring those sectors also into line with future vaccine mandates. That work is quite active at the moment and will ramp up and we’ll have more to say about future vaccination mandates to achieve those same goals in the near future when that work is undertaken. Some of the other public health and social measures that will also been acted based on the advice they’ve received will also be implemented as of January 12 when this new set of orders rolls in. The number of people hospitalised with Covid-19 in Victoria has increased from 752 to 818 overnight, Victoria’s health minister Martin Foley said. Foley, speaking at that delayed press conference in Victoria, says that’s “a significant increase”. Last week, there were 491 people in hospital with Covid. Of those in hospital, 118 people are in intensive care and 28 are on ventilators. Two people with Covid died in Victoria yesterday. In terms of case numbers, 17,190 people reported a positive rapid antigen test result through the online reporting system, on top of 17,618 positive results through the PCR testing system. That’s a pretty even split, totalling 34,808 cases. Foley says: Through our rapid antigen tests reporting and engagement program, we now know that we’ve got a huge increase in Covid cases across our community. And that builds, of course, on top of our PCR system which faced being overwhelmed in this Omicron spike. The last few days, we’ve seen pretty much the same number of PCR tests coming back positive and people self-reporting on rapid antigen tests their Covid status. And the system of ensuring that duplications and crossovers is now starting to work very effectively as we align that data for a better picture of what the Covid cases in the community are. Crews in Queensland are still searching for the 14-year-old girl who went missing in the floods. Supt. Michael Sawrey: We have water police, we have police divers. We obviously have volunteers searching and SES and police searching that area. Unfortunately at this stage we haven’t found the missing 14-year-old girl and we have grave concerns for her, but we’re putting in whatever efforts we can to try to locate her. To Queensland now, where superintendent Michael Sawrey is giving an update on the flood situation at Maryborough, about 250km north of Brisbane. Sawrey says the flood waters reached a peak of 9.96m last night and are now receding. Emergency services and the local council will conduct rapid assessments to determine damage levels today. Early indications are 1,000 residents in different towns that may be isolated by floodwaters, but Sawrey says that just means they have been isolated and assessments will provide the accurate figure as to actual damage. It will take “a number of days” for the floodwater to subside, he says. So the clean up will take a while, as you would have seen. The water was slow rising and with that, it’s normally slow getting away. But as you can see from last night even, how much water has gone down. So that’s a positive thing for Maryborough. Good morning everyone, and thanks to Matilda for taking you through the morning. We’ll take you to the Victorian press conference very shortly but, for now, the prime minister is still speaking. Morrison was asked how to prevent essential workers who may work across state lines from being caught up in conflicting rules around isolation, after NSW and Queensland changed the rules around isolating as a close contact in certain essential industries. He said he’d consult with states before pre-judging what action should be taken, but that he “anticipates ... that we will see agreement occur between the jurisdictions”. And I think that that is very important ... You’ve got people working in food production, food processing, food distribution. It does move across borders. A really good example of that cooperation was last week with the seven-day rolling testing for truck drivers. That was something that we had put in place. Now, if that had not been done and agreed by everyone, bar WA which has a different set of circumstances, that would have been problematic. But the premiers were very quick and very practical about that and I would expect a similar response here. With that, I shall hand over to the fantastic Calla Wahlquist to take you through the Victorian press conference! Reporter: In relation to your encouragement to Australians to push through, looking at potential future new strains - are you satisfied with the level of preparation and contingency planning done ahead of Omicron? And has the government, the federal government, stepped up in relation to what’s occurred with Omicron, its future preparation and contingency planning for potential new variants? Morrison: Yes. Cool! Glad we got that sorted! Reporter: A number of medical experts are now saying that Australia is most certainly in the let it rip stage management of the pandemic. Why are we at that time now? And is there an acceptable death toll that’s just a reality now in the same way as the flu? Morrison: No, I don’t accept that analysis, because that’s not the approach that the government is taking at a commonwealth level or in the states and territories. I’d describe it more as I said before as pushing through. I mean, we do have public health social measures in place. We do have other restrictions that are in place. But we also have a very practical understanding of how the Omicron variant works. And it works very differently to the Delta strain. So no, I’ve heard those suggestions and I understand Mr Albanese has made this suggestion. Well ... you know... If Mr Albanese thinks that the answer is to put Australia back into lockdown, then I don’t agree with you. I agree with the advice that we’re receiving, that we need to keep pushing through. And I’d encourage Mr Albanese to seek a briefing with the health authorities. I understand that the last one he had was on December 2. And so, that is available to him. I’m sure that he’ll take that up. Scott Morrison says Australia isn’t “letting it rip” when it comes to the Omicron variant, but instead is “pushing through”. You’ve got two choices here. You can push through or you can lock down. We’re for pushing through. That’s [how] you get through this. You get through to the other side and it’s going to be tough. The whole pandemic has been tough and Australians have shown the resilience and patience and the determination. They’ve dealt with the circumstances, as they’re in front of them – not behind them. And the government is taking the same approach based on the best possible medical advice. And the best possible medical advice is to push through. Morrison says, for the sake of the workforce, it’s important that most states send children back to school at the end of January as planned. As you heard already from the New South Wales Premier, the Victorian Premier, the situation in both of those states are fairly similar. And I do welcome the fact that in Queensland, the children of essential workers and others are able to go back at the same time. See, one of the big challenges we have is to balance that need to ensure that we have kids back at school, because we need kids back at school learning. We need kids back at school because it also has very significant impacts on the workforce availability - particularly in the health sector. And so, that is very important. And obviously, of course, above and beyond all of those issues is the health and welfare of the kids and those who work in the schools. So they’re the issue that is are being managed and I think that we can have some very clear principles around all of those that can be applied to the relevant circumstances on the ground in each state and territory. We will be hearing from the Victorian Health minister in about 15 minutes. This comes as the state records 938 new Covid-19 cases. This blog previously reported that the ACT had reported three new deaths overnight; this was incorrect. Morrison was asked if Australia will consider moving to the US isolation model, where fully vaccinated Covid-19 positive people are allowed to isolate for only five days after testing positive. But it doesn’t sound like it’s on the cards just yet. As I said, our measures are never set and forget. They’re never set and forget. But they’re always set for Australia. Let me stress that. Other countries are doing any number of things. We always look at what they’re doing, but that doesn’t mean that it works here. Other countries have different experiences, different health systems. They have different experiences of the pandemic. We set Australia’s rules for Australia. And Australia has one of the lowest death rates, one of the strongest economies coming through the pandemic and one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. By following the Australian way, these Australian results have been proved to be very good for Australians by and large. And so we’ve got to keep focus on making sure our settings are for Australia and for Australians. Reporter: “On schools, national cabinet in November first discussed a test-to-stay approach for schools. Why is it that two months later, we still haven’t got a plan for the return to school?” Morrison: Well, Omicron is the answer. Omicron changed everything. Delta was a completely different variant of this virus. And so, as we have had to do on so many occasions during this pandemic, rules that were written for one situation have to be reconsidered and have to be redone again for Omicron. And that’s what is being done right now. And so, the applicability of those situations is being reconsidered by the medical experts and that’s what Paul and his team have been doing, quite thoroughly, and that’s what we set out to be able to be talking about this Thursday. Here is what Kelly has to say about food supply workers being given exemptions from close contact isolation: We cannot [PCR] test everybody when there are so many cases. Hence the discussions we have had around rapid antigen testing and that will assist in the coming weeks. We cannot trace everybody as we used to. That contact tracing exercise has changed. And there are reasons, very strong and good reasons for society to keep functioning, for our healthcare system to keep functioning, for our aged care residents to be cared for, and now in the food and grocery supply chain, to make sure we do have those products on the shelves that we do need to make a risk-based approach to those settings of isolation and quarantine. Kelly: Make sure you know where to get the best advice to assist you in those circumstances. And there are several ways of doing that. If you develop severe symptoms then you should not hesitate and call an ambulance. But that is a very, very small proportion of what we are seeing. The vast majority of those 500,000 active cases are mild or indeed asymptomatic. And that is an important part. But sometimes those more severe things can happen and so seek advice and seek it early. The chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, says Australia has moved into a new stage of the pandemic, the “living with Covid” stage, which I think is safe to say is a pretty optimistic reading of the current mood in the country. And what exactly is his big advice for “living with Covid”? Keep some Panadol in the cupboard. Yep. Here is Kelly: We are in a new phase of the pandemic as we have been talking about in the last few weeks. We are living with Covid and that brings with it many advantages but some issues that need us to change some of our settings in relation to living with Covid. One of the key areas there was discussed by my colleague professor Michael Kidd yesterday in a press conference, which was about preparing yourself in case you are in contact with or actually contract Covid. I’m sure everyone who is listening to this and seeing this knows someone now in Australia that has Covid. We have over 500,000 active cases at the moment. That is a very different situation to even a few weeks ago. So those issues about being prepared, having some paracetamol or ibuprofen in your cupboard. Don’t wait to get symptoms to treat yourself if you have ... Covid. Make sure you know where to get the best advice to assist you in those circumstances. The treasurer Josh Frydenberg is still at work despite contracting Covid several days ago, Morrison says. The treasurer despite having Covid is still battling on. He’s improving. I speak to him very regularly and he’s been speaking to the banks as well ... monitoring what the impact is on their customer base on their small businesses. And the reports we are getting back are that while this is a tough time, and it is really tough for businesses because of the impact of Covid. That’s living with Covid – when there are a high number of cases it is difficult. But what we are seeing is there are strong balance sheets. Right across the economy. Morrison says the federal government is working to ensure small to medium-sized businesses are not required to test their staff for Covid-19. It is very tough on business and so we are working to ensure that we can alleviate the impacts on business, firstly when it comes to any regulatory issues and the first of those is occupational health and safety regulations. The attorney general is leading a process with the states and territories which we anticipate being concluded in time for national cabinet on Thursday which will remove any suggestion of a requirement that small medium sized businesses have to be undertaking testing of their staff. There is some confusion about that. I should note and pretty much all states except possibly for Western Australia, there are no exposure sites anymore. And so the risk of a business becoming an exposure site is not something that they – as they were concerned about earlier in the year – that is now changed because of the definition of close contacts and the like. So working out those occupational health and safety regulations and giving small business certainty around that is very, very important. We identified this issue last week and so that work has been done. Morrison says the next step is taking the isolation exemptions into other critical sectors. We are especially looking at ... both in aviation and in other distribution tasks. So not customer facing ... on the food side, so talk about Coles and Woolworths, we’re not talking people working on checkouts. Anyone who is customer facing, they are not doing that. But those who are driving the truck to deliver the food, those stacking the shelves at night, those in the distribution centres, those who are in the abattoirs, the manufacturing places that are producing food, all of those now caught up in those new critical supply chain rules, and we are looking to extend those to other sectors. I note some premiers have noted that they would begin to look at how we can apply that in the hospitality sector. We’ll take that one step at a time. For now we are very focused ... on those critical supply chains and getting the workers where we need them to go. As the case numbers continue to rise the volume of cases will of course have an inevitable impact on the workforce. And so we are looking to maximise those who can remain in the workforce. Scott Morrison has announced a new set of national guidelines – endorsed by the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee – that will allow close contacts in some vital industries to come out of isolation if they are fully vaccinated and do not have any Covid-19 symptoms. They include workers in jobs that are vital for the food supply chain and in some healthcare settings. Morrison says Victoria is likely to make a similar announcement on this later today. The medical expert panel, the AHPPC, has endorsed a new set of arrangements that relate to workers in critical supply chains, and processing, food production, and distribution, as well as emergency services. Now, as you know, some states have already moved on that ... I understand the Victorian government will make further announcements on that today. That paper is now before national cabinet for endorsement. I was not going to wait until Thursday for that and [after] discussions with the chief medical officer ... we agreed it should immediately go to national cabinet for endorsement. [We] anticipate that will happen over the course of the morning. It was sent to them earlier today, so we will wait for that endorsement and that will enable them to take that up. What that involves is asymptomatic close contact being able to go to work in those sectors. Morrison says Australia currently has more than enough ICU and ventilator capacity, but medical staff shortages are still placing pressure on the system. There are 78 patients who are on ventilators, which is well, well, well within capacity. The major stresses on the hospital system relate to workforce issues and they will come back to that in a moment. Morrison says more than 5,000 people are in hospital with Covid in Australia. He says up to half of those patients aren’t in hospital due to their Covid infection: Omicron is a gear change and we have to push through. That is what Omicron is about. We’re dealing with serious volumes of cases but not seeing the same impact proportionally from previous variants as to the impact on hospitalisations, ICU, and ventilated patients. There are 5,097 patients in hospital who have Covid. That does not mean they went to hospital because of Covid, it means they are in hospital and have Covid. As we outlined a week or so ago, up to half or thereabouts of those patients who have been admitted are being admitted for other reasons and have Covid. That still means they have to be treated in hospital as a Covid patient, but that is not the reason they went to hospital. Morrison: There has been a request for federal resources to support any response or recovery effort. That is well in hand with the local authorities. But you would have seen this morning that minister McKenzie has announced that the commonwealth disaster payments, which are $1,000 for adults and $400 for children, have been activated. You will be able to get those online or by ringing up tomorrow at 9am and get those payments if you were in the Gympie, Bundaberg or Fraser Coast areas, as defined. There is also the disaster recovery allowance for those who have had income impacted, a payment for up to 13 weeks at the jobseeker rate. That will also be available from tomorrow morning. The prime minister Scott Morrison is speaking now in Canberra and starts by giving an update on the Queensland floods. I want to express my condolences to the family of the 22-year-old man who was killed during the course of those floods and also we continue to hold out hope and prayers for the young girl, 14-year-old girl who was washed away in the floods and our thoughts are with her family as well. [We] have a daughter who is 14 years old, so we can understand the terrible, terrible time that family must be going through at the moment. I want to thank all of those who are engaged in the rescue and search work up in Queensland at the moment. It was quite a deluge, as we know. The floodwaters peaked in Maryborough last night at 10 metres. That is a little less, I understand, them back in 2013, but a very serious flood. An evacuation order was put in place for the CBD area and homes were obviously affected, as were parts of the CBD. There is an evacuation centre that has been established at the Brolga theatre, around 25 people are there, the plan was activated by the head of emergency management yesterday. What that enables is all the disaster arrangements and request being facilitated through the commonwealth, through the emergency management authority. There has been an iddy-biddy earthquake in the Victorian high country this morning. Tweet me at @MatildaBoseley if you felt it! NSW premier Dominic Perrottet says that although the state government hasn’t ruled out opening close contact isolation exemptions for those in the hospitality industry, it’s not currently on the cards, despite calls for this from the sector. I understand completely where the hospitality sector is coming from even before the outbreak of Omicron we have had right across the board significant staff shortages in a number of industries. And we want to obviously continue to deal with those as we go through. We will work with our health teams in relation to that but we need to prioritise here and ultimately our number one responsibility is to keep people safe. But as we move through this period I would expect further adjustments will get made as we have from time to time. But obviously we have been in contact with hospitality industry completely understand their concerns. Better to be open [and] have this issue, as I have said in the past, better to have the issue of labour shortages than be closed. But we will move through, I will continue to have discussions with them and work with the health teams. But at this stage we are completely focused on ensuring that those essential workers in those areas of food supply and manufacturing distribution networks have the labour force required to keep society moving through. NSW chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant says the man in his 30’s who passed away in the latest reporting period was unvaccinated. The gentleman in his 30’s was not vaccinated. And in terms of underlying health conditions, I really haven’t been briefed adequately, and not all health conditions you would expect to lead to that. So I haven’t got that information available. I think I just highlight the key points that we know that vaccinations is going to help us. We know that with Omicron having that booster is going to be really critical. And I do want to urge everyone particularly the elderly or those with chronic underlying health conditions to get into the boosters. We will be getting Tasmanian health updates from the premier at 2.30pm today. Chant says there have been issues communicating with all Covid-positive people in NSW and she is worried that people “fall through the cracks”. Clearly I worry that people do fall through the cracks and that’s why we need - we have been doing the work we have been doing to make sure there is call lines, working with our GP colleagues and trying to get as much information out there. There are groups where there are therapies that are time critical. The other thing we want people to do is present early. So not wait for them to be six or seven days into their illness before they seek testing. That often means that the window of opportunity for some of the therapies is diminished. So I think I would like to acknowledge the role that GPs are playing in supporting their patients. Pharmacists are fantastic as a point of call as well. And our call lines. But I do acknowledge the challenges of communicating effectively with everyone. NSW chief paediatrician Matthew O’Meara says Covid-related staff shortages are to blame for some children having their vaccine appointments cancelled. As you have heard 63,000 children have already been booked in to NSW Health vaccine clinics. Many more, in fact the majority will get their vaccines through their local GP or local pharmacy. You can see where to get your child vaccinated through the vaccine clinic finder. Just book in. I acknowledge some children who have been booked in for vaccines through their GP or pharmacy have had their appointments cancelled. There have been problems due to the supply chain and due to staff illness. Just like other vital industries. I know that delay can be really frustrating, as you have tried so hard to protect your child as soon as possible. I appreciate your understanding and your patience. The interval between the two doses is eight weeks. So children who get their first vaccine today will be eligible for their second vaccine in early March. That eight-week interval means that more children will be able to get their first dose of the vaccine even sooner. The NSW chief health officer Kerry Chant has confirmed a child under the age of five was one of the 18 NSW Covid deaths overnight. The child passed away at home. Sadly we are announcing the deaths of 18 people, six women, 11 men and a child aged under five. The child from south-western Sydney died at home and had significant underlying health conditions. And a man [in] his 30s from eastern Sydney died at Prince of Wales Hospital. Can I just express my sincere condolences for those that lost their loved ones. A severe thunderstorm warning has been issued for Port Douglas, Mossman, Daintree Village, Julatten and every other town in far north Queensland. This is as tropical Cyclone Tiffany approaches the shore. Dr Kerry Chant has urged people, even if they test positive on a RAT, to connect with health services to ensure they are safe for the duration of the disease. One of the key issues we just want people to be linked with care. If you fall into the categories where you are unvaccinated, you are pregnant, you have chronic underlying medical conditions, please don’t delay getting a Covid diagnosis. It is critical that you are linked with care and also please a reminder do not take symptoms such as breathlessness, particularly in young people when that is not your underlying usual condition, without taking that very seriously. I think you have heard before from some of our intensivists and respiratory physicians we don’t expect young people to get breathless or dizzy and that’s a sign you really need to escalate your care. The NSW chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant is up now to run us through the (not particularly accurate) Covid-19 case tally for the day. So today we have around 2,030 Covid cases admitted to the hospital with 150 people in intensive care, 47 of whom require ventilation. There were 20,030 cases detected by PCR testing reported in NSW from the 24 hours to 8pm last night. And 84,000 tests, PCR tests were reported in that period. That clearly is an underestimate as people are moving and transitioning to RAT testing, the rapid antigen testing. But just to let you know that’s certainly hopefully freeing up quite a lot of the capacity for PCR testing for those who need it and if you can’t access a RAT, and need to be tested, please proceed to get a PCR test. Perrottet says his preschool-aged daughter was vaccinated last week: As a parent I know it can be daunting. You are getting your children vaccinated, we had our daughter just last week being vaccinated who is in preschool. I think she screamed the GP centre down. But what I know here with our hubs we are supporting that GP network here in NSW is that it’s a very kid-friendly environment – highly supportive to ensure there is as much comfort for parents, anxious parents and children as we go through this period. The NSW premier Dominic Perrottet is speaking now: Today we commence here in our state the rollout of vaccinations for our five -to 11-year-olds. And that will occur in GPs, pharmacists, in many of our hubs right across our state. We here in NSW want to particularly support that system as we move through. We appreciate that and acknowledge that vaccination is being key to keeping our community safe and efforts that people have made right across our state during this vaccination program [have] insured that NSW is in a particularly strong position to deal with this phenomena, the global phenomena, and vaccinations and boosters have been key to that. Please forgive me for saying the prime minister’s press conference was an hour and a half away. As previously mentioned I’m stuck in Queensland and forgot about that whole pesky daylight saving thing! Scott Morrison’s press conference is, in fact, about half an hour away! FYI, here are the links to register your positive RATs with your state government (for those that have a system in place). We will be hearing from prime minister Scott Morrison at 10.30am AEDT this morning. That’s in about half an hour. They haven’t said what’s it about just yet, but I reckon the primary school vaccination program is a pretty safe bet. If you want to stay up to date on all the Novak Djokovic updates from his hearing today, you can head on over to our dedicated live blog headed by the amazing Josh Taylor. But like, just open it in a separate tab, because there are lots of general Covid-19 updates still to come over here as well! A reminder that we are set to hear from NSW’s leaders (sans the deputy premier who is isolating at home with Covid) in about 20 minutes. It seems like the big topics will be the vaccination of children aged five to 11, when primary schools will come back from summer break, and how the state will go when including RAT tests in the daily cases tally. Media have gathered outside the Park Hotel in Melbourne’s Carlton, as Novak Djokovic prepares to fight his deportation in Australia’s federal court this morning. The court is set to meet at 10am to decide the fate of the men’s tennis world No 1, who has been confined to the Park Hotel, where a group of refugees are also being held, since Thursday. Government lawyers made their submission late on Sunday evening, saying the automated email that Djokovic received confirming he was eligible to enter Australia was not an “assurance” he was permitted to enter. There is no such thing as an assurance of entry by a non-citizen into Australia. Rather, there are criteria and conditions for entry, and reasons for refusal or cancellation of a visa. The email from the department stated that the applicant’s responses to his Australian Traveller Declaration indicated that he met the requirements for ‘quarantine free’ travel into Australia. Djokovic fans had gathered outside the centre until late on Sunday night, dancing, singing and protesting against the detainment of their hero – but there is no sign of them yet this morning. There are a small number of refugee activists already gathered. They have laid banners on the ground and are calling for Djokovic to help them advocate for the men stuck inside the immigration hotel. Djokovic’s lawyers have prepared a suite of arguments, including that the tennis star’s Covid-19 infection in December means he is within Atagi’s guidelines. The minister for emergency management and national recovery and resilience, Bridget McKenzie, says Queenslanders in communities impacted by the current flooding will be able to apply for financial support from the federal government from Tuesday afternoon. And gosh she is saying “Liberal and Nationals Government” a lot in her statement. By making this financial support available, the Liberal and Nationals Government is helping people get back on their feet as soon as possible. The Disaster Recovery Payment is a one-off, non-means tested payment of $1,000 for eligible adults and $400 for eligible children. This payment is available to anyone in those affected local government areas who has suffered a significant loss, including a severely damaged or destroyed home or serious injury. The Disaster Recovery Allowance provides a short-term income support payment to assist individuals whose income has been affected because of this disastrous event. The Allowance is available for up to 13 weeks, equivalent to the maximum rate of Jobseeker Payment or Youth Allowance. The Liberal and Nationals Government continues to provide support in the hope of strengthening and uplifting communities, as they overcome the significant damage caused by these events. We are getting close to the start of tennis star Novak Djokovic’s hearing from 10am at the federal court today. We will bring you all the updates when that starts. In other news, well known Melbourne charity figurehead Father Bob Maguire has also tested positive for Covid-19 but has been released from hospital to isolate at home. Here is the full statement from health minister Greg Hunt on children aged five to 11 becoming eligible for the Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine this morning. So just for context, it’s worth remembering that the Victorian case numbers include RATs that have been registered by individuals but the New South Wales numbers are currently only reflecting PCR test results. Basically, Victoria might not actually have more cases than NSW, and take everything with a grain of salt for the time being. Hold by for Covid-19 numbers. T-minus one minute. A man has been allegedly kidnapped from south-west Sydney as police investigate whether a car fire nearby is connected, reports AAP’s Greta Stonehouse. Police say the 39-year-old man was abducted from a Condell Park home in Third Avenue on Sunday at about 7.30pm. The state’s robbery and serious crime squad are assisting Bankstown detectives while investigations continue into a Greenacre car fire hours later. The vehicle was set alight in an open carpark at a Lawford Street unit block on Monday about 1.25am, spreading to a second car before it was extinguished by firefighters. Authorities are calling for anyone with information or who may have dashcam footage of the incidents to come forward. A 14-year-old girl remains missing as parts of Queensland continue to be affected by major flooding. The aftermath of ex-tropical cyclone Seth has caused “unexpected” heavy rains and storms across parts of the state, with further cyclone activity expected this week. Severe thunderstorms were no longer occurring across Capricornia, Wide Bay and Burnett but a tropical cyclone may be brewing further north in the wake of Seth, with a tropical low developing east of Cape York Peninsula. The premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, said the cyclone was forecast to hit the coast as a category one system at about 4am on Monday, local time. You can read the full report below: The head of Woolworths has worked to quell concerns about supply shortages as supermarket shelves are left bare, reports AAP’s Dominic Giannini. Bradford Banducci told ABC on Monday that customers won’t be left hungry but some concessions needed to be made due to the increased demand. There is enough product in our supply chain to meet the needs of our customers [but] it might not always be their favourite brand unfortunately. Banducci said supply issues would likely last for the next two to three weeks as the country comes to the predicted peak of Omicron cases. He noted he was taking a conservative estimate, with his team saying supply would be able to meet demand by the end of the week. NSW and Queensland have moved to try and ease pressure by easing quarantine requirements for close contacts. It’s a move that’s been branded as reckless by the Transport Workers’ Union which is worried it would only exacerbate shortages if there were breakouts in workplaces. National secretary Michael Kaine expressed his dismay at the changes. Close contacts are more likely now than ever to have the virus, because of Omicron and definition of close contacts ... The concern is they will be required to work. That means you have people [who are] the most likely to have the virus in workplaces. There is a real danger here that this might make matters worse. The Australian Retailers Association said access to rapid antigen tests needed to be a priority for workers, calling for them to be made free and immediately available for essential frontline retail and distribution centre workers. Lieutenant general John Frewen has once again refuted claims that there is a vaccine shortage for those aged five to 11, telling ABC radio that Australia “will have more than enough vaccines for every kid to have their first dose before the end of the year”. If there have been circumstances of people having trouble finding a booking I’m not going to contest that, but for every one of these anecdotal stories there are many thousands of positive stories. Close contacts of people with Covid-19 will be allowed out of isolation to work if their job is critical for food supply or emergency services under new rules in New South Wales and Queensland. The two state governments announced the relaxed restrictions to ease food shortages on Sunday as federal health officials revealed isolation rules may soon change nationwide. With case numbers spiking due to Omicron, Australians are adjusting to growing hospitalisations, workforce disruptions and an increasing onus on managing the pandemic themselves by recording rapid antigen test results. NSW reported its deadliest day since the start of the pandemic on Sunday with 16 deaths in the preceding 24 hours – eclipsing the highest daily totals of the Delta wave. Eight men and eight women in their 60s, 70s, 80s, and 90s died. You can read the full report below: January 28 is the non-negotiable date for NSW children to return to school, the premier says, with rapid antigen testing critical to the plan, reports AAP. A further 50m at-home rapid test kits have been purchased by the state in addition to the 50m already held in reserve, the premier, Dominic Perrottet, said on Sunday. The announcement came as NSW reported its deadliest day of the pandemic, recording 16 deaths related to the coronavirus. There are currently 1,927 virus patients in NSW hospitals, 130 more than the previous day. Of them, 151 are in intensive care with 38 needing ventilation. There were also 30,062 new infections reported from less than 100,000 conventional PCR lab tests. NSW is yet to launch a system to report rapid test results, but Perrottet says he’s advised the switch will happen by mid-week, at which point case numbers are expected to surge afresh. The newly purchased rapid tests would be instrumental in getting kids back to school, he said. We are finalising our back-to-school plans at the moment. This will be a core part of the plans getting kids back in the classrooms ... There will be challenges as we move through the return-to-school program but ultimately we can’t let perfection be the enemy of good. We need kids back in class. While just over 78% of children aged 12 to 15 in NSW have been fully vaccinated, primary school-aged children, those between five and 11 are only become eligible for their first dose from today. Very few will be fully vaccinated when classrooms open their doors amid the nation’s biggest outbreak. That has prompted the Queensland government to delay the return to classrooms by two weeks, to 7 February. Lawyers for Australia’s Department of Home Affairs have insisted Novak Djokovic was never given any assurances his medical exemption would allow him to enter Australia. While also confirming that the world No 1 is unvaccinated, the legal team from the Australian government said ahead of Monday’s appeal hearing that there is no valid reason for Djokovic to be granted access to Australia for the tournament which begins on 17 January. Djokovic had his visa cancelled after arriving in Melbourne last week, and his lawyers have submitted a lengthy document arguing the 34-year-old fulfilled the criteria for a vaccine exemption certificate because of a recent Covid infection. You can read the full report below: NSW opposition leader Chris Minns has told Sydney radio station 2GB that children in the state should still return to school come February despite their northern neighbour issuing a two-week delay. In many parts of the country hospitals are under stress, as more patients turn up for treatment and many staff are required to be absent because of Covid. As we reported, these hospitals range from the very large – such as Melbourne’s Alfred hospital or the much smaller, including Byron Central hospital in northern NSW. The rise in cases means hospitals are nearing capacity. One concern worrying health officials is there will be an unexpected event, such as a train or bus crash, that will suddenly present a lot of people needing urgent care but with no beds spare. Another issue looming in the near future is the resignation of exhausted medical or other staff, tired of the demand for long overtime or even bullying or abuse from patients unhappy at the attention they are receiving. At Byron, which is without its two top executives because of resignations, three more senior emergency department staff have quit, according to a nurse from the Nurses and Midwives Association. The trio includes the ED’s nursing unit manager. According to one Facebook post from the region, “currently four doctors and eight nurses who work in Byron hospital are off sick with Covid. My friend says that none of this is due to poor practices, they are just being swamped with cases. Instead of being offered sick pay or worker’s compensation, they have been told to use their leave entitlements/holidays.” Similar issues are popping up across the country. Feel free to contact me on peter.hannam@theguardian.com to let us know your concerns. By the way, we will be hearing from NSW Health officials at 10am today. Jumping back to the Covid vaccine and Lieutenant General John Frewen is out and about this morning defending the rollout of vaccines for five-to-11-year-olds, stating there is “absolutely more than enough” jabs for children. There is more than 10,000 places where vaccines are being administered across the country. The majority of those will also be doing kids. So what I would say to people is there is absolutely more than enough of the paediatric dosage to get everybody their first dose before they get back to school. The real challenge here is just lining people up with where the capacity is at any given time. What I say to parents is if they can’t get an appointment with their primary health provider or their GP, then they should try around the pharmacies. They should try some of the state and territory clinics but there is enough vaccine and there are enough points of distribution, it is just about a little bit of patience. Speaking of the Maryborough situation, the Queensland fire and emergency services assistant commissioner, Stephen Smith, told ABC that the peak of the flood waters has now passed. So the peak has occurred overnight and is expected to stay for a little period of time and then slowly drop away. There has been significant inundation and impacts through the area but that has been lessened overnight working very closely with Fraser Coast regional council in reducing the impacts in the CBD and the temporary levy in place there. So a lot of work was done by crews with council overnight to minimise the impact and as a result, the businesses impacted will be greatly reduced. Back up to Queensland and the city of Maryborough is still under water this morning. According to Nine News, another man has been detained by police outside the Park Hotel in Melbourne where unvaccinated tennis star Novak Djokovic is being held alongside a number of refugees. NSW deputy premier Paul Toole has tested positive for Covid-19 but says he is only experiencing very minor symptoms. In a social media post last night the politician said he was already in isolation after a number of family members tested positive. It’s been a long week in our house, with my oldest daughter getting Covid-19 at the start of the week, followed by my wife and youngest daughter, and then my son ... Today my results have come back and I have tested positive too. Fortunately I have very minor symptoms including a sore throat and a little bit of a temperature from time to time. Let’s remember to respect our health workers out there who are working around the clock to keep us all safe ... At least the dog’s still happy to see me whilst we’re working together in the backyard. Good morning everyone! It’s Matilda Boseley back on deck for the first time in 2022, and I come to you today from Queensland (not by choice – I’m in close-contact isolation), which is why I reckon we should start today by talking about the deadly floods that are affecting the state. According to a spokesperson for the Bureau of Meteorology, tropical Cyclone Tiffany has strengthened to a category 2 storm and is just hours from making landfall in far-north Queensland. People between Cape Tribulation and Coen, including Cooktown, should complete preparations quickly and be prepared to shelter in a safe place. The cyclone (which formed in the Coral Sea) is expected to cross into Queensland between Cooktown and the Lockhart River sometime on Monday night, and communities have been told to expect wind gusts of up to 130km/h as the centre of the cyclone makes landfall. After moving through far-north Queensland it’s expected to move into the Gulf of Carpentaria on Tuesday and intensify as it moves towards the Northern Territory coast. Of course, we also need to chat about Novak Djokovic, whose visa case will be heard in federal court this morning, his lawyers challenging the rejection of his visa by Australian border force officials. In their appeal document sent to the court, they say the 34-year-old tested positive for Covid-19 in December, and it was on those grounds that they sought a medical exemption that would allow him to defend his Australian Open crown. But lawyers for the federal government will argue in a hearing that it had not given Djokovic any assurance that his medical exemption would be accepted. The Serbian has to await the outcome of this hearing which will determine if he’s allowed to play for a 10th Australian title or whether he will be deported. And of course, finally, today is the day that children aged between five and 11 will finally be eligible for the Pfizer jab, with federal health minister Greg Hunt insisting there will be sufficient supply. He insists there will be 3m vaccine doses available over January for the 2.3 million children who will be eligible for a jab, but opposition leader Anthony Albanese said parents are anxious because they can’t get appointments for their children. Hunt conceded that as there are 8,000 vaccination points around the country, each will have a limited number of doses a day, and therefore not every child will be able to get the jab right out of the gate. This is to make sure people in rural and regional areas, non-English-speaking areas and lower socioeconomic areas have the same access. OK! What a morning, so why don’t we jump right into the day.The prime minister, Scott Morrison, says the economy is “obviously” taking a hit from the Omicron wave of the pandemic, while Labor is warning that mismanaging health outcomes will make the situation worse. As the country recorded another 71,000 cases nationally on Monday, Morrison said it was “understandable” that the Omicron variant was affecting the economy, but he was hopeful of a strong rebound. “At this stage, it is a bit too early to tell (the economic impact), but there’s obviously been a dampening impact on consumer demand – I think that’s fairly obvious and understandable,” Morrison said. “But what we’ve seen so many times is that when you, it’s a bit like when you’ve come out of lockdown, you see the economy surge back quite quickly.” Morrison said that businesses enduring workforce shortages and disruptions to supply chains were experiencing “a tough time”. “As the case numbers continue to rise, the volume of cases will of course have an inevitable impact on the workforce,” the prime minister told reporters in Canberra on Monday. “This is an incredibly tough time on business. There aren’t lockdowns but there are many people obviously impacted by being close contacts or people being wary, or those indeed who have Covid themselves.” Morrison made the remarks while unveiling changes to isolation requirements for workers in the food manufacturing and distribution sectors, which have been hit by workforce shortages of more than 40%. Spending surveys released by the ANZ bank last week showed consumer spending was once more down to lockdown levels, as workers were isolated, businesses shut down, and consumers stayed home. But despite the grim figures, Morrison pointed to figures released on Monday showing Australians are, on average, 45 months ahead of their monthly mortgage repayments, with $222bn in offset accounts, up from $174bn in March 2020. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Australians have been making good decisions to increase their financial resilience during the course of this pandemic. “They’re using their smarts. They’re making their choices. They’re ensuring they’re getting their financial position in as strong a position it can be to get through this pandemic.” But the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, criticised the government for failing to manage the easing of restrictions and preparing for the spread of the virus. “What we know is that if you don’t get the health outcomes right, the adverse impact on the economy will be stronger,” Albanese said. “We are seeing that around the country, we’re seeing that with workers unable to attend work, with shortages on our supermarket shelves. “We need to deal with the health issues first, and that will lead to a better economy, more jobs being able to be undertaken. A more normal way of life, including children being back at school, is what everyone wants.” The mid-year budget update in December warned of a potential downside scenario that could arise after an outbreak of a new variant, which would result in a significant government response including lockdowns. In this scenario, economic activity would be around $20bn lower in 2021-22, wiping 1 percentage point off GDP in 2021-22 and hiking unemployment up by 1%.At 10am last Thursday, Women Composers came on air and Hit the Dancefloor bit the dust. This new arrival among Scala Radio’s 20-strong family of digital niche stations is devoted entirely to classical music composed by women. Things began, however, not with a great fanfare (what a wonderful commission for a female composer that would have been) but with a bit of technical jiggery-pokery that meant knocking out one of Scala’s existing stations – farewell Hit the Dancefloor, a peculiar mixture of waltzes, ballets and galops (even a clog dance in its final hour) – and replacing it with the new Women Composers icon. The changeover took a few minutes, and the first piece to be played – the opening movement of Fanny Mendelssohn’s String Quartet in E Flat Major – was sadly not available to this listener, whose computer kept displaying an error message. But the second piece – Hildegard von Bingen’s Spiritus Sanctus Vivificans – was extremely uplifting, and the third, even better: a movement of Clara Schumann’s Piano Concerto in A Minor played by Isata Kanneh-Mason and the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra. And yet after this promising beginning, the new station opted for a day of mostly musical mush: the sort of ghostly, ghastly mood music that would not be amiss on Scala’s mindfulness station. Anne Nikitin’s Found God did not make me find God; Julianna Barwick’s Healing Is a Miracle was far from miraculous; Alexandra Hamilton-Ayres’s Coma did exactly what it said on the tin. On the plus side, there was some captivating piano: Oscar-winning film composer Rachel Portman’s A Gift made me want to hear more of her work; Marie Bigot’s Etude in A Minor was hugely polished; Maria Szymanowska’s Six Menuets wonderfully elegant. Like Clara Schumann, Bigot and Szymanowska were virtuoso pianists in the first half of the 19th century who also composed. Playing was seen as respectable for women; composition less so. When contemporaries heard a piece by “F Mendelssohn”, they invariably assumed her brother Felix rather than Fanny. A letter from her father has become infamous: “Perhaps for Felix music will become a profession, while for you it will always remain but an ornament.”  Scala’s premium stations – targeted at “music super fans” who pay £3.99 a month to get ad-free access – are a classic example of narrowcasting: there are stations for devotees of baroque or romantic music, there’s one that plays nothing but Mozart 24 hours a day, one that dishes up “dinner party” music, and a station that promises “classical bangers” which seems to play the Blue Danube a lot.  This is presenter-less radio, with lots of short pieces (three or four minutes on average) broken up by brief prerecorded statements: “Non-stop music from women composers” and “The only station that plays the best works by female composers 24 hours a day.” It is essentially a playlist, shuffled by computer with occasional human intervention. There are a lot of similar-sounding film scores and plenty of unthreatening piano, harp and guitar pieces. Think Enya crossed with Philip Glass: relaxation, mindfulness, the rhythm of a well-ordered life. Not much vocal music – too intrusive? The station’s computer prefers narcoleptic sopranos humming wordlessly.  Scala sets out to make classical music (what a knotty and unhelpful term that is) “accessible”, so you will not find many longer or more challenging pieces on the new station. Don’t expect Judith Weir, Sofia Gubaidulina or Hannah Kendall. The pieces align with what programme manager Jenny Nelson calls Scala’s “familiar sound world” – music that washes over you, gives pleasure, vaguely reminds you of something you saw and enjoyed on the telly.  Nelson sees Weir as “a Radio 3 composer”, and Clara Schumann, Anne Dudley and Portman as representative Scala composers. “Radio 3 is a brilliant station,” she says, “and people assume there’s a lot of crossover [with Scala] because of the term classical, but the overlap isn’t that great. One of the ideas we had when we started Scala was ‘What if Radio 2 did classical?’ It’s more that mindset that determines our music and editorial policy. There is some crossover, but there’ll be pieces we play that Radio 3 wouldn’t touch with a bargepole, and vice versa.”  Composer Julie Cooper, whose ethereal Secret Paths crops up a lot on the new station, insists the formulaic programming will not undermine its contribution to correcting the imbalance between male and female composers. “It really doesn’t matter from what genre they are playing works,” she says. “The most important thing is heightening awareness and giving visibility to women composers.” Scala has allied with the charity Donne, which campaigns to “readdress the gender inequality within the music industry”, to start this new station. Donne’s founder, Gabriella Di Laccio, believes an all-women station – even one with so limited a playlist – will demonstrate how many female composers, ancient and modern, there are. But she also accepts there is a danger of ghettoisation, and has some sympathy with those who reject the label “woman composer”. “We look forward to the day when there are just composers,” she says, “but we are not there yet and there is still a need to highlight women composers.” It is an interesting experiment, but surely Scala need to be braver. Subscribers have stumped up their £3.99 and aren’t your run-of-the-mill casual radio listeners – these are “music super fans”, remember? – so why not give them Weir, Gubaidulina and Kendall alongside Dudley and Portman? And programme some works that last longer than four minutes – the whole of Clara Schumann’s piano concerto for instance. Expand that sound world. Maybe start a station devoted to female serialists. Now that would be an adventure. • Subscribe and listen at planetradio.co.uk/women-composers/Life comes fast at supporters of Newcastle United. No sooner were they prancing around in Arab headpieces while contemplating the appearance of Kylian Mbappé in the cafes of Jesmond than they had to swallow an FA Cup exit at the hands of a club whose previous claim to fame was the completion of 31 matches without a win. Before we go any further, it should be noted that followers of Sunderland have no cause to chortle; their own run towards competitive irrelevance is such that Cambridge United provide routine opposition. Elsewhere, though, the laughing has been audible. Cambridge’s 1-0 win was a hugely popular one. Sympathy for long suffering fans in black and white? A distant memory. Newcastle’s takeover by the Saudi Arabian Public Investment Fund has led to the club being replaced as everyone’s cuddly second team. There are shades of jealousy attached to that – who wouldn’t want their club controlled by an entity with an estimated value of $500bn? – but also an element of moral repulsion. Saudi’s appalling record on human rights and reported involvement in the death of Jamal Khashoggi matters considerably more than the image of flags flying in the Gallowgate End. And fly they have; the demonisation of Mike Ashley on Tyneside was such that you were left with the impression the Jack the Ripper would be afforded herograms so long as he removed Sports Direct branding from St James’ Park. “We have our club back” was the cry, as if Newcastle had been purchased by the cast of Jossy’s Giants. A deflating, if predictable, business. By the time Newcastle edged past Burnley – Burnley! – on 4 December, players engulfed in a Premier League relegation battle were completing a lap of honour. The dawning of a new era, undermined by a subsequent tanking in Leicester. In the absence of Jim Barclay, Amanda Staveley and Yasir al-Rumayyan – reportedly flanked by bodyguards – gave a dressing-room message of support to Newcastle’s beleaguered players as their Cambridge counterparts partied. Players, surely, Newcastle would upgrade in a heartbeat. The cost of doing precisely that spirals with every on-field embarrassment. Newcastle should have had more than enough to see off Cambridge, four points from the relegation places in League One, but theirs is a squad lacking talent and, more ominously given the on-field predicament, character. Newcastle’s response to conceding Joe Ironside’s goal was more pitiful than the fact it happened in the first place. Neither Staveley nor Rumayyan have previous experience of running a football club. Despite spending years on the messy deal to purchase Newcastle, PIF breezed into office in early October without a manager – Steve Bruce was forced to limp on in unedifying style – or a director of football. Three months on, the Saudis have provided Eddie Howe (after a botched attempt to prise Unai Emery from Villarreal) with a 31-year-old full-back in Kieran Trippier and Nicky Hammond, a recruitment consultant whose performance at Celtic should have set off alarm balls long before Hadrian’s Wall. Howe’s coaching credentials are widely lauded but he will recognise that he is featuring in a totally different movie to anything that has come before. When West Ham and Crystal Palace can pay players more than £100,000 per week, the challenge Howe has in convincing individuals of suitable mindset and ability to join a side with one win in 19 league attempts is abundantly clear. Geography has never been in Newcastle’s favour when it comes to transfer business. It may look mean-spirited to take a swipe at Newcastle – a terrific city that houses passionate and good-natured football followers – at this low ebb but episodes such as Cambridge offer an opportunity to assess what precisely the Saudis have bought into. And for less money, according to reports in the US, that the recent acquisition of Real Salt Lake by an investment group. Newcastle last won the FA Cup in 1955, with the list of those who have lifted the trophy since including Bolton, West Brom, Sunderland, Ipswich, Coventry, Wimbledon, Portsmouth and Wigan. Newcastle were last FA Cup semi-finalists in 2005. We are just five years short of the centenary of Newcastle’s last top-flight championship win. Newcastle have never won the League Cup; even Luton and Swindon have done that. There was glory in the Fairs Cup of 1969 and Intertoto Cup in 2006; one tournament long forgotten and another so pointless even Uefa ditched it. So much is continually made of Newcastle’s esteemed past and potential, but that is somewhat undermined by the club’s staggering lack of success. Still, people persist with the bizarre notion that Newcastle are destined for or ultra-worthy of glory. Other clubs, such as Leicester, actually deliver it. Supporters will blame Ashley’s frugality for recent struggles in the Premier League but statistics stretching back to the 1950s show top-flight top-five finishes the exception rather than the rule. “Newcastle United deserves to be top of the Premier League,” Staveley insisted in October. It was as legitimate then as it is now to ask what on earth that assertion is based on, save large attendance numbers that ultimately count for nothing much at all. Football leagues across the world include clubs with huge supporter bases who have encountered inexorable slides into oblivion. It seems safe to assume that kind of fate will not befall Newcastle. Saudi resources should at least see to that. Yet this is a club that gladly sold their soul to a pretty dubious regime, for benefits not thus far apparent. Had Ashley and Bruce been at the helm, defeat against Cambridge would have led to an incredible level of screaming and wailing. Instead, the Toon Army have no option but to keep the faith. Theirs is an unenviable position. • This article was amended on 10 January 2002. Newcastle United were last FA Cup semi-finalists in 2005, not 2000.In May 2020, we and other scientists predicted that many regions of the world might never reach the herd immunity threshold for Covid-19 – the point at which enough people are immune to infection that transmission begins to slow down. This remains true today, even as vaccines have become accessible in wealthy nations and many people have built up immunity through vaccinations, boosters and previous infections. The herd immunity threshold was commonly misunderstood as a universal target to hit early in the pandemic. But the threshold has always been changeable: it depends on how transmissible the pathogen is, and the behavioural and immunological characteristics of the population in which it is spreading – how much they mix and how easily they are infected. For example, if a virus is very transmissible, able to more readily infect people, or the population is very densely packed and mobile, a large proportion of the population will need immunity to halt its spread. Conversely, if a virus is less transmissible or a population doesn’t mix often in large groups, fewer people need to be immune to slow the virus down. In each case, the precise herd immunity threshold would be different. The original Sars-CoV-2 virus strain had a herd immunity threshold that was estimated at 60-75%. But more recent and more transmissible variants, such as Delta and Omicron, likely have thresholds upwards of 80-90% – and that’s assuming everyone who has been vaccinated or previously infected is fully protected against future infection. In fact, for Omicron, existing immune protection against infection and transmission is much lower (although protection against severe disease is still thought to be very high), so even with 90% of the population vaccinated we would not likely see Omicron transmission dying out. Behavioural changes such as wearing masks, working from home and avoiding large gatherings can slow the virus’s spread. But as these interventions are lifted or varied across populations virus transmission will again accelerate, raising the herd immunity threshold compared to that of a more cautious population. At the same time, social inequities may exacerbate the disproportionate toll Covid has already had on marginalised communities by raising the herd immunity threshold locally, for example if people live in crowded housing. Last year, some scientists suggested that we were approaching the herd immunity threshold through a combination of vaccination and infection. But a year after Covid-19 vaccinations began, we are seeing the largest spikes in cases to date in many regions, including places where population immunity from infection and vaccination is quite high. The highly infectious Delta and Omicron variants have driven recent surges through their high transmissibility and ability to partially evade immunity, making a much larger fraction of us susceptible to infection again. This experience underscores that we have yet to – and likely will never – reach the herd immunity threshold despite the remarkable success of vaccines. At the same time, we must not resign ourselves to endless, explosive outbreaks. We now find ourselves in the awkward transition to Covid-19 endemicity. In a prescient paper published in Science in January 2021, Jennie Lavine and her co-authors predicted that, like the other human coronaviruses that now cause the common cold, Covid-19 would eventually transition to a mild infection that continues to circulate at lower levels in the human population as people become exposed and immunised at early ages. In other words: an endemic virus. Once Covid-19 is endemic, infection-blocking immunity would rapidly wane so that the virus would still spread easily but immunity against severe disease would last longer, causing infections and (primarily mild) disease to shift into younger age groups yet to be exposed or immunised; instances of severe disease, which primarily affects adults without prior immunity, should decline. However, we’re not at that point yet. The authors cautioned that behavioural interventions to slow the spread were still necessary during the transition to endemicity to avoid overwhelming surges in hospitalisations and deaths, not to mention the symptoms of long Covid, which is now estimated to affect 1.3 million people in the UK alone. Vaccination (and periodic boosting) remain important for blunting the worst outcomes as we transition to endemicity. It’s important to remember that the buildup of immunity within a population has benefits for everyone, even when the herd immunity threshold cannot be reached. Severe disease is dramatically reduced, preserving healthcare resources. When vaccinated people do become infected they may be infectious for less time and have lower viral loads, reducing onward transmission. Protection is multiplicative when vaccinated people mainly come in contact with each other, as the odds of becoming infected and passing on that infection are both reduced. It is still the case that the uncontrolled spread of Covid-19 in undervaccinated regions could lead to the evolution of new variants that continue to cause disease. So far, Omicron typically seems to cause less severe disease than previous strains of the virus – and competition between variants (for example Omicron out-competing Delta in many regions), may work in our favour. But even milder variants still have the potential to inundate hospitals if they are highly transmissible. Rapidly vaccinating and boosting the global population, especially those facing severe inequities in vaccine availability, and combating the misinformation that hinders vaccine uptake remain some of the best ways to slow the emergence of new variants, and the uncertainties and setbacks they bring. We can prepare for endemic Covid-19 now by improving access to vaccines, high-quality masks and tests, and requiring them in public settings where risk is high. We should invest in research on and distribution of treatments to prevent severe outcomes and social support for people grappling with Covid-19’s long-term effects. We must also strengthen our public health infrastructure to prevent future pandemics, establish regulations for safer work environments and mitigate health disparities that have been exacerbated by the pandemic. Covid-19 is not going away, but we can manage it with smart policy and collective action. Erin Mordecai is an associate professor of biology at Stanford University. Mallory Harris is a PhD candidate at Stanford University, where she studies infectious diseaseJust when you think everything is going right, along comes Carson Wentz. There was a wonky stat floating around on Sunday afternoon. It pointed out that Wentz, the Indianapolis Colts’ quarterback, was one game away from playing an entire season without throwing an interception on the road. It’s a neat stat. And it would be meaningful if Carson Wentz was not … Carson Wentz. Ah, but Carson Wentz is Carson Wentz. Sunday afternoon’s 28-11 collapse in Jacksonville represented a full 10 on the Wentz-ing Scale. The quarterback threw two interceptions on two consecutive plays. He fumbled – again. One absurd sack followed the other. Misreads. Happy feet. Bad decisions. The works. Indianapolis entered Sunday with a simple playoff scenario ahead of them: Win and they were in. It was the same last week. They failed then. They failed on Sunday. It doesn’t get much easier than a Week 18 trip to the hapless Jags, a team with two wins on the season, ranked 31st in defensive efficiency, and with just seven turnovers all year – half as many as the second-lowest figure in the league. This was a Jacksonville team with nothing to play for except future contracts. It’s a team with a rookie quarterback, still trying to find his sea legs in a rudimentary offense. It was a game played in front of a hometown crowd that arrived, en masse, more interested in wearing clown wigs to roast their owner than the game itself. The Colts fell flat on their faces. They didn’t just lose, they were embarrassed. They were beaten up in the trenches for a second straight week – on both sides of the ball. Frank Reich, the team’s head coach and play-caller, shifted to a pass-centric approach, ditching the run game that had carried the team through its 6-1 midseason stretch. The ball was put in Wentz’s hands. Take us to the promised land. Even by the standards of the finest Wentz-ings, this was something special. More than any other high-level quarterback, you can feel Wentz’s indecision seeping through the screen. You can almost see the cogs churning. Should I throw this? I shouldn’t throw this. I’m not gonna throw this. Bleep. Did I just throw that? Sunday’s performance had been coming. Barfing up turnovers is part of the whole Wentz Experience, he has just had an unusual amount of turnover look for extended stretches this season. ProFootballFocus, the NFL’s leading charting service, charted 16 “turnover worthy” throws from Wentz heading into Sunday, with over half of those coming on the road – and that might be a conservative figure. Against the Jaguars, he lodged his eighth fumble of this season, a career-low by his standards, but pushing still pushing his total number of turnovers for the season up to 14 – and his turnover-worthy plays closer to the mid-20s. A reminder: The Colts are still due to send the Eagles a first-round pick for Wentz in the upcoming draft. Wentz is also on the books for $28m next season, good for the 10th-largest cap hit of any player in the league. Indianapolis have built an excellent roster. It’s the kind that is tailor-built for a get-hot-for-a-month postseason run: A bruising offensive line; a young running back whose skill-set complements one of the league’s most bountiful run games; playmakers at every level of the defense. On both sides of the ball, the Colts have smart coaches, all at the cutting edge of where the game is at and where it’s going. Then there’s the quarterback spot. The Colts bet that Reich’s innovative style could curb some of the quarterback’s baser instincts, that they could scheme around his flaws, hiding some of his decision-making issues with nifty play designs. They could handle the bad, they theorized, so long as it didn’t arrive at the worst time possible. They bet that they could navigate through the regular season, and that Wentz’s off-beat playmaking chops could be a difference-maker in a tight playoff game. On Sunday, that all went bust. Two weeks ago, the Colts had the look of a stealth contender. Now, they’re outside looking in, once again facing long-term questions about where they go as a franchise and what they do at quarterback. Video of the week You saw that right. That’s the 4-12 Giants running a very obvious quarterback sneak on third-and-9 in the second quarter of a Week 18 game. I remind you: ESPN’s Adam Schefter has reported that Joe Judge will be back as head coach for the 2022 season. Judge has weaponized his special blend of rah-rah nonsense to such a degree that Giants owner John Mara has claimed he sees something of the Bill Belichick or Bill Parcells in the young coach. The video above – and reality itself – would indicate otherwise. There is no franchise that will head into the offseason in a deeper hole than the Giants. MVP of the week Dan Campbell, head coach, Detroit Lions. The Fighting Dan Campbells emptied the playbook against the Packers to hand Detroit a 34-31 win. The Lions ran an assortment of trick plays to bring some much-needed oomph to a ropey offense. Entering the day, the Lions held the first overall pick in the upcoming draft. The win dropped them to second, with the Jags leaping into the first spot. It’s been a tough year for Campbell, but a win on Sunday was the kind that can give a franchise and its fan-base hope heading into the offseason. The roots of something are there – a tough, physical style, with some creative schematic designs on both sides of the ball. Like all bad teams, the Lions are a quarterback away. But quarterback aside, the foundations of a good team are there. Stat of the week Thirty years. We have a doozy for you this week: No human in history has ever sent a text message about the Bengals winning a playoff game. The Bengals last playoff win: 1991. The first text message that was ever sent: 1992. The Bengals head to the playoffs for the first time since the Andy Dalton-Marvin Lewis-AJ Green axis led the franchise to three painstaking defeats in a row. This time, the Bengals enter the postseason with Sleeper Contender status. Cincinnati have all the ingredients: They’re second in the league in explosive play rate on offense; they have the league’s best deep threat; they have a funky defensive scheme; they can rush the quarterback with four; in Joe Burrow, they have one of the league’s finest third-down creators. The only thing holding the Bengals back: Their head coach’s game management. The Bengals will face the Raiders in the wild-card round next week. If they’re able to beat Rich Bisaccia and co in Cincinnati, you best believe the 5G will be working overtime in Ohio. Quote of the week “Those other three teams have top-shelf quarterbacks, which is obvious to everybody.” – Vic Fangio on what separates the Broncos from the rest of the AFC West The NFL’s coaching carousel is already up and running. The Broncos fired Fangio on Sunday morning following Saturday night’s 28-24 loss to the Chiefs and three losing seasons. On his way out the door, Fangio offered a timely reminder to prospective head coach candidates to not jump to a head coaching job for the sake of the moniker. It’s about picking the right job. And the right job means picking the right quarterback. Fangio’s days as a head coach are likely over, but he immediately vaults to the top of the defensive coordinator power rankings. Denver, with a shaky ownership situation and dodgy quarterback room – in a loaded division – is unlikely to be at the top of the list for any of the most sought-after head coaching candidates. The Broncos’ ideal plan would be to swing a coach-quarterback double-deal, tempting Aaron Rodgers away from Green Bay with the quarterback bringing a coach of his choosing along for the ride. The Broncos have a talented core, and their reputation for organizational competence will see them land one of this carousel’s top names. But the job will only be as good as the team’s ability to find a quarterback in the offseason. Elsewhere around the league • The show goes on. Ben Roethlisberger completed a fourth-down pass in overtime to set up a game-winning field to earn the Steelers a spot in the playoffs. Roethlisberger’s goodbye will have to wait at least another week. Kudos to the Ravens, though. In a delightful bit of petty, Baltimore showed a video ‘tribute’ to Roethlisberger during a late-game timeout, in which they showed nothing but highlights and headlines of the quarterback getting sacked or losing. That’s how you do a rivalry. • The Niners rallied back from 17-3 down at the half to beat the Rams 27-24 in overtime to secure a spot in the playoffs. Jimmy Garoppolo delivered a pair of clutch drives to first extend the game and then give the Niners the lead in overtime. A late Matthew Stafford interception sealed the win and a playoff berth for San Francisco. • The road to the Super Bowl in the AFC will go through Tennessee. The Titans wrapped up the number one seed in the AFC with a 28-25 win over the Texans. With the win, Tennessee secured the all-important (and sole) bye week, which will give Derrick Henry an added week of rest before he returns to the fold. It’s hard to overstate the importance of the win for the Titans. They have, for the most part, been a mess on offense without Henry, ranking 28th in the league in EPA per play since Henry fell out of the line-up. With Henry, the Titans have championship upside. • The Cowboys rediscovered their offensive bluster on Saturday night as Dak Prescott threw for 295 yards and five touchdowns. Dallas’ star-driven vehicle has looked sluggish for much of the second half of the season. But Prescott et al re-found their early-season magic over course of the last three weeks, just in time for the playoffs. The Cowboys’ blend of offensive efficiency and the playmaking chops they bring on defense is tough to match anywhere in the NFC. • NFL Network reports that the Seahawks have no plans to trade Russell Wilson in the offseason, though whether Wilson has plans of his own remains unknown. Seattle are staring down a choice between bringing back Pete Carroll and the team’s personnel czar or bringing back Wilson. NFL Network reports that a “mutual” parting of the ways between Carroll and the Seahawks is, at this stage, the likeliest outcome. • As expected, Matt Nagy is out in Chicago. The Bears job has a solid foundation – a young, talented quarterback; gifted players at every level of the defense – but it’s unlikely to be at the top of any candidate’s list. Justin Fields is a sound starting point, but the rest of the offense needs more than a schematic facelift. While the defense has started to age and creak, with several pieces of the defensive core are set to age out of their prime, hit free agency, or are likely to be cap casualties this offseason. • Mike Zimmer is expected to be out in Minnesota, too. The Vikings head into an offseason in which they have $40m in guaranteed money (yes, really) tied up in Kirk Cousins. That would represent the third-highest cap hold of any player in the league. The Vikings ditching Zimmer might be an attempt at a soft reboot, grabbing an offensive-minded coach to try to squeeze more out of the Cousins-led offense. Alternatively, the Vikings can trade Cousins before the draft and save themselves $30m, punting on the whole Zimmer-Cousins era and starting afresh. • Save the best for last, and all that. The Chargers and Raiders eschewed the much-discussed Kneel-Down Bowl in favor of playing out the Game of the Year. On a tense, back-and-forth night, the Raiders wound up the 35-32 winners, setting up a wild-card tie against the Bengals. It was an extraordinary night in Vegas, featuring a performance for the ages from Justin Herbert and a wonky late-game timeout from Brandon Staley that essentially cost the Chargers a playoff spot. With the Raiders running out the clock for a tie in overtime – a result that would have sent both teams to the playoffs – Staley took a timeout to try to force a stop on third down. The Raiders picked up the first down, kicked a game-winning field goal, and dumped the Chargers from the playoff. • There haven’t been many more impressive coaching jobs than what Rich Bisaccia has done with Las Vegas. Bisaccia guided the Raiders through controversy and tragedy, distractions and adversity. Let’s not get it twisted: The Raiders are liable to be one-and-done in the playoffs. They were fortunate during the second half of the season. After losing five out of six, they drew three straight games against a backup quarterback (Drew Lock), an injured quarterback (Baker Mayfield), and a sick quarterback (Carson Wentz). They won those games by a combined nine points. Still: Bisaccia deserves credit for keeping the train on the tracks in what has been an unusually tumultuous season.1) Kesler Hayden aims to not look out of place in top flight Cole Palmer capped a man-of-the-match performance with a pearl of a strike in victory at Swindon but he was not the only 19-year-old England youth international to shine. On the opposite flank – and for the opposing team – the on-loan Kaine Kesler Hayden did not look out of place up against Kevin De Bruyne and Bernardo Silva. Kesler Hayden, who was called up to the England Under-20 squad in September, impressed the Aston Villa manager, Steven Gerrard, so much that on Sunday he recalled the right-wing back. Kesler Hayden bombed forward at every opportunity and in the second half Rodri earned a booking after resorting to shoving the advancing defender to the floor. There was a cheeky nutmeg on João Cancelo but his sweetest moment was surely the sprint and tackle to cleanly snaffle the ball from De Bruyne. Gerrard is keen to bolster his defensive options and, on Friday’s evidence at least, Kesler Hayden looks ready to star. Ben Fisher Match report: Swindon 1-4 Manchester City 2) Ironside proves dreams can come true Sometimes, just sometimes, dreams really can come true. Given that Joe Ironside grew up watching Alan Shearer play No 9 for Newcastle and still idolises him, it seemed somehow fitting that Cambridge United’s Middlesbrough-born striker scored the goal which sealed a 1-0 win for Mark Bonner’s impressively choreographed League One side – along with the shock of the third round. Hats off, too, to Dimitar Mitov, Bonner’s Bulgarian goalkeeper – and Ironside’s housemate – who made some fabulous saves against Eddie Howe’s generally very disappointing team. Newcastle seemed to surrender after Ironside’s goal and it was all too easy to understand how they have won only once all season. Small wonder the club’s chairman, Yasir al-Rumayyan, who, accompanied by a quartet of bodyguards, had flown in from Saudi Arabia to watch the tie, took the highly unusual step of visiting the home dressing room to deliver a post-match pep talk. Louise Taylor Match report: Newcastle 0-1 Cambridge 3) Upset causes pitch invasion and further upset Amari Morgan-Smith has defended the pitch invasion that followed Kidderminster’s memorable FA Cup third-round triumph over Reading. The National League North side’s striker scored the winning goal in the 82nd minute but, after 14 added minutes were played, the Aggborough pitch was stormed by hundreds of fans, the vast majority of whom were celebrating the 2-1 triumph. Veljko Paunovic, the Reading manager, complained that his players were endangered as his team and coaching staff were verbally accosted but Morgan-Smith could see the traditional aspect of Kidderminster’s emotional achievement. The 32-year-old said: “It’s one of those moments we’ve all seen happen so many times over the years in the FA Cup – there’s a giantkilling act and the fans come on to the pitch. So it’s been part and parcel of the game really. The players gave everything for the fans and the vast majority were only there to show their appreciation, which was nice. It took me a while to get back to the dressing room and I was cramping up in my legs, so it took me even longer than most.” Peter Lansley Match report: Kidderminster 1-0 Reading 4) Hall proves a capable deputy for Blues It was, as Thomas Tuchel kept pointing out, only against a fifth-tier side, but still there was much to enjoy in the performance of Chelsea’s debutant 17-year-old left-back Lewis Hall. He was quick and purposeful, looked comfortable on the ball, showing no signs of the pre-match nerves of which he later spoke. He got forward repeatedly, crossing for Romelu Lukaku to score the third and unleashing the shot that was blocked before Andreas Christensen headed in the rebound for the fourth. With Ben Chilwell and Reece James both suffering long-term injuries, Chelsea are in need of another full-back and have made initial approaches to Everton’s unsettled former Barcelona left-back Lucas Digne. Playing in the Premier League, clearly, is another level, and Hall was not tested defensively, but it may be that Hall did enough to suggest that it’s at least worth considering him as cover for Marcos Alonso. Jonathan Wilson Match report: Chelsea 5-1 Chesterfield 5) Butland makes amends following error Jack Butland must have been the most relieved man in south London on Saturday night after Crystal Palace swept aside Millwall following his first-half error. The former England goalkeeper was making only his sixth start for Palace since joining from Stoke in October 2020 and showed mental resilience in making some important saves in the second half to ensure his side set up a home tie against Hartlepool in the fourth round. “Jack has a really strong character and he’s surrounded by people who really want him to do well,” said Patrick Vieira. “He understands the mistakes and he will bounce back. He is an international player but when you are not playing every week, of course the confidence is not there. But the way he has been working when he has not been in the team has been brilliant and I’m glad to have him here.” Ed Aarons • Match report: Millwall 1-2 Crystal Palace 6) Vlasic finally has chance to impress Nikola Vlasic has not found it easy since joining West Ham last summer. The Croatian did not have much time to adapt after arriving on the final day of the transfer window and has not had many chances to show why David Moyes thought that he was worth £25.7m. West Ham’s attack was settled and Vlasic, who had a disappointing spell at Everton before joining CSKA Moscow, struggled to break into the team. Now, though, he has a chance. Saïd Benrahma is away at the African Cup of Nations with Algeria and West Ham need Vlasic to step up. He has a lot of talent and played well as West Ham eased past Leeds, playing a crucial role in Manuel Lanzini’s opening goal. “Vlasic played well,” Moyes said. “He’s a really good lad. I’ve got a lot of faith in him and think he’ll come good.” Jacob Steinberg Match report: West Ham 2-0 Leeds 7) Teenage kicks for Liverpool’s young guns Liverpool’s teenage right flank encapsulated the team’s afternoon against Shrewsbury – struggling initially against Nathanael Ogbeta’s threat on the counterattack or to break down a deep defence before delivering a composed, confident performance that demonstrated Jürgen Klopp’s belief in the talents of Kaide Gordon and Conor Bradley. The 18-year-old Bradley, already a Northern Ireland international, provided two assists as Liverpool eventually eased into round four while Gordon, at 17 years and 96 days, overtook Michael Owen as the second youngest goalscorer in the club’s history with a polished equaliser. Klopp said: “They both can be so much better because they are real talents. We know how good Conor can be and Kaide, finishing-wise he is an adult, but in all the rest he is still a kid. When he gets in these situations he is really calm. He has a nose for it. Kaide has time, but he will have his minutes here and there. He only just came back from Covid as well. It is really not easy to show up in a game like this and he did.” Andy Hunter Match report: Liverpool 4-1 Shrewsbury 8) Toffees display mettle in sticky situation Masking over the issues at hand or a genuine cause for optimism moving forward? That was the question for many Everton supporters on Saturday night as they made their way back along the M62 after booking their place in the fourth round of the FA Cup. Victory against Hull was certainly hard fought, and not without its nervy moments throughout the course of 120 minutes. But in a way, as Rafa Benítez pointed out, that was perhaps the biggest positive of all. Everton, no strangers to adversity this season, faced a serious test of their mettle against Hull, especially after going a goal behind inside the opening minute. That they showed the desire and resilience to ultimately prevail in the tie was encouraging for Benítez, and it is a trait they will have to call on again in the coming weeks if the Spaniard is to win over his doubters. Aaron Bower • Match report: Hull 2-3 Everton 9) Returning Rashica has plenty left to prove Milot Rashica could hardly miss. A late tap-in at the Valley served to both open his Norwich account, and secure a fourth-round tie at Wolves. Of equal importance, extra time was avoided. Neither player nor team needed that. Norwich’s £60m summer spend gave them Europe’s 11th biggest transfer outlay. Their perilous Premier League position therefore, represents failure. Of the 11 new faces brought in, most supporters would pick Kosovan Rashica as the standout. His return to fitness then, is timely. Without him, the Canaries secured just one point from six top-flight games, scoring just once. Faint hopes of survival may just rest on Rashica’s shoulders. Sam Dalling Match report: Charlton 0-1 Norwich 10) Fearsome Forest bring Patino down to earth One game into his Arsenal career, it all looked too good to be true for Charlie Patino, the much whispered-about 18-year-old who marked his debut against Sunderland last month with a well-taken goal and in the process seemed to confirm all the swirling hype. His second appearance, this time against rather less accommodating opponents, delivered something of a reality check for anyone who imagined that he would be able to reproduce his youth-team displays at senior level without overcoming a hurdle or two on the way. Patino didn’t do a lot wrong on Sunday but he didn’t do much right either, traipsing off after 68 minutes having made fewer passes than the opposition keeper – not a statistic you would want against your name as a central midfielder. Patino is clearly supremely gifted and may well go on to become an all-time Arsenal great. Sunday was a reminder that such a fate is anything but guaranteed. Alex Hess Match report: Nottingham Forest 1-0 ArsenalThe double shock of Donald Trump’s election and Leave’s referendum win in 2016 sent political commentators scurrying for an explanation. The blame was largely placed on members of a smug liberal elite, who had grown so convinced of their own status and opinions that they ignored the growing discontent of their fellow citizens. Trump’s win and Brexit were, in their different ways, a reason and an opportunity for those who had been “left behind” to kick back. There’s much to this argument. In western democracies, modern political parties of centre left and right have increasingly emphasised merit as the basis on which society should be organised. The promise of “equality of opportunity” – which has involved a massive expansion of higher education – was that it would temper the inequalities produced by market economics. But too often the reality of meritocracy has been that the wealthy use their privilege to monopolise the most prestigious schools and universities, and gain the qualifications that act as a ticket to success. Those without degrees have seen their access to high-status jobs blocked. The rich have got ever richer while non-graduate earnings have stagnated. Worst of all, the plutocrats in charge now think they have earned their privilege through brainpower and hard work, rather than inheritance. Yet these highly qualified elites have left their nations with a series of unwinnable wars, a financial crisis, accelerating climate change and far lower rates of economic growth than in the postwar decades. There’s no monopoly of error here, though. Those who voted for Trump and Brexit have a different but equally dubious idea of what a meritocracy should look like. Leave voters, for instance, are more likely to take a tough stance on the “undeserving” poor, whose benefits they see as unearned, and on immigrants “jumping the queue” for housing. They may believe their efforts deserve greater reward and object to the advancement of people both above and below them on the ladder. After becoming prime minister, Theresa May, speaking to Brexit voters, offered a “vision for a truly meritocratic Britain … ordinary working-class people … deserve a better deal”. Politicians from all parties talk about “people who work hard and play by the rules” with the frequency of a catechism. The best of the post-populist backlash books, such as Michael Sandel’s Tyranny of Merit, accept that the current elites do not represent a genuine meritocracy, but take the argument a stage further. Even if we could somehow organise society to ensure genuine equality of opportunity, and allow everyone a fair shot at success, would we want to? After all, the term “meritocracy” was coined by the sociologist and politician Michael Young in his 1958 book, which imagined it leading to a dystopia where a high-IQ elite, certain their position was justified, lorded it over everyone else until rebellion ensued. Sandel’s view is that our talents are not deserved any more than the advantages bestowed by wealthy, well-connected parents. They are also an accident of birth. In her recent book, The Genetic Lottery, Kathryn Paige Harden notes that there is a 1 in 70tn chance that any given child emerges from the combination of their parents’ genetic material. None of us control either the genes we are born with or the environment we are born into. You may think that, regardless of your natural talents, you still had to work hard to achieve your successes. But it is our genes, too, that help to determine how conscientious we are, how well we can concentrate and so on. Sandel points out that the same logic applies even if you are religious and don’t accept a purely biological account of human behaviour. If your talents were bestowed by an omnipotent god then your achievements are no more due to your personal merit than if they were a genetic accident. But fully accepting this logic is almost impossible. When Luther and Calvin strongly reasserted Augustine’s principle of salvation by grace alone, their followers found it impossible to believe their own actions made no difference to their eternal fate, so ended up seeing their good works as evidence of God’s plan to save them. They did “deserve” it after all. The same is true in our more secular world. While people may be able to accept the logic of Sandel and Harden in theory, it would be very hard to organise society if, in practice, people weren’t incentivised by the prospect of reward for what feel like their efforts. And both authors struggle to offer pragmatic suggestions on how to reduce the fixation on merit. Harden, writing for a US audience, merely proposes the kind of welfare state common in Europe, which, while obviously preferable, still leaves huge inequalities. Sandel pushes for a redistribution of status based on civic and moral worth rather than just financial success, which simply changes the definition of merit to one he’s more comfortable with. Meritocracy as an organising principle is an inevitable function of a free society. We are designed to see our achievements as worthy of reward and any politician who tried to suggest otherwise wouldn’t be long in elected office. But the raft of books about the limits of merit is an important correction to the arrogance of contemporary entitlement and an opportunity to reassert the importance of luck, or grace, in our political thinking. The more we are able to accept our achievements are largely out of our control, the easier it becomes to understand that our failures, and those of others, are too. And that in turn should increase our humility and the respect with which we treat our fellow citizens. Ultimately, as the writer David Roberts put it: “Building a more compassionate society means reminding ourselves of luck, and of the gratitude and obligations it entails.” • Sam Freedman is a senior fellow at the Institute for Government and a former adviser at the department for education. Further Reading The Tyranny of Merit: What’s Become of the Common Good? by Michael Sandel (Penguin, £9.99) The Genetic Lottery: Why DNA Matters for Social Equality by Kathryn Paige Harden (Princeton, £25) The Aristocracy of Talent: How Meritocracy Made the Modern World by Adrian Wooldridge (Allen Lane, £25)Like Andy Dufresne in The Shawshank Redemption, the Rumour Mill continues in the early stages of its crawl to freedom, through 31 days worth of transfer-related foulness most people can’t even begin to imagine. And as unlikely a prospect as it seems, we’re also hoping to come out clean on the other side. Cristiano Ronaldo could be planning an audacious escape bid of his own as he weighs up an attempt to break out of Old Trafford, where everything has gone pear-shaped for Manchester United since they hijacked Manchester City’s attempt to sign the forward last summer. The Portugal international is reported to be in “crisis talks” with his agent Jorge Mendes over what to do next. Tanguy Ndombele is hoping to find a new home where he will be more appreciated after being booed off the pitch and down the tunnel during his slow trudge upon being substituted during Spurs’ FA Cup win over Morecambe on Sunday. The Athletic reports that the French midfielder is anxious to leave the club in the current transfer window, having unsuccessfully agitated for a summer move. With more than two years left on his contract, whether or not Ndombele will be able to find a club willing to match his current £200,000-per-week wages remains to be seen and a loan move seems more likely in this window. Dutch winger Steven Bergwijn is also reportedly headed for the Tottenham door marked “Do One!” and could pitch up at Ajax in the coming weeks. Having brought in Philippe Coutinho on loan last week, Aston Villa are reported to be confident of signing out-of-favour Everton left-back Lucas Digne. Newcastle are also interested in signing the £25m-rated Frenchman, while Chelsea would like to bring him in to deputise for the sidelined Ben Chilwell, but only on loan. The European champions are also trying to recall Emerson Palmieri from his loan spell at Lyon but are meeting stout resistance. They will almost certainly have to compensate the French side in order to bring the Italian defender back to Stamford Bridge. With Kieran Trippier already one defeat into his Newcastle career, his new employers are interested in signing New Zealand striker Chris Wood from Burnley, all the better to convert the many delightful crosses they hope to see their new full-back ping towards opposition penalty areas. While you could be forgiven for thinking Wood’s employers would be unwilling to sell him to fellow relegation strugglers, reports suggest they are open to rinsing Newcastle’s preposterously wealthy new owners for an ageing player with just 18 months left on his contract. The Mags have also identified RB Salzburg’s young Swiss international centre-forward Noah Okafor as a potential target, it says here. Best known for a Puskas Award-nominated scorpion kick he scored for Newcastle Jets in the A-League three years ago, Riley McGree now plies his trade with MLS side Charlotte FC but spent the first half of this season on loan at Birmingham City. The midfielder is believed to be on the verge of joining his fellow Aussie Ange Postecoglou at Celtic despite firm interest from Championship sides Middlesbrough and Nottingham Forest. And finally, Gareth Bale is reported to be considering retirement when his contract with Real Madrid runs out this summer, but only if Wales fail to qualify for the World Cup. In the event of Wales booking a place at the winter jamboree through the play-offs, he is expected to prolong his playing career until the tournament by signing a short-term deal with some team or other from one of the English league’s top two tiers, in order to stay match fit ahead of Qatar.Michael Gove, the communities and levelling up secretary, made a slightly delayed appearance on Radio 4’s Today programme after being trapped in a BBC lift for about half an hour. “We were hoping to talk to Michael Gove. You might have been hoping to hear from Michael Gove,” the presenter Nick Robinson told BBC listeners about five minutes after Gove’s interview had been due to begin at 8.10am. “He’s very kindly come in to the building so we didn’t have to deal with one of those awkward line failures. Mr Gove is stuck in the Broadcasting House lift. I wish I could say this is a joke. It’s not a joke and it’s not very funny for Mr Gove and the security men, who have been stuck there for some time. “But he’s keeping cheerful, and even offered at one stage to talk to us on the phone. But I think we will try and get Mr Gove released from the Broadcasting House lift, and we hope to hear from him a little bit later in the programme.” Gove appeared about 10 minutes later, telling Robinson: “After more than half an hour in the lift you successfully levelled me up.” Saying “these sorts of things happen,” Gove insisted the mishap would not affect negotiations on the future of the BBC, saying it could instead be source material for the corporation’s BBC-set comedy W1A. Told by Robinson that the hashtag #FreeMichaelGove had been started on Twitter, the cabinet minister said he suspected there were “rather more people” who felt he should be incarcerated for longer. Gove said later he had texted the BBC chair, Richard Sharp, in order to be freed from the lift. Speaking on LBC, he said: “I’m talking to you from BBC New Broadcasting House but in a scene, perhaps, I think more appropriate for The Thick Of It or W1A, I was trapped in a BBC lift for half an hour between 7.45 and 8.15. “But, thanks to the good offices of the Today programme, and also thanks to my texting the BBC chairman, I was liberated. “He made sure that a crack engineering team were dispatched. As someone pointed out, even though we had to wait half an hour, eventually I was levelled up.” He said it was “very good advice from both a health and a safety point of view” to take the stairs out of the building. A BBC spokesman said: “We’re sorry Mr Gove was stuck in one of our lifts, but we’re glad he was later able to take part in the interview.” Gove was on a broadcast round principally to talk about a £4bn package intended to make sure leaseholders escape onerous costs in replacing combustible cladding. He is set to announce to parliament that residents of blocks between 11 meters and 18 metres tall will no longer face crippling bills. He has said developers and others responsible will be asked to pay, and that those who fail to do so could be penalised via legal means and, if needed, the tax system. Leaseholders in buildings with other fire-safety problems such as wooden balconies could still face significant bills, and campaigners have urged Gove to help them. In an earlier interview with BBC1’s Breakfast, Gove said the aim was to identify these other defects, saying the “guiding principe is that leaseholders should not be responsible” for such costs.To Paradise, Hanya Yanagihara’s vast, complex follow-up to her Booker-shortlisted A Little Life, is a novel of many faces. I could tell you, for instance, that it’s about colonialism and racism in America today; or that it’s a queer counterfactual history (and future) that asks what would happen if sexuality were destigmatised (and then restigmatised); or an elegy for the lost kingdom of Hawaii. Most readers, I think, will concentrate on the book’s longest section, the third, in which Yanagihara writes of a series of pandemics and the way they reshape society in the decades ahead. To Paradise is arranged in three discrete but interrelated parts. The first, Washington Square, is set in the 1890s in a fictional New York. History has gone through a delicious skew, so that the north-eastern states have seceded from the rest of the US, part of a more general post-civil war rearrangement. Our hero for this section is David Bingham, the dreamy and foppish scion of a banking empire. He lives with his grandfather, Nathaniel, in a beautiful house in Washington Square. The “Free States” based their independence on the question of gay marriage – it seems that, with all stigma stripped away from homosexuality, around half of the citizens choose same-sex relationships. This section is in essence a love story, as David, “still almost-young”, falls for the 23-year-old Edward, a music teacher. There is another potential suitor for David: the bluff, genial Charles Griffiths, a New Englander. As David attempts to choose between the two men, Nathaniel Bingham looks into Edward’s past and finds that all may not be as it seems. David is faced with a choice: the certainty of life in the Free States or a journey westwards, to California, to paradise. The second part of the book, Lipo-Wao-Nahele is itself divided in two sections. The first is about another David Bingham, this one a junior paralegal carrying out a semi-illicit affair with his boss, the wealthy Charles Griffiths. It is the 1980s, deep in the heart of a pandemic (which we presume is Aids – it is never named). Even from Griffiths’s opulent Washington Square home (the house is one of the constants in the novel), there is the sense of a city under siege. Yanagihara has always been brilliant on the trappings of the good life, but here there’s an almost fetishistic caressing of material goods, a celebration of luxury as necessity at a time of crisis. We discover in this second section that David Bingham is “from one of the oldest families in Hawai’i… If things had gone differently, I would have been king.” David is Kawika, heir to a throne that no longer exists. The dark history of the US annexation of Hawaii is too complex to unpack here, but it is one of the key themes running through the novel; how American capitalism warped and curdled Hawaii’s sense of itself. The drifting, gentle David/Kawika, and the narrator of the second half of this section, Wika, David’s damaged and dying father, are collateral damage in this half-forgotten act of colonialism. The final part of the novel is Zone Eight. Again, the section is split in two, although these two parts interweave and reflect upon each other. One thread is set in the 2090s, two centuries after the novel opens, and is narrated by Charlie, who we learn is a survivor of one of the terrible zoonotic pandemics that swept the globe in the course of the 21st century. She is a strangely blank, affectless character: she fell ill as a child in the pandemic of 2070 and the experimental drug that was used to cure her has half-destroyed her mind. Charlie lives, again, on Washington Square, although the house has been divided into apartments. The world is ruled from Beijing and all the marks of classic dystopia are there: the internet has been shut down, the press is state-controlled, books are banned, the secret police spy on people using insect drones. This narrative is intercut with letters from another Charles Griffiths, Charlie’s father, who is writing to Peter, a fellow scientist in “New Britain”. His letters begin in 2043 and take us through the dark years of the second half of the 21st century, where each new wave of disease becomes an excuse for increasingly totalitarian modes of control. It’s brilliant and horrifying in equal measure, particularly if, like me, you’re temperamentally disinclined to worry too much about the loss of freedoms in the face of a pandemic. I’m not about to burn masks in Parliament Square, but this is a novel that really forces you to examine your woolly liberal assumptions about the motives behind lockdowns. Put together, the three sections of the novel combine to deliver a series of powerful statements about progress and utopia, about those who are excluded from our visions of a better world. Yanagihara asks us in particular to move beyond binary configurations of sexuality, race and health, to challenge any political movement that seeks to privilege one group or another based on narrow definitions of identity. We are all multiple selves in the world of To Paradise. Nabokov said that names carry “coloured shadows” in a novel and the repetition of names across the three sections is on one level quite simple: this is a multigenerational family saga, showing how fortunes rise and fall over centuries, questioning the idea of inheritance and examining ideas of family that extend beyond blood ties. There’s something more than this, though, something that chips away at the verisimilitude of the novel, that asks us to engage in a complicated way with the very idea of characters in a book: these are figures facing similar challenges in different times, but the points of correspondence reveal essential truths about what it means to be human at a time of crisis. Sometimes literature takes time to digest momentous events: the great novels of the Napoleonic wars, of the Holocaust, of the plague, weren’t published until decades after the episodes they describe. Occasionally, though, a masterpiece emerges from the white heat of the moment: The Great Gatsby, The Decameron, The Waste Land. There’s something miraculous about reading To Paradise while the coronavirus crisis is still playing out around us, the dizzying sense that you’re immersed in a novel that will come to represent the age, its obsessions and anxieties. It’s rare that you get the opportunity to review a masterpiece, but To Paradise, definitively, is one. To Paradise by Hanya Yanagihara is published by Pan Macmillan (£20, AU$32.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyUntil 2019, virtual reality was an absolute faff to use. It was expensive and tethered by cables to expensive PCs, but the wireless and easy-to-use Oculus Quest has changed that. Once the headset is on you can browse from a few hundred apps and games designed for VR, many of which are social spaces designed for chatting to other people. VRChat is one of several, and the most popular, partly because it is intriguingly wild and random. Some VR spaces – including Meta’s Horizon – attempt a kind of calming, sanitised, futuristic look, with soft colours and cartoonish humanoids. VRChat is a total mishmash, dominated by anime aesthetics: neon cities, cat ears, big-busted, scantily clad 2D women, and of course furries (that’s sexualised anthropomorphic cartoon animals, for anyone fortunate enough not to know). Portals lead to different chatrooms – a club, a beach, apartments, galleries – all of which look like they’re straight out of a video game from 2009. This is not an aesthetically rich experience. In a miniature cyberpunk city, my eyes are assaulted by clashing neon and giant billboards advertising different spaces and communities, mostly adorned with smiling anime girls. In my latest trip into VRChat, a little green robot, a giant banana and a frog – other players – are wandering about aimlessly. The frog looks at me and gives a thumbs up. I exchange a few hellos with a Korean raccoon, before he walks off. The point, in as much as there is one, is to find other people to chat with. And because a very large proportion of VRChat’s users are teenagers, people seem to be mostly interested in messing with each other. Trolling might be seen as a problem in virtual spaces by adults, but for teens it is rather the point, as evidenced by hundreds of YouTube video compilations. “Edgy” humour is the norm here. The first thing anyone said to me in VRChat (a few years ago now) was: “Hey, do you want to do drugs?”, in a voice that had definitely not yet hit puberty. It reminds me a little of Second Life, the online virtual world that briefly captured headlines in the early 00s, where I was once approached by a giant squirrel who offered to sell me a “bucket of Aids”. I did not encounter problems everywhere I went on VRChat – mostly just banalities and nonsense – but if I wanted to go looking, I would not have to go far to find someone spouting slurs for laughs, or one of the explicitly adult rooms. Getting a conversation going at all can be a challenge. The truth is that most chats are random, fleeting and rather pointless, or mildly unpleasant. Right now, apps such as VRchat work on a kind of self-regulating report system when it comes to moderation: players who continually receive complaints about their behaviour gradually lose privileges, and you can mute or block other users if they’re annoying or harassing you. Given how endemic toxicity is online, from Twitter to Facebook to Call of Duty, I do not have high confidence that Meta or indeed anyone in the big tech world has either the will or the means to make the online world universally pleasant and safe. In this way, VR worlds are no better or worse than anywhere else online. Bearing in mind that like social media, VR headsets are not intended for users under 13, the best we can do at the moment is equip teens to deal with it.Novak Djokovic has won a battle with the Australian government after a court quashed the decision to cancel his visa – but he may still yet lose the war. No sooner had federal circuit judge Anthony Kelly revealed the home affairs minister had agreed to settle the case, than the Australian government’s counsel warned the immigration minister could still decide to use a personal power to cancel Djokovic’s visa anew. That means that Alex Hawke, one of the closest political allies of prime minister Scott Morrison, now has a momentous political decision to make: let Djokovic stay and play for a record 21st grand slam singles title; or deport him, which comes with a hefty three-year ban from re-entering Australia. The harsh border policies that have allowed Australian governments to detain asylum seekers indefinitely are now being directed at one unvaccinated man, who happens to be the world’s No 1 ranked male tennis player. Djokovic obtained an exemption on the basis he had recently contracted Covid-19, which the judge noted had satisfied a qualified physician and an independent panel set up by the Victorian government. But a delegate of the home affairs minister cancelled his visa on the basis the tennis star might pose a risk to public health. The government argues recently having Covid by itself does not justify an exemption, because Djokovic has recovered. In a hearing on Monday the federal circuit court heard procedural complaints about that decision. After a lengthy afternoon adjournment the government agreed to roll over but warned the nuclear option is still on the table. To exercise the personal power, Hawke will have to be satisfied: there is a ground to cancel the visa, in this case the alleged threat to public health; that Djokovic hasn’t dissuaded him of this; and that it is “in the public interest to cancel the visa”. Immigration law professor Mary Crock told Guardian Australia the Migration Act gives the minister “god-like powers” to cancel visas and if “they really decide to … the power is there”. Crock said only one ground needs to be made out to cancel a visa, natural justice rules do not apply to the decision, and the idea of “public interest” is a broad one that could fit the current scenario. “Everything that has gone before can be disregarded – it is set up precisely for this situation, to come in and cancel a visa anyway. “The politics behind this is enormous … If the visa is cancelled under this provision – you’re excluded for three years,” she said. “Australia would be at risk of losing the Australian Open.” Crock said such a cancellation is “not common” and would “definitely end up in court again” – this time to answer the substantive question of whether an unvaccinated person poses a risk. Amid a surging wave of Omicron cases, the idea one unvaccinated person could pose a threat seems ludicrous – but the Migration Act is built to allow the government to deport first and ponder proportionality later. The architecture Australian governments designed to deter unlawful arrivals and reverse lawful ones at the drop of a hat may now be directed at the man vying to become recognised as the greatest ever male tennis player. The Morrison government has already tried once to crack this walnut with the proverbial sledgehammer, the only question now is whether they’re desperate enough to prove “rules are rules” by having another swing.A Little Catechism from the Demon What is a demon? Study my life. What is a mountain? Set out now. What is fire? It is for ever. What is my life? A fall, a call. What is the deep? Set out now. What is thunder? Your power dry. What is the film? It rolls, it tells. What is the film? Under the Falls. Where is the theatre? Under the hill. Where is the demon? Walking the hills. Where is the victory? On the high tops. Where is the fire? Far in the deep. Where is the deep? Study the demon. Where is the mountain? Set out now. Study my life and set out now. From the first line of this intriguing, unsettling “catechism”, we can reasonably infer that the demon is the speaker, uttering both the questions and the pedagogically correct responses. So the first question for us is the one that begins the poem (“What is a demon?”) and is dodged. We have only a series of selective questions and oblique responses from which to build a picture. At least we know it’s a teacher demon: it wants to be understood, to spread demonic knowledge and be an exemplar for the student demons. The voice sounds robotic: perhaps this is a post-human AI demon, programmed for re-mastery of a near-devastated planet. Non sequiturs sometimes suggest it’s still in the process of mastering the English language. It’s certainly not big on clear explanation. But perhaps this make it all the more attractive to the students it’s addressing. Much of the imagery is drawn from the natural world, and the symbolism of these images is clear. The demon seems to favour mountains, hill-tops and “the deep”: it’s possibly a fire-worshipper. There is a question as to whether there’s a gap between its ambition and its actual power. The response in the sixth line (“What is thunder? Your power dry”) is elusive: has the power become dangerously less by being “dry” – or more potent? The demon might itself be identified with Satan (see line four). It could equally be a benign daemon, or simply a neutral force of nature. It’s fascinated, though, by two non-demonic human inventions – theatre and film. These media have perhaps seduced it to a further desire for “victory” and the means for achieving it. Film, after all, has the power to tell its story. The 15-line catechism is in two sonnet-like parts, the first eight questions beginning with “What” and the following six with “Where?” This suggests a movement outwards from theory to the experience of the phenomena invoked. If the demon has a message, it’s that knowledge is achieved by action: studying the life, and then setting out now. Questions breed questions and the skilful avoidance of direct answers increases the thrill of interest. Edwin Morgan’s experimental and science fiction poems often imply joyful adventure, boundless optimism. This set of coolly mysterious imperatives leaves us wondering about the nature of the quest, so urgently and indeterminately presented. That repeated call to “set out” somehow implies that human history, even after catastrophe, will start up and continue as before, meeting the challenges of its newly elemental setting. We’ll still want mastery. We’ll still rush to “set out now”. And perhaps Edwin Morgan, in his wisdom, is saying that this is the only right thing to do. The demonic is the human. A Little Catechism from the Demon is published in Centenary Selected Poems by Edwin Morgan.In February 2019, Anna, a finance professional in her 50s, joined the dating website Zoosk. She had been single for four years, recovering from an incredibly difficult, abusive marriage. “I was finally ready to meet someone,” she says. So, when she met Andrew, a handsome Bulgarian food importer living in London, she was thrilled. The pair were soon spending hours talking on the phone each day. Anna was smitten. “He showered me with love and affection,” she says. “If you imagine candy floss, I was the stick and he was the sugar wrapped around me. I felt as though I was floating.” They made plans to meet up, but Andrew told her he had to go to France for an urgent business trip. They continued to speak on the phone and also, occasionally, on video chat. About five weeks after they first made contact, Andrew asked to borrow money; just a small amount. “He told me he’d had a work crisis and needed help with port charges for a delivery. He was so distressed by the unexpected charge. I felt sorry for him.” Anna thought Andrew was her perfect man. Now, she believes he was a character invented by a criminal gang to extort her. So-called “romance fraud” – where unsuspecting victims are scammed by someone with whom they have formed a relationship – is nothing new. But online dating makes such fraud easier; experts say these scams have increased in sophistication and frequency. Then came the pandemic – when online dating was the only kind that was allowed. According to Action Fraud, the UK’s reporting centre for fraud and cybercrime, 8,863 cases were reported to the National Fraud Intelligence Bureau (NFIB) between November 2020 and October 2021, up from 6,968 the previous year, with total losses for the past year amounting to almost £92m. Daters who started online relationships between Christmas and Valentine’s Day were the most susceptible, with 901 reports recorded in March 2021. These figures are likely to be the tip of the iceberg – Action Fraud says the shame and stigma around romance fraud mean many people don’t report it. Things soon got worse for Anna – Andrew’s requests began to snowball. He told her his daughter was unwell, then that she had died and that he desperately needed money for repatriation and funeral costs. Anna checked the charges were legitimate, before sending money directly to a funeral services company in France. Whenever she became suspicious, Andrew assuaged her fears. “I’d be sucked back into his all-powerful love bubble. I was also getting receipts for many things and he constantly had an explanation for me.” The following year, Andrew had more unpaid charges on his shipping containers. Then, in March 2021, everything got more serious – he told her he had been taken hostage by loan sharks and was being tortured. “I was absolutely distraught. He said he was being stripped and beaten, and sent me pictures of his broken arm. He was locked in a room with no windows.” In the summer of 2021, when Andrew claimed he was still being held hostage, Anna asked a French Facebook group if anyone had seen him. One reply astonished her. “A woman contacted me and told me the man I’d posted a picture of was Juan Soler, an Argentinian-Mexican actor. She tried to explain I’d been scammed, but I couldn’t believe it.” Anna confronted Andrew, but he said he could explain and “made me question how I could doubt him”. Anna’s new Facebook friend, meanwhile, spent months trying to convince Anna to call Action Fraud. “I pointed out that we’d had video calls, but she told me he’d been using technology to superimpose a moving image.” Despite the mounting evidence against Andrew, Anna didn’t want to be responsible for his death at the hands of loan sharks if he was telling the truth. By the time she had been convinced to sever ties with him, in October this year, she had lost £350,000. “I had spent the year completely unstable, trapped in this abusive cycle. I’d become obsessed with preventing his pain.” After ending the relationship, she cried for weeks. “It felt like losing a husband that I loved with every inch of my heart and soul. I was never going to get any closure or say goodbye.” Anna has now reported Andrew to Action Fraud; the situation is under investigation. *** Olivia James, a trauma therapist, explains why romance fraud is uniquely seductive. “Many of us have wounds around our age, appearance and past relationships that make us susceptible to someone promising love. It’s tempting to ignore doubts and see what we want to see,” she says. This cognitive process is known as “betrayal blindness”. “Sometimes people have an inkling, but the fear of abandonment is too much.” It is not uncommon for people to ignore signs of cheating or accept crumbs of affection in place of real commitment. “Romance fraud is just a more extreme version of something that lots of us have experienced,” says James. “For some people, there’s an element of rescue fantasy, too. If they can help this person, they’ll be able to live out their happily-ever-after romance.” It is a particularly cruel crime, says James. The hurt it causes, alongside the loss of financial stability, can lead to post-traumatic stress disorder and other long-term mental health conditions. “People feel completely destabilised. They stop trusting themselves or anyone else. As humans, we need connections with others, so being betrayed by someone you thought was your soulmate is incredibly hard.” The love-bombing tactic used by such scammers can be hard to resist. “These online romances can make people feel as if they have found a knight or woman in shining armour, because they’re getting showered with affection they may not have previously received,” she says. “But this form of attention can be a form of emotional abuse used to control people.” Societal pressure to find “the One” increases victims’ susceptibility, too. “Not having found that can make people feel like a failure and leaves them even more vulnerable to betrayal.” Samantha Cooper, who runs Rogue Daters, an investigation company specialising in romance fraud, agrees it is becoming increasingly common. “The most targeted age groups seem to be people over the age of 45 – especially women. By this age, they may own a house or a successful business, or have received an inheritance.” As with Anna, many of Cooper’s clients struggle to accept that their partner isn’t who they thought they were – even after being presented with evidence. “Scammers are manipulative and use grooming techniques,” she says. “Once a person has been scammed, in most cases it is impossible to get the money sent back, so our biggest challenge is preventing this from happening in the first place.” Such deceptions can continue offline. Carol Goodall, 62, met her former partner Gary on a dating website at the end of 2015. “I was working long hours as a carer and it was nice to be able to talk to someone. I’d had a difficult marriage that had ended nine years earlier and I was very lonely.” Gary seemed like a wonderful man. The relationship moved quickly; by April 2016, he had asked Goodall to marry him. Although she worried it was a bit fast, friends encouraged her to take the plunge. “Everything was so great. I’d been honest about my experiences with my ex and he was the opposite – always kind and thoughtful.” But a few days before they were due to marry, in September 2016, he told her there was a problem with his divorce papers and that they had to delay the wedding. “All his excuses sounded plausible,” says Goodall. “Looking back, he always showed me papers when I was busy cooking or cleaning, then pulled them away.” By November, Gary suggested having a blessing while they waited for the official paperwork. He also suggested that Goodall sell her three-bedroom house so they could pool their resources to buy a bigger place. “He adored my kids and told me he wanted what was best for them.” Due to Goodall’s long hours, Gary handled the house sale and told her that he had transferred the money into a joint account. While they looked for their own place, they rented a home. But soon Gary was disappearing in the evenings and at weekends. When Goodall raised concerns, Gary reassured her that he loved her and would do anything for her. In a last-ditch attempt to distract and manipulate her, he claimed he had cancer. “It was devastating. I’d lost my mum to the disease and he knew how much it had hurt me.” One day in 2018, Goodall was contacted by another woman: “She was also engaged to Gary. He’d sold her house, too, and she had never seen the money.” Goodall learned that Gary’s real name was Richard Robinson – and that he was known to the police as a conman. “I feel like I’ve been incredibly stupid, but he was so convincing. I am heartbroken and unable to trust my own judgment. My confidence has been shattered. I’m still lonely, but I don’t know how I’ll ever be able to trust anyone again,” she says. Robinson was sentenced to 10 years in jail in 2020 for defrauding two women, but Goodall was not able to recover the £250,000 she lost. She has moved to a one-bedroom flat and has little money left for food or furniture. “As much as I want to forget it, I can’t. I struggle to get out of bed, to go to work, and there have been many times I wanted to end my life. I can’t understand how this has happened to me.” Lisa Mills is a senior fraud manager at Victim Support, which offers guidance for people affected by scams. She says that romance fraud makes up about one-fifth of the cases in her area of Sussex, mostly targeted through online dating platforms or social media. “A lot of dating websites are trying to clamp down on fake profiles, so criminals are changing tactics and using other platforms, like Facebook. They trawl through profiles to build up a profile of themselves that a victim might be interested in,” she says. “We advise people to privatise all their settings, as people with lots of information online can be more easily duped – scammers can create a more ‘suitable’ partner for them to trust.” Although it might not seem romantic, she also suggests people do some research when they meet someone new. “You can use Google to do a reverse image search and check the person’s name,” she says. “Look out for red flags. Anyone who can’t meet up, is constantly away or can’t phone or video call properly is potentially a scammer.” *** Keith Grinsted, 69, says loneliness is the root cause of this growing problem. As well as being targeted himself, Grinsted knows of other victims through his online support group, Goodbye Lonely, which he set up in 2020. “I was very low, and there’s an element of desperation when you’re single,” he says. “I started online dating so I didn’t have to go through another lockdown alone.” Because he was so eager to meet someone, he gave potential partners the benefit of the doubt, even when he spotted red flags. Last year, he began speaking to Tina, whom he hoped to meet when restrictions lifted. After many weeks of chatting to Grinsted, she told him she was living in poverty. “She started sending pictures of empty food bowls, so I sent over some money for food,” he says. But when she asked for more money to pay for flights back from the US to meet him, alarm bells began to ring. “She claimed to be visiting sick relatives, but I couldn’t understand how she’d flown there in lockdown,” he says. Instead of giving her money, he offered to book her flight home. She disappeared without a trace. The emotional impact was huge. “I thought I’d found someone wonderful, and we’d spoken about potentially living together,” he says. “When it all fell apart, I deliberately kept myself awake – I didn’t want the next day to arrive and to feel even worse. It took a long time to recover.” He has been targeted since then, but has become more attuned to the warning signs. According to Dan Parkinson from City of London police, reports of romance fraud have been rising since 2017. “Criminals are likely to have been exploiting the inability of victims to gain timely support and advice from others,” he says. “Remember: never give money to someone you haven’t met, no matter how well you think you know them. If you feel uncomfortable or unsure, speak to trusted friends and family members and get their advice.” Mills says many people feel ashamed that others will judge them for falling for such scams. “Victim-blaming is a particular problem, because on the face of it someone has given their money away. But if people knew the inner workings of the scams – the manipulative techniques and an individual’s personal situation – they might feel differently.” Such judgment means many victims turn to charities such as Victim Support, or peer support groups such as the Society of Citizens Against Relationship Scams, rather than loved ones. Anna is one. “I know they’d tell me I was insane, but it’s impossible to explain how all‑consuming and addictive this love for Andrew was,” she says. She is determined to ensure others avoid the same trap. “I am intelligent, but I’m not the only person this has happened to. The heart and mind can be fragile, especially after abuse. The combination of taking someone’s heart while robbing them day in, day out exceeds evil.” Some names have been changed. If you think you have been a victim of fraud, contact your bank immediately and report it to Action Fraud at actionfraud.police.uk or by calling 0300 123 2040. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or by emailing jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at befrienders.orgRising temperatures due to the climate crisis will lead to a rise in people suffering from kidney stones – a painful medical condition exacerbated by heat and dehydration, according to a new study. Researchers used two climate scenarios to estimate the burden of heat and humidity related kidney stone disease by the end of the century in South Carolina – a state in the south-east US, a region which currently has a higher than average incidence rate. In the US, about one in 10 people suffers from kidney stones at some point, and the incidence increases from north to south. According to researchers at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia (Chop), the number of cases will increase between 2.2% and 3.9% depending on whether greenhouse gas emissions continue at the current rate or are cut to an intermediate level, leading to a huge rise in health costs either way. Kidney stones are caused by hard deposits of minerals (mostly calcium) that develop in concentrated urine which are extremely painful when passing through the urinary tract. The incidence of the condition has escalated over the past two decades, particularly among people of color, women and adolescents. Diet and lifestyle changes have contributed to the rise in the condition, but prior research has demonstrated that high ambient temperatures increase the risk. The number of people seeking medical help for kidney stones escalates following very hot days when the risk of dehydration multiplies. “With climate change, we don’t often talk about the impact on human health, particularly when it comes to children, but a warming planet will have significant effects on human health,” said Gregory Tasian, a pediatric urologist at Chop and senior author of the study published in Scientific Reports. In the first scenario modeled, the average temperature would increase by 2.3C by 2100, compared with 3.6C in the second. Results from a wide range of climate model studies suggest average temperature could be 1.1C to 5.4C warmer by the end of the century.At times, this slow-burn indie hillbilly thriller feels like a heavy-footed stomp through the genre. It’s set in the Appalachian mountains, where a close-knit clannish community lives by its own rules; a lawless backcountry in which a lone woman takes on the meanest family on the mountain to protect her own, banjos strumming on the score. It’s not exactly strong on originality or authenticity. But what The Devil to Pay does have going for it is a performance of real emotional force by Danielle Deadwyler (best known for supporting roles in films such as the Netflix western The Harder They Fall). Deadwyler plays Lemon Cassidy, a farmer eking out a living with her husband and little boy. Life is tough, and gets tougher still when Lemon’s husband goes missing while up to his neck in trouble with the Runions – a terrifying local family headed up by matriarch Tommy (Catherine Dyer). We meet Tommy in her kitchen, all apple-pie sweetness and giving baking tips in the same breath as she threatens to kill Lemon’s son. As a character she’s a shade too gimmicky, or perhaps Dyer goes a bit light on the menace; either way Ma Runion never feels genuinely scary. Still, Lemon appears convincingly scared, eyes saucer-wide with terror. And she stays frightened while on her quest to find her husband and clear his debt. Usually, it seems a stretch when ordinary people turning badass in movies, instantly acquiring ice-cold killer instincts and a deadly aim. But Lemon trembles as she points her gun; in every scene she looks afraid for her life. Deadwyler’s soulful performance really grounds The Devil to Pay even as it cranks into revenge-movie mode. That said, if you want a slice of grim Americana to hunker down with, I’d go with Winter’s Bone or Frozen River. • The Devil to Pay is released on 17 January on digital platforms.China is battling to stamp out its first outbreak of the Omicron variant, only weeks before the Chinese new year and the Beijing Winter Olympics, with cases recorded in at least two distant provinces. On Monday, health authorities reported 97 new locally transmitted cases for the preceding 24 hours, across several cities. At least 30 cases were in Henan province, while at least 31 new cases were reported in the Tianjin, including 15 children aged five to 15. At least two of the cases detected in the city’s Jinnan district were reported as Omicron, the latest variant of Covid-19, which is many times more transmissible and is tearing through other countries around the world. Authorities said the two patients did not have a travel history out of the city. In Anyang, Henan province, two Omicron cases were traced to a student who had arrived from Tianjin more than 300 miles (500km) away, officials said. There were 15 cases reported in Anyang for Monday but the breakdown of variant type was not disclosed. State media have described the outbreak as China’s “first real battle against Omicron”. In response, Tianjin authorities have tightened controls on people’s movements, requiring residents to get approval from employers or community authorities in order to leave, and 75,680 have been quarantined, according to the Global Times. Subway lines have been closed and about 150 flights reportedly cancelled. Schools and university campuses have been closed. About 14 million residents of Tianjin districts have been asked to stay in place and report for testing. Those who do not will have their health code changed on the widely used app that controls quarantine, travel and other pandemic related movements. Some measures have been focused on preventing cases reaching the capital, Beijing, about 60 miles away, which is set to host the Winter Olympics next month. A party meeting including senior city officials reportedly urged rapid action and testing to create a “moat” around the city. Unnecessary travel between Tianjin and Beijing has been strongly discouraged, with those who can asked to work from home, and trains into Beijing from Tianjin have been cancelled. Road checkpoints have also been set up for vehicles entering Beijing. In Beijing, temperature checks and QR codes have been strengthened, as well as controls and inspections at transportation hubs, schools and accommodations. The government has also warned people of punishment for concealing infections or failing to implement anti-pandemic measures adequately. “The spring festival is approaching, the flow of people will be more frequent, and the Beijing Winter Olympics and the Winter Paralympics will be held soon,” said a government notice on Monday. “The epidemic prevention and control cannot be relaxed for a moment.” The Chinese capital’s municipal government has urged its more than 20 million residents to stay in the city during the festive period. To avoid potential spread of the disease, Beijing’s traffic management authority also asked people to stay away from the special vehicles used to ferry athletes to and from the Winter Olympics venues in the event of a car incident. The Games, which begin on 4 February will be kept in a “closed loop”. This means that only a limited number of spectators may be allowed in venues Overseas spectators will not be allowed to enter the country, and personnel involved in the Games will have to avoid contact with people outside the loop. China has been committed to a zero-Covid policy, and deploys extraordinary resources including mass testing of tens of millions, targeted and blanket lockdowns, and travel restrictions, often at a moment’s notice and sometimes over just a handful of cases. Pressure has grown on authorities with the Winter Olympics around the corner, and some local officials have been punished for alleged inaction, leading to increasingly harsh responses. The policy – and people’s support for it – has been challenged by the subsequent responses to recent outbreaks, including in Xi’an where 13 million people have spent more than two weeks in lockdown with reported instances of food shortages and delays in accessing medical care, and another 2 million locked down in Yuzhou. The spring festival, when east Asia celebrates the lunar new year, is typically the biggest holiday of the year with hundreds of millions of people travelling across the region to see family. These festivals have been disrupted over the past two years by the pandemic and associated travel restrictions or lockdowns, with many migrant workers prevented from travelling home – often the only time of the year they get to do so. “I haven’t been back to my hometown for Chinese new year for three years,” said one online commentator, who nonetheless urged people to reduce travel again if they could. ‘“Chinese people have a strong family concept. Last year, they called on everyone to celebrate the new year locally. Many people were late for the reunion for a year, which would inevitably lead to a collective impulse. It may be difficult to call on people to celebrate locally this year.” Additional reporting by Xiaoqian ZhuJames Mtume, the jazz and funk musician who fronted the group Mtume and produced a number of US chart hits for other artists, has died aged 75. His family confirmed the news to music website Pitchfork. Lisa Lucas, the daughter of one of Mtume’s collaborators, said: “So much loss. So much grief. Rest in power to Uncle Mtume.” James Mtume was born James Forman in Philadelphia in 1946, and changed his name – Mtume means messenger in Swahili – after spending time with the black nationalist group US Organization in the mid to late 1960s, while studying in Pasadena in California. A pianist and percussionist since his teens, Mtume was soon drawn into the orbit of major mid-century jazz players, beginning with his uncle Albert “Tootie” Heath’s album Kawaida in 1969, which featured Mtume compositions played by a group including Herbie Hancock, Don Cherry and Mtume’s father Jimmy Heath. Mtume moved to New York, and played alongside Miles Davis for his funk fusion album On the Corner and a number of other early 1970s recordings such as Dark Magus; further sessions in these years came with Lonnie Liston Smith, Gato Barbieri, McCoy Tyner and more. Joining forces with another member of Davis’s electric-era band, guitarist Reggie Lucas, the pair toured with Roberta Flack and formed their own group, Mtume, securing a major label deal in 1978. With James Mtume playing keys and percussion, and singing alongside vocalist Tawatha Agee, the group recorded two albums of joyous, driving funk before their best known record, Juicy Fruit (1983). Its title track topped the R&amp;B chart and crossed over into the Top 50 of the pop charts, and its beat and vocal later formed the backing for the Notorious BIG’s Juicy. Mtume and Lucas also became a production and songwriting duo, creating hits for Stephanie Mills, whose sweeping disco song Never Knew Love Like This Before reached No 6 in the US in 1980 and won a Grammy for best R&amp;B performance; and Flack and Donny Hathaway’s ballad duet The Closer I Get to You (later covered by Beyoncé and Luther Vandross) which reached No 2. They had a minor hit with another duet, Two Hearts by Mills and Teddy Pendergrass. Mtume continued to work as a producer, earning credits on albums by Mary J Blige, R Kelly and K-Ci &amp; JoJo, and was also a DJ for New York station Kiss. Mills was among those paying tribute, saying: “He was so brilliant and an amazing music mind. The work chemistry we had was second to none. I will continue to lift you up through our music.” DJ Premier described Mtume as an icon, saying: “Thx for your incredible contributions to music.”Jubilant Serbian Australians have taken their celebrations away from the detention hotel their beloved Novak Djokovic had been held in for days, leaving behind deflated refugees and their supporters on Monday. Since December 2020 refugee advocates have stood outside the former hotel every day, trying desperately to bring awareness to the plight of the 30-plus men stuck indefinitely inside. When the world’s No 1 male tennis player unexpectedly joined refugees and asylum seekers inside, it brought a new group of protesters and an international media spotlight. But that unlikely alliance ended on Monday night, as a court ordered Djokovic’s release from immigration detention after quashing the Australian government’s decision to cancel his visa. To his fans, their hero had won a David and Goliath battle for freedom. They were there to party. They carried Serbian flags, cheering “Novak! Novak! Novak!” before heading down to Federation Square to continue the celebrations. Across the park, the mood was more sombre, as advocates for the refugees gathered together. Occasionally they would chant “free them all” but mostly they stood in a solemn silence. They’ve spent the last five days trying to springboard off the media attention on Djokovic to raise awareness about the other men stuck inside. They’ve climbed on the building, used chalk spray to make huge signs and arranged media interviews with refugees. Some have even been arrested – and now as Djokovic walks free they fear the men will be forgotten. Gemma Harben had been protesting at the centre since long before the tennis star arrived – she said the attention had made the refugees feel hopeful. “They’ve felt forgotten and ignored for so long and finally people turn up, it might not be for them, but people are outside the building,” Harben said. “They’re on the international news. To see this kind of attention disappear again will be heartbreaking.” For them, the decision to let Djokovic free showed what money and power can do – a win against Australia’s notoriously strict immigration laws. “I hope they reassess the rules and let everyone out.” Harben said she hoped the Djokovic saga would make people realise “they’re all human beings”. That the tennis champion could end up in a basic hotel next to men who have been locked up, some for nine years, showed we are not that different from each other, she said. At the small protest on Monday night, one refugee advocate interrupted some of the supporters’ celebrations to ask if they would all come back tomorrow for the refugees. “Yes,” they answered, but the advocate wasn’t convinced. Djokovic supporters argue he has been a pawn in Australia’s political game, used by the federal government to win votes. “There was no basis to hold him and they did it anyway,” Neb Jovanovic, who was draped in a Serbian flag, said. “We knew the government had their secret agenda behind it, but he has pulled through – that’s what he always does. “It’s a step in the right direction for freedom.” When asked if they will see the tennis star play at the Australian Open, there was a pause. As a matter of principle he should pull out they said. “If I was him I wouldn’t do it,” Jovanovic said. Watching on was Adnan, who did not give his last name. He has been in detention since he was 15. He is now 24. Describing the conditions in the hotel, he says he is never called by his name, only “detainee” or by his number. There is no fresh air in their room and he doesn’t often mingle with the others – everyone is often too depressed to leave their room, he said. “It’s terrifying and bizarre. You’re always treated as a suspect. You are treated worse than a criminal.” He said the crowds outside the window the last few days and the fact they were sharing a building with Djokovic had given them hope. “It does warm our hearts. It will help us fight through this unfair environment and give us the strength to fight back this cruel immigration system.” Djokovic’s detention brought two very different groups together with very different kinds of protesting. The tennis star’s supporters sang, danced, lit candles in the evening and joked with police. Refugee advocates used megaphones, drums and chants to get their point across. While each gathered outside the Park hotel for their own reasons, there were enough similarities to unite them, if only briefly. “I feel so ignorant,” one Djokovic supporter said as she was leaving on Thursday. “I came here for him and found out they’ve been locked up nine years. It’s so wrong.”This is such a simple but delicious soup, based on one made by my friend Emily years back. The velvety cauliflower soup is a wonderful contrast to the heat of the chilli oil and crispy almonds, with crunchy caper twists to dip. It’s perfect to kick off an evening with friends, or as a warming lunch – and an excellent Veganuary dish. Just use dairy-free puff pastry for the twists, such as Jus-Rol’s from Ocado. Instantly shop all these ingredients from ocado.com/cauliflowerandalmondsoup Cauliflower and almond soup with chilli oil and caper twists Prep 15 mins Cook 20 mins Serves 6 For the soup 1 large cauliflower, cut into medium florets 1.2 litres vegetable stock Fresh nutmeg, grated 100g ground almonds Sea salt flakes, to taste 1 lemon, juice only For the caper twists 400g Jus-Rol vegan puff pastry 2 tsp dijon mustard 3 tsp capers, finely chopped Big handful parsley, finely chopped For the chilli oil 50ml olive oil 80g flaked almonds 1 tsp chilli flakes To serve Coriander leaves, roughly chopped For the soup, bring the cauliflower and stock to a boil in a large saucepan with a good grating of fresh nutmeg, and simmer partially covered for 15 minutes until the cauliflower is soft. Add the ground almonds and blitz with a high-speed stick blender until you have a velvety smooth soup. Add salt to taste. For the caper twists, preheat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/430F/gas 7. Place the pre-rolled vegan puff pastry on a lightly floured surface. Roll it out evenly so it’s about 5cm larger on each side, and just under 2mm thick. Spread half of the rectangle with the mustard, then scatter with the capers and parsley. Gently fold the other half of the pastry over the top, press down at the edges, and roll out to 1/3 larger. Cut the folded pastry into 1cm strips, and then gently twist each strip several times before transferring to a lined baking sheet. Continue with the remaining pastry strips (you will need more than one baking sheet), then transfer to the oven to cook for 15 minutes, until golden brown and crisp. For the chilli oil, heat the oil and flaked almonds in a small frying pan, and fry on a medium to low heat, stirring frequently for 3-4 minutes until the almonds are golden brown. Add the chilli flakes, stir, and turn off the heat. Reheat the soup until bubbling, then add the lemon juice. Taste and adjust the salt once more, then divide into bowls and scatter with the coriander leaves. Add a couple of tablespoons of the chilli oil and almonds to each bowl, and serve with the caper twists on the side. All these ingredients are available at Ocado.com, which offers more choice than any other supermarket, including an extensive vegan range.Boris Johnson is facing increasing pressure from his own MPs, and from usually supportive newspapers, to take action over the cost of living crisis at the start of what could be another perilous week for the prime minister. In a pair of front pages that will spook No 10, the Daily Mail and Daily Express led on Monday with calls from senior Conservatives for measures including an end to VAT being imposed on heating bills. Also on Monday, one of the party’s perceived rising stars, the Tees Valley mayor, Ben Houchen, used an article in another Tory-friendly paper, the Times, to warn that voters in “red wall” seats would need tangible evidence of levelling up soon. It follows similar noises from usually supportive media over the weekend – and new polling of Tory members by Sky which showed nearly half believe Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, would win more seats for the Tories at the next election than Johnson. Perhaps the most alarming front page for Johnson will be Monday’s Mail, which quoted three Conservative MPs who chair select committees all saying the cost of living is – as described by Robert Halfon, who chairs the education committee – the “number one issue facing the prime minister”. Julian Knight, who heads the Commons digital, culture, media and sport committee, told the paper: “Boris needs to wake up and listen to his party on energy and set a clear path out of the cost of living crisis. In the short term, he needs to abolish the VAT on energy bills and get rid of the green taxes.” The Express similarly had a front page saying: “PM urged: act now on cost of living squeeze”, quoting former ministers including Esther McVey. Over the weekend, the Saturday edition of the Sun also called in an editorial for an end to VAT on energy, “urgent relief for the crippling price rises we now face”, and an delay or cancellation of the rise in national insurance contributions intended to help the NHS and social care. Ministers have been resistant to the idea of cutting VAT on energy, as it would cut bills for everyone, including those who are not facing difficulties. Asked about the idea by Sky News on Monday, Michael Gove, the communities and levelling-up secretary, said it would be better to “take a balanced approach and a balanced approach means that when we can support, we provide support most for those in the most difficult circumstances”. But alongside the pressure for Johnson to cut taxes, other influential voices are also calling for more investment in levelling up. In his article for the Times, Houchen said that before the next election, voters “need to see with their eyes concrete evidence that they were right to back this government”. He wrote: “Voters are also realists – they know that levelling up is not something that will be delivered in just a year or two, it will be a decades long project. But they do need to see progress, and this means steel going up to deliver new factories, spades in the ground for new energy infrastructure, and cranes in action as new bridges are built out over waters.”In the sample clues below, the links take you to explainers from our beginners series. The setter’s name often links to an interview with him or her, in case you feel like getting to know these people better. Let’s go! There is no better time than a January of hunkering down for getting acquainted with those stiffer challenges that we termed, in the context of Stephen Sondheim’s puzzles, the more engrossing crosswords. There is a new Genius from Picaroon – or you could try the previous one, from Jack, since its annotated solution is now available. In the Observer, Azed has reached what I guess may be a record: the 50th Christmas puzzle in a series by a single setter. (Azed puzzles are dissected at Fifteen Squared and And Lit.) Although we are looking forward, it would be remiss not to flag up Micawber’s 2021-themed Telegraph Toughie, with such striking clues as these … 10a Adult gets into origins of Peppa Pig with hesitation in front of function needing sheets of A4? (9) [wordplay: abbreviation for “adult” inside (“gets into”) initials (“origins”) of PEPPA PIG, then hesitant utterance + synonym for “function” (as a verb)] [A inside PP, then ER + WORK] [definition: sheets of A4?] 17d Body of water, no longer European, requiring customs for meat products (8) [wordplay: synonym for “body of water” without abbreviation for “European” + synonym for “customs”] [SEA – E + USAGES] [definition: meat products] … for PAPERWORK and SAUSAGES. And while we are looking back, the cryptic podcast Off Grid finished 2021 with a collection of unheard bits. Paper-free Likewise, “engrossing” is the warning “Enumerations have been withheld” in this three-dimensional puzzle titled Still. It was set by the spectator-welcoming solver Liari using technology developed, as I understand it, from Gussalufz, who sets for the Indian newspaper the Hindu. If the mention of three-dimensional puzzles has reminded you about those 3D calendars that raise money for Children in Need and the Royal National Institute of Blind People, the 2022 edition features the Guardian setters Puck, Enigmatist, Tramp, Nutmeg, Boatman, Imogen and Vlad, plus others we have interviewed here (including Curmudgeon, Soup and Sirius). It is available here and is typically … engrossing. Puzzling elsewhere I have been trying largely to avoid social media; when I first saw posts headed “Wordle”, I eyed the intriguing collections of coloured blocks devoid of context and wondered: what’s the con? Is this trying to harvest my data, my eyeballs or my wordplay techniques? What are the steps between this intriguing game and my imminent existence in a mine, pecking seed to obtain fresh multiverse rewards? It was humbling, then, to hear the creator of Wordle talking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme (1:24:38): At the beginning of last year, my partner and I, we got really into doing crosswords and playing word games and I wanted to make a game for us to play each day in the morning as part of our routine. So, the Wordle creator is … utterly one of us? And he has found a way to make other solvers’ experiences intriguing before you play and fascinating afterwards? Unless that claim is part of the con, here it is. Perhaps now is a good moment to mark the retiring of the word “program”. Once upon a time, some programs were apps. A little later, Apple was so keen on us all making a connection between “app” and “Apple” that it sued Amazon for using the name “Appstore”. Now, “app” is used dramatically less in the context of job applications – and hors d’oeuvres – and increasingly to mean any and all code, which leads us to our next challenge. Reader, how would you clue APP? Cluing competition Many thanks for your clues for SEVENTH HEAVEN. Despite Wellywearer2’s poetic definition “Swans a-swimming today / The sky reflects their happy way”, the audacity award goes to GappyTooth for the baffling but attractive “Lord’s abode, eternal rest, afterlife, paradise, the Elysian Fields”. The runners-up are Newlaplandes’s intricate “Good place, even though empty, to throw tin cans” and PeterMooreFuller’s bold “Such a joy to appear in Aliens, Event Horizon and The Avengers”. The winner is Steveran’s ineffably poignant “Where we’ll be when events have changed and weight is lifted?” Kludos to Steveran. Please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition – as well as your non-print finds and picks from the broadsheet cryptics – below. The latest in our collaborative playlist Healing Music Recorded in 2020-22 to Accompany a Solve or Even Listen to is a harpist. (You will have to click on the embedded video.) Clue of the Fortnight The setter known locally as Crucible gave Financial Times solvers an interesting image on New Year’s Eve … 6d Part of crown jewels lifting Spain’s asset ratings (5,5) [wordplay: synonym for part of “crown jewels” understood as slang with a letter E (“Spain”) lifted] [MAN’S TESTES with E lifted] [definition: asset ratings] … which turned out to be a clue for MEANS TESTS. Stay safe. • Here is a collection of all our explainers, interviews and other helpful bits and bobs. • The Shipping Forecast Puzzle Book by Alan Connor, which is partly but not predominantly cryptic, can be ordered from the Guardian Bookshop.Vladimir Putin has claimed the unrest in Kazakhstan last week that killed at least 164 people was the result of foreign meddling, and said a Russian-led military bloc should take steps to ensure that future attempts to interfere in the region failed. “The events in Kazakhstan are not the first and far from the last attempt to interfere in the internal affairs of our states from the outside,” said the Russian president, who was speaking at a video conference of leaders of the Russian-led Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO), a military alliance that deployed about 2,500 troops to Kazakhstan this week at the request of Kazakhstan’s president, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev. The CSTO, which also includes Belarus, Kyrgyzstan, Armenia and Tajikistan, has never before deployed troops, and many in Kazakhstan expressed extreme unease at having Russian troops on the ground. “The measures taken by the CSTO made it clear that we would not let anyone destabilise the situation at our home and implement so-called ‘colour revolution’ scenarios,” said Putin. The Russian president believes former Soviet nations should fall into Moscow’s sphere of influence, and has frequently dismissed popular uprisings as “colour revolutions” organised and financed from abroad. Putin also said the events in Kazakhstan showed the dangers of social media and unrestricted internet use. Putin’s words come as negotiations in Geneva begin between US and Russian delegations, after Russia demanded a new security deal with Washington and amid fears that Putin is poised to order a further incursion into Ukraine. The fast-moving events in Kazakhstan took the Kremlin and other regional players by surprise. Protests, which began over a sharp rise in fuel prices, quickly spread across the country, but were taken over by violent groups who stormed government buildings and the airport in Almaty, Kazakhstan’s biggest city. Widespread looting followed. At the CSTO meeting, Tokayev described the protests against him as a coup, launched by unspecified internal and external forces. “Under the guise of spontaneous protests, a wave of unrest broke out … It became clear that the main goal was to undermine the constitutional order and to seize power. We are talking about an attempted coup d’état,” he said. He also claimed trained Islamist fighters were involved in the unrest. Tokayev has repeatedly described violent protesters as “bandits and terrorists” and said on Friday he had given an order to security forces to shoot to kill without warning. Although the country is getting back to normal, Tokayev said the hunt for so-called “terrorists” was continuing. Explaining why no evidence of a foreign terrorist connection had so far been presented, Tokayev said terrorists had attacked morgues and stolen the dead bodies of their comrades “in order to cover their tracks”. It was a claim symbolic of an official storyline that appears to contain numerous gaps and inconsistencies. On Sunday, Kazakhstani authorities said 164 people had died in the violence, including three children. The interior ministry announced on Monday that security forces had detained nearly 8,000 people, a number that is rising sharply each day. It is not clear how many of them will be charged. Concerns about how transparent the investigation process will be arose when state television aired footage of a bruised man who said he had been paid to travel from neighbouring Kyrgyzstan and take part in violence. Viewers in Kyrgyzstan quickly identified him as Vikram Ruzakhunov, a well-known jazz musician who frequently toured Kazakhstan. Ruzakhunov was reportedly released on Monday. Last week, the powerful head of security services, Karim Masimov, was relieved of his duties and then arrested on suspicion of treason. While no evidence has yet been presented of foreign backing for the unrest, many have speculated that the protest movement was used by groups inside the Kazakh elite to settle differences. Some sources have pointed to recent disagreements between Tokayev and figures close to his predecessor, Nursultan Nazarbayev, who ruled the country from independence in 1991 until 2019 and handpicked Tokayev as his successor. Nazarbayev holds the honorific title of leader of the nation, and the country’s capital was renamed Nur-Sultan in his honour in 2019. He was removed by Tokayev as head of the national security council this week, and has still not spoken or appeared in public.For students across the US, the return from winter break has been marked by chaos and confusion as the Omicron variant has exacerbated staff shortages and sparked fierce debates about how to reopen classrooms safely. In Chicago, classes resumed and then were canceled abruptly last week as the teachers’ union and school district failed to agree on safety protocols, while teachers in San Francisco and other Bay Area schools staged a “sickout” to demand more N95 face masks, testing and paid sick leave for those who contract the coronavirus. For Los Angeles Unified – the second largest public school system in the US – classes are scheduled to resume on Tuesday, and educators, students, and parents alike are bracing for another winter of anxious uncertainty. Schools here are grappling with coronavirus conundrums that institutions across the country are facing – but on a huge scale. Vaccination rates continue to lag among children, and tests are in short supply. And all this comes as rates of Covid surge in the surrounding community, with about one in every five coronavirus tests in Los Angeles coming back positive. In a district where many students come from low-income families and more than 80% of students qualify for a free lunch under federal guidelines, “there are no real easy answers right now” on how to balance children’s educational needs and health, said Tyrone Howard, a professor of education at the University of California, Los Angeles. With coronavirus transmission rates in LA exceeding levels seen during the winter of 2020-21, Los Angeles Unified announced last week that all students and staff returning to campus this week must show a negative Covid-19 test. New rules from LA county also require employees at public and private schools to wear medical-grade masks on campus, including outdoors in crowded spaces. Administrators and health officials expect that the Omicron variant is likely to send exposed children and teachers back home and into quarantine. But after becoming one of the first large districts in the US to adopt a strict vaccine mandate for students 12 and older for this coming semester, school officials decided to delay enforcement until next fall – largely because tens of thousands of students remain unvaccinated. Marisol Rosales, a mother of four school-aged children in Los Angeles, said she has had trouble keeping up with the shifting rules and requirements for each of her kids’ campuses. “I’ve been calling all day to find out more about the guidelines, and where I need to get my kids tested, and by which day,” she said. She and her husband are also mentally preparing to take time off work or find last-minute childcare if schools shut down again, which will mean navigating the logistics of finding space for their four kids to attend online classes from their tight, one-bedroom home. “There’s just a lot to worry about right now,” she said. While Los Angeles Unified is reopening this week, other school systems in the LA area opened during the first week of January, many with teachers and staff missing. The Santa Ana Unified school district in southern California was missing about 10% of its teachers, with 324 employees either sick or in quarantine. Another local district, in San Gabriel, closed a middle school and a high school following outbreaks but opted to keep other campuses open. LA Unified is bracing for similar issues, while also seeking to fill 600 teacher vacancies after the district saw a spate of resignations and retirements during the pandemic. “Teaching is already a stressful job. Doing so when I’m fearing for my life and for students’ lives and the lives of their families is just on a different level,” said Joanne Yi, an ethnic studies and geography teacher at Augustus Hawkins in South Los Angeles. Yi said she was dreading returning to class and fretting about whether she might contract a breakthrough infection, despite being vaccinated, or worse – pass on the infection to a student. Her classes largely consist of low-income students of color, many of whom are recent immigrants, and many of whom are undocumented. Their parents often work in healthcare, food service or other industries – where they may face high risks of contracting Covid-19. And many students live in multigenerational homes with parents and grandparents and may lack access to affordable healthcare. “The classroom can easily become ground zero for a mass infection in the community,” Yi said. She and other local teachers said they would feel safer if the state or local government developed benchmarks or guidelines to indicate when schools should close – similar to the color-coded system that California instituted last year. “Right now we’re consistent in our lack of consistency,” she said. The inconsistency can wear on students, as well. “I think the number one emotion I feel is just frustrated,” said Favour Akingbemi, 17, a senior at Washington Preparatory high school in South LA. Facing yet another semester of unpredictability and the prospect of trying to focus on online classes alongside three of her siblings at home, Akingbemi said she felt burned out. Nearly three of Akingbemi’s four high school years have been defined by the pandemic. Over the past year, she has had to convince her own parents, as well as a number of classmates, to get vaccinated, refuting the misinformation they are bombarded with on WhatsApp and social media. “It’s upsetting that we’re still stuck in this pandemic,” she said. While about 86% of LA Unified students 12 and older have been vaccinated, vaccine rates are lagging among students five to 11 years old, who became eligible for Covid-19 vaccines in the fall. Across Los Angeles county, only 15.7% of children aged five to 11 are fully vaccinated. For Rosales, concerns that Covid-19 vaccines will cause long-term side-effects in her kids have outweighed worries that they could contract coronavirus at school. Both Rosales and her husband are fully vaccinated and boosted, “but I don’t think the vaccines should be mandated for little kids”, she said. “I worry about the repercussions of the vaccines on their developing bodies.” No serious safety concerns or lasting side-effects from Covid-19 vaccines were found in clinical trials among children, and public health officials and pediatricians have been assuring parents that the approved coronavirus vaccines – much like other vaccines required for children – are safe. “I tell parents, though, it’s OK to be overwhelmed, it’s OK to have fears,” said Ilan Shapiro, the medical director of health education and wellness at AltaMed in LA, who has been conducting bilingual outreach efforts to promote the vaccine. “I try to explain to parents how I decided to get my own young kids vaccinated.” Debates over mandating vaccines for LA Unified centered on whether it would be feasible for schools to send up to 30,000 unvaccinated students aged 12 and over back to distance learning. Officials in Portland, New York and Chicago also paused discussions of mandates this winter. With vaccination rates among Black and Latino residents lagging, a strict mandate threatens to push already vulnerable students of color into a “separate and unequal” remote schooling system, said Howard. But public health experts say that boosting vaccine rates among children is the only surefire way to protect children and keep schools open as more infectious variants arise. That is especially true for Black and Latino students in Los Angeles, whose families have been disproportionately affected by Covid-19, said Yvonne Maldonado, a pediatric infectious disease expert at Stanford. The county revealed last fall that unvaccinated Black and Latino residents had the highest Covid-19 rates during the last wave of infections, driven by the Delta variant. Although children are less likely than adults to fall seriously ill from Covid-19, amid this surge of cases, Covid-19 hospitalization rates among children are rising. Across the US, an average of 824 children are hospitalized each day with Covid-19. “If we really want to protect these kids, we have to get them vaccinated,” Maldonado said. State and local governments need to do more to reach out to parents, she added, and provide more information, in more languages, about the safety of the available Covid-19 vaccines. “Everybody’s burned out and tired and overwhelmed,” she said. “But I think we need to do this on behalf of kids.”When Lynda’s husband died in 2015, she had no idea that online support existed. Two years later she stumbled upon a Facebook group for widows and started connecting with others in her situation. “You can’t really know what it’s like until you’ve been through it,” says Lynda. “It was nice to meet a group of people who understood.” In September 2018, she began speaking to Carl, who’d been widowed earlier that year. “After my wife, Pam, died, I didn’t see anyone for days,” he says. “I hadn’t really used Facebook before but I hoped joining a group for widows might be a way to meet people.” Both he and Lynda had each been married for more than 40 years. “I clocked her on the group and read some of her messages,” remembers Carl. “I thought she was very positive and spoke about things she enjoyed in life, as well as her husband.” When he was invited on a group holiday that autumn, he turned to the support group for advice. “He asked whether Pam would approve and I said she’d tell him to go but not to drink too much,” laughs Lynda. “He wrote back to ask if I’d known her, as that’s exactly what she would have said.” They began sending each other private messages and built a friendship. A couple of weeks later, they arranged to meet in a pub in Manchester and got on brilliantly. “My husband was the first boy I’d ever been out with. We got together when I was 14,” says Lynda. “Although Carl and I had fun, it scared me a bit. It didn’t seem right to be so attracted to another man when I still felt married.” She wrote Carl a message to say that she couldn’t take the relationship any further. “I’d not been dumped since I was 17 and then I got dumped on the first date,” laughs Carl. But he wasn’t ready to give up. “I knew she felt confused but I didn’t want to lose the connection we had.” After more conversations online, Lynda decided to see him again. “I said yes because we got on so well. He made me laugh by telling me stories about when he was a footballer, many years ago.” After that, they went on regular dates to the pub or the cinema. “I lived in Manchester and Carl lived in Wigan. A few days before we met, [the mayor of Greater Manchester] Andy Burnham gave women my age a free bus pass, so it cost me nothing to travel to him a few times a week,” says Lynda. “It was as if it were meant to be.” They married in January 2020, just before the pandemic hit, and she moved into Carl’s home. “Because we’d both been widowed, we experienced opposition from family about our relationship at first,” says Carl. “In widow [support] groups, people say it’s very common. But our families came around and now everyone is happy for us.” Their late partners are still an important part of their lives. “You never forget,” says Lynda. “We talk about them and tell little stories about what they were like. It’s a form of therapy.” Recently, Carl was diagnosed with a rare, progressive, muscle-wasting condition called inclusion body myositis, but they won’t let it stop them from making the most of their time together. “We’ve already been through the worst by losing a partner. Disability is just another journey; we’ll work it out,” says Carl. “We’ve got a different way of looking at life. We are learning to adapt but we are in it together.” Lynda loves Carl’s positivity. “He’s got such a great sense of humour and a lovely voice,” she says. “I liked his Wigan accent the first time I heard it. We have our breakfast in bed every day and chat together all the time.” Carl appreciates his partner’s kindness. “I’ve never known anyone as generous as Lynda. I’m just so glad we found each other.” Want to share your story? Tell us a little about yourself, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form here.Planet-heating emissions roared back in the United States in 2021, dashing hopes that the pandemic would prove a watershed moment in greening American society to address the climate crisis, new figures have shown. Following the onset of the pandemic in 2020, millions of people switched to working from home, car and airplane travel plummeted and industrial output slowed. This led to a sharp drop in greenhouse gas emissions, spurring predictions that a newly shaped American economy would emerge to help banish the era of fossil fuels. These forecasts may well have been baseless, however, with the new research showing that US emissions rose by 6.2% last year, compared to 2020. While emissions were still 5% down from 2019 levels, the jump in pollution as people returned to previous rhythms of life was greater than last year’s overall economic growth. “We expected a rebound but it’s dismaying that emissions came back even faster than the overall economy,” said Kate Larsen, a partner at Rhodium Group, the independent research firm that conducted the analysis. “We aren’t just reducing the carbon intensity of the economy, we are increasing it. We are doing exactly the opposite of what we need to be doing.” The leap in emissions in 2021 was largely down to an increase in cars and trucks on the road, with a 10% growth in transportation emissions from a year previously as Americans, and their goods, started moving again amid optimism spurred by the rollout of vaccines. Coal, the dirtiest of fossil fuels that has been in a steady decline in the US, also made an unwelcome return, with its use in power generation posting a 17% increase on 2020. Emissions from industrial processes rose by 6.6% last year, while emissions from the use of buildings edged up slightly. US emissions have been on a gradual decline since around 2005, primarily because of market conditions that have made coal uncompetitive and gas, a less polluting fossil fuel, attractive to utilities as a cheap and abundant alternative. Despite more than three decades of increasingly urgent warnings from climate scientists, and a growing parade of catastrophic wildfires, floods and heatwaves, the US has never put in place any national legislation to deal with the climate crisis. Larsen said it is “critically important” for Congress to pass climate measures in the Build Back Better spending bill that has been stalled by Senator Joe Manchin, a centrist Democrat from West Virginia who has deep ties to the coal industry. “There was hope this pandemic would bring about wholesale changes, but we aren’t seeing that across the board,” said Larsen. “More importantly, we need to decarbonize our economy and not just bet on individual behaviour changing. “It’s concerning that we rely upon the oil and gas market to lower emissions and even more concerning we have not passed the rules and laws we need. It was always going to be an uphill battle for the US and now that hill is even steeper.” The uptick in emissions in 2021 has thrown the US off track in the rate of cuts required to meet the internationally agreed targets articulated in the Paris climate accords. The deal states that countries must try to keep the global temperature rise to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, a point beyond which scientists warn the world will face dire impacts. “We’ve got to come down from the peak, in fact halfway down to zero, within this decade if we are to remain on course to keep warming below a catastrophic 1.5C,” said Michael Mann, a climate scientist at Penn State University. “There was progress at Cop26 but there needs to be much more. And for the US to be able to do its part, we need the climate provisions of Build Back Better to pass Congress as soon as possible.”A year ago last Thursday, Mitch McConnell and Kevin McCarthy were fleeing for their lives as a violent mob swarmed the halls of the US Capitol. With their personal safety at risk, the two most powerful Republicans on Capitol Hill at last stood up to Donald Trump. In a heated phone call, McCarthy, the House minority leader, fruitlessly implored the president to call off the mob. Senate majority leader McConnell later called the rioters “terrorists” and said Trump was “morally responsible” for the violence. But McConnell and McCarthy soon slunk back to enabling Trump’s assaults on democracy. They were quiet while Trump insisted the 2020 election was stolen and that anyone who disagreed must be purged from public office. They stayed mute as Trump supporters threatened violence against election officials and Republican-dominated state legislatures rewrote laws and procedures to prevent fair voting. McConnell and McCarthy have shamelessly put party ahead of country and ambition ahead of duty, setting up alarming ramifications for the future. Scientists have said for years that humanity faces a climate emergency and only rapid, far-reaching action can preserve a livable planet. On the first anniversary of the 6 January attack, it’s clear the United States also faces a democracy emergency as well. Only rapid, far-reaching action can preserve a government that is of, by, and for the people. The democracy emergency is closely linked to the climate crisis. Each is grounded in a big lie – that climate science is a hoax, that Trump won in 2020 – pushed by the same rightwing politicians and propaganda “news” outlets and embraced with cult-like devotion by Trump’s followers. Left untreated, each threatens disaster. If Trump’s forces do change enough electoral rules and personnel to guarantee victory in 2022 and beyond, there is zero chance the US government will take the strong climate action needed to avert global catastrophe. Defusing the global climate emergency therefore depends on protecting democracy. To be sure, the US is not the only country where anti-democratic trends hamper climate progress. Most of the worst laggards at November’s Cop26 climate summit were countries where authoritarianism is either entrenched or on the rise: China, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Brazil, India, the US. But the collapse of US democracy would carry especially damaging climate consequences. Slashing global emissions in half by 2030, as science says is imperative, would be impossible if the world’s biggest economy and leading historical carbon emitter refuses to help. How to defuse the democracy emergency is too big a question to answer briefly. President Biden and the Democrats surely must do more; the Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer, has promised a vote by 17 January on reforming the filibuster to pass fair voting laws. A mobilized civil society is also vital. With Trump’s followers trying to install partisans on voting boards across the land, the Atlantic’s Barton Gellman notes that democracy activists can likewise work at the local and state levels to block such skulduggery and ensure fair elections. A free press is foundational to democracy, and journalism must also rise to the occasion with outspoken coverage. Monika Bauerlein, chief executive of Mother Jones, urges the media to treat “the war on democracy” as the “big story” of 2022. The Washington Post columnist Jennifer Rubin says political reporters should “stop … concealing that only one party is launching a campaign to suppress votes” and “demand that Republican [officials] defend their participation in the big lie of a stolen election” – and if Republicans try to dodge, keep asking the question. Aside from Trump himself, no one deserves such journalistic grilling more than McConnell and McCarthy. As the senior Republicans in Congress, they have the stature to oppose Trump’s campaign for one-party rule. Twin profiles in cowardice, they have instead betrayed their oath to defend the constitution against all enemies, foreign and domestic. McConnell and McCarthy want the world to forget that a year ago Trump’s mob was hunting them down, leading each man to stand up, briefly, for democracy. But the world must not forget. The press in particular must not allow McConnell, McCarthy and most other Republicans to obscure that they are enabling the gravest threat to American democracy since the civil war – and, by so doing, encouraging a hellish climate future. This story is published as part of Covering Climate Now, a global collaboration of news outlets strengthening coverage of the climate story. Mark Hertsgaard is Covering Climate Now’s executive directorAfter years of driving past and reminding each other that “one day we should stop here for lunch”, we finally did. We turned off Via Ternana, a few hundred metres before Poggio Mirteto station in Lazio, and into a wide, informal car park where we immediately found a spot by the wall with sun and the words “Ecofattorie Sabine” painted on it. Words on green awnings promised local products, which in an area packed with olive trees and busy with sheep are welcome. Two women were setting tables outside, and the air carried the smell of just-lit charcoal. Someone must have done experiments looking at the endorphins released when people walk towards lunch; the reasons behind the euphoria felt on nearing the door of a restaurant, cafe or pub, and how it differs depending on whether it is somewhere familiar or new. Add hunger to the mix, as well as the sound of cutlery and the distant smell of sheep, meaning the promise of pecorino. And where there is pecorino, there is its soft, white byproduct, the result of reheating the leftover whey to make ricotta di pecora (sheep’s milk ricotta). There were more endorphins when we, inexperienced new dog owners, allowed our small creature too close to the handsome reigning dog. As it turned out, she wanted only to make it clear who was in charge before returning to her spot in the unflinching sun. I did, however, need a seat at one of the wooden tables and a glass of wine after that. If someone has researched near-the-door endorphins, they must have looked at sitting-down-and-putting-knees-under-the-table endorphins, too. Also, what happens chemically when you first glance at a menu, take the first sip of wine and taste of bread, which surely triggers something calming. We ordered local salami, which came with just-baked buns the size of pin cushions and speckled with cheese. After that, fat potato gnocchi and tomato sauce for Luca and Vincenzo, fettuccine alla pecorara for me, then lamb cooked on the grill outside. But back to the pasta, a simple recipe of great goodness. “Alla pecorara” translates as “shepherd’s style”. It is a dish most famous maybe in the neighbouring region of Abruzzo, and most notably in the province of Pescara, where it means pasta – often homemade rings called anelli – with tomatoes, other vegetables and sheep’s milk ricotta. However, in Lazio and especially Sabina, pasta alla pecorara means ricotta, pecorino and guanciale – and, at Ecofattorie Sabine, hand-rolled fat ropes of pici or ribbons of fettuccine. What is interesting about their version is that they use a meat slicer to cut the guanciale, which means it is incredibly thin and so fries into almost-crisps that shatter. Wonderful, but at home I prefer fatter batons. Pasta alla pecorara Serves 4 200g guanciale, or pancetta or bacon 300g ricotta – sheep’s or cows’ milk 40g pecorino romano Black pepper 400g pasta (mezze maniche, penne, pici, fettuccine) Put a pan of water on for the pasta. Cut the guanciale into short batons, put into a pan over a medium-low heat and fry gently until light golden and some fat has rendered out. (If you are using pancetta or bacon, fry it in a little olive oil.) Lift out the guanciale and set aside, then pour off the fat and keep that, too. Once the water is boiling, add salt, stir, then add the pasta and set the timer. In a large, warm bowl, mash the ricotta with the pecorino, lots of black pepper and two tablespoons of the guanciale fat. Stir, taste to see if it needs salt, then lift the cooked pasta directly into the ricotta and toss, cautiously adding a little of the pasta cooking water if you think it needs loosening. Divide between bowls, top each serving with some of the crisp guanciale and serve with red wine and bread for calmly cleaning the bowls. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoSo the much-disgraced Golden Globes, derided for a lack of diversity and transparency in the voting membership, lucrative TV coverage cancelled, gravy-train derailed and the awards ceremony dwindled to a virtual event on social media, carries paradoxically on with delivering a set of awards that are in perfectly plausible good taste and not very much different from all the other un-disgraced awards ceremonies. However, it was sad to see Paul Thomas Anderson’s dazzling comedy of transgression Licorice Pizza overlooked, of which more in a moment. Jane Campion’s handsome, complex and brilliant western drama The Power of the Dog gets best picture (drama) and best director, along with best supporting actor for the excellent Kodi Smit-McPhee, while Steven Spielberg’s glorious, passionately respectful revival of West Side Story wins best picture in the musical or comedy section, along with its breakout player Ariana DeBose for best supporting actress and newcomer Rachel Zegler for best actress in musical/comedy. Will Smith and Andrew Garfield win best actor in drama and musical/comedy respectively for King Richard – the story of Venus and Serena Williams’s demanding tennis-coach-dad Richard – and for tick, tick … BOOM!, about the troubled composer Jonathan Larson in which role the eminently lovable Garfield gave an object acting lesson in relatability and emotional availability. Entirely decent choices, though I was sorry here to see Mahershala Ali overlooked for his excellent performance in Swan Song, and indeed Denzel Washington’s mighty interpretation of Shakespeare’s Macbeth. And the Globes’ excellent best foreign language list would surely pass muster in the most demanding critics’ choice forum with Ryûsuke Hamaguchi’s Drive My Car emerging as the winner. The Power of the Dog, through that mysterious process of awards-season groupthink, is emerging as the single frontrunner, though there could hardly be a more deserving beneficiary: a colossal tragic drama taking place on a giant plain, dominated by an almost dreamlike house, surreally isolated on this vast landscape. Benedict Cumberbatch gives a fascinatingly spiky, confrontational, uningratiating performance as the cattleman in the grip of psychological turbulence he cannot explain and of which he is perhaps hardly even aware, as he begins a spiteful duel with his sister-in-law (fellow nominee Kirsten Dunst) and her son played by Smit-McPhee. West Side Story, though a box office disappointment, and coolly received by some critics for its alleged failure to be radically different from the original stage show and 1961 movie version, seemed to me a dazzling spectacle, whose every scene and dance sequence is presented with matchless flair and exuberance. This is a magnificent picture that really should be seen on the big screen – and let’s hope its Globes success will boost the box office. I loved Kenneth Branagh’s heartfelt autobiographical movie Belfast, about his early childhood in Northern Ireland at the beginning of the Troubles, for its heart-on-sleeve directness and the way he challenged the tacit liberal consensus that Belfast and the Troubles can only be represented in terms of angry despair. It was great to see Branagh pick up best screenplay – but I have to say that here, as in so many other categories, the superb Licorice Pizza (the 70s-set story of a hilariously pushy 15-year-old boy and his romantic obsession with a 25-year-old woman) was snubbed. Perhaps this is a film that confuses too many people, and its jagged, surreally satirical barbs at racism and antisemitism not easily accommodated into the contemporary discourse. And as for Nicole Kidman winning best actress (drama) for her very peculiar impersonation of Lucille Ball in Aaron Sorkin’s strenuous Being the Ricardos, about the 50s TV hit I Love Lucy … well, big fan of Kidman as I am, this was not her greatest performance and she was arguably the weakest link in a category that included Kristen Stewart’s performance as Diana, Lady Gaga’s uproarious turn in House of Gucci and Jessica Chastain in The Eyes of Tammy Faye. The Globe should really have gone to Olivia Colman for her amazingly good and richly detailed performance in Maggie Gyllenhaal’s The Lost Daughter. So – no backslapping, no boozy dinner, no outrageous presenter gags from Ricky Gervais, but a decent, if mainstream, list of winners.Good morning. The world No 1 tennis star Novak Djokovic will be immediately released from immigration detention in Australia, after the federal circuit court quashed a decision to cancel his visa. Alex Hawke, the Australian immigration minister, has said he is considering whether to use his power to cancel Djokovic’s visa. The decision now under consideration to would result in Djokovic being excluded from Australia for three years – significantly upping the stakes in a bizarre border row that threatens his quest to win the most grand slam singles titles of all time. Can Australia’s immigration minister really cancel his visa? Immigration law professor Mary Crock told Guardian Australia the Migration Act gave the minister “godlike powers” to cancel visas and if “they really decide to … the power is there”. But what about the judge’s decision? That doesn’t matter, as Crock explains: “Everything that has gone before can be disregarded – it is set up precisely for this situation, to come in and cancel a visa anyway.” Fire in Bronx building leaves 19 people dead, including nine children Nineteen people including nine children were killed in an apartment fire in the Bronx in New York yesterday, one of the worst fire disasters in the city in 30 years. Thirteen people remained hospitalised in critical condition, authorities said late on Sunday afternoon. In all, more than five dozen were hurt. Eric Adams, the mayor who is in his first days in the job, said: “The numbers are horrific. This is a horrific, painful moment for the city of New York. The impact of this fire is going to really bring a level of pain and despair in our city. “This is going to be one of the worst fires that we have witnessed during modern times.” More than 200 firefighters fought the blaze, at a 120-unit, 19-storey building on East 181st Street known as Twin Parks. What caused the fire? Authorities said the fire was caused by a space heater in a duplex apartment. The fire commissioner, Dan Nigro, said the fire started shortly before 11am in a duplex on the second and third floors and spewed smoke through the building because a door was left open. Trump not immune from criminal referral for Capitol attack, lawmakers insist Donald Trump cannot hide behind immunity from criminal prosecution and faces the possibility of being debarred from running for public office over his role in the Capitol attack, several members of Congress said yesterday. Days after the anniversary of the 6 January insurrection that left five people dead and scores injured after Trump supporters attempted to scupper the certification of Joe Biden’s victory in the 2020 election, the threat of possible criminal proceedings looms large over the former president. Lawmakers from both main parties, including moderate Republicans, said yesterday that Trump would not be spared criminal liability should evidence emerge that he actively coordinated the attack. Republican senator Mike Rounds from South Dakota spoke on the topic. What did he say? He told ABC’s This Week that any immunity from prosecution that Trump enjoyed while in the White House evaporated on 20 January 2021, when he left office, saying the “shield of the presidency does not exist for someone who was a former president”. Golden Globes: The Power of the Dog and Succession triumph The Power of the Dog and Succession were the big winners at an unusual, stripped-back Golden Globes. Traditionally, the ceremony is a glitzy telecast with A-listers in attendance but after a year of controversies surrounding diversity and amoral practices, the Hollywood Foreign Press Association lost its footing in the industry, with publicity firms, studios and celebrities choosing to distance themselves. Nevertheless, the awards were still handed out. The acclaimed Netflix drama The Power of the Dog was named best motion picture – drama, while Jane Campion became the third woman to win best director. Kodi Smit-McPhee won best supporting actor for his performance in the film. On the television side, HBO’s hit drama Succession picked up awards for best drama, best actor for Jeremy Strong and best supporting actress for Sarah Snook. Who attended the ceremony? Sunday night’s event took place at the Beverly Hilton hotel in Los Angeles, with no stars or audience, and just select members and grantees. Results were announced via social media. In other news … Bob Saget, the actor and comedian most famous for his role in the much-loved 80s sitcom Full House, has died at the age of 65. He had been found unresponsive in his hotel room at the Ritz-Carlton in Orlando, Florida yesterday. Aung San Suu Kyi has been handed a four-year jail sentence by a military court in Myanmar over various offences, including illegal possession of walkie-talkies, the latest judgment in a series of cases that could lead to her spending the rest of her life in detention. The Democratic congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez has tested positive for Covid-19. In a statement on Sunday evening, the office of the New York progressive said she was “experiencing symptoms and recovering at home”. Lithuania has paid more than $110,000 to Abu Zubaydah, the Guantánamo detainee known as the “forever prisoner”, in compensation for having allowed the CIA to hold him at a secret site outside Vilnius where he was subjected to forms of torture. Don’t miss this: Bernie Sanders says Democrats are failing Senator Bernie Sanders has called on Democrats to make “a major course correction” that focuses on fighting for America’s working class and standing up to powerful corporate interests because the Democrats’ legislative agenda is stalled and their party faces tough prospects in this November’s elections. In an exclusive interview, the senator says it’s time to “step up and take on the greed of the ruling class in America”. Climate check: US emissions roared back last year after pandemic drop Planet-heating emissions roared back in the United States in 2021, dashing hopes that the pandemic would prove a watershed moment in greening American society to address the climate crisis, new figures have shown. The onset of the pandemic in 2020 led to a sharp drop in greenhouse gas emissions, spurring predictions that a newly shaped American economy would emerge to help banish the era of fossil fuels. These forecasts may well have been baseless, however, with the new research showing that US emissions rose by 6.2% last year, compared with 2020. Last Thing: joy as baby given to US soldier during Afghan withdrawal is reunited with relatives An infant boy handed in desperation to a US soldier across an airport wall in the chaos of the American evacuation of Afghanistan has been found and reunited with his relatives. The baby, Sohail Ahmadi, was just two months old when he went missing on 19 August as thousands of people rushed to leave Afghanistan as it fell to the Taliban. After a Reuters story published in November with his pictures, the baby was located in Kabul, where a 29-year-old taxi driver named Hamid Safi had found him in the airport and taken him home to raise as his own. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comManchester City cannot be held responsible for the abuse suffered by eight men at the hands of the paedophile Barry Bennell more than 30 years ago, a high court judge has ruled. The claimants, now in their 40s and 50s, said Bennell, 68, abused them when they were playing schoolboy football for teams he coached in north-west England between 1979 and 1985. Mr Justice Johnson accepted their accounts but, in a written judgment published on Monday, the judge said that although there was a “good explanation” for the delay in the claims against City, they were brought too late for there to be a fair trial of the club. He said even if the claims were not time-barred, the fact that Bennell was a scout for City, coached their feeder teams and helped to organise trial games did not make the club vicariously liable for his abuse, as the eight men had argued. He said: “The work that Bennell did for MCFC (Manchester City football club) did not require him to have children stay at his home overnight. The connection between the abuse and Bennell’s relationship with MCFC is insufficient to give rise to vicarious liability. “The relationship gave Bennell the opportunity to commit the abuse, but MCFC had not entrusted the welfare of the claimants to Bennell. It follows that it has not been shown that MCFC is legally responsible for Bennell’s acts of abuse.” David McClenaghan, a partner at Bolt Burdon Kemp solicitors, who represented the eight men, said they were “shocked and dismayed” at the decision, which he said rested on a “technicality”, and would be appealing against it. City bosses denied the claim, saying Bennell was a local City scout in the mid-1970s but not between 1979 and 1985. Bennell, who is serving a 34-year jail term after being convicted on five separate occasions of child sexual abuse offences against 22 boys, gave evidence that supported the club’s case during the trial, a move McClenaghan described as “callous behaviour” on the part of City. Bennell denied being linked to City during the 1980sbut Johnson rejected Bennell’s evidence, saying he was a “manipulative liar” and “not a credible witness. The judge said the claimants had shown that Bennell did have connections with the club before 1980, which then resumed from around 1981. However, he said: “The evidence suggests that Bennell was not an employee of MCFC and that he was not in a relationship with MCFC that is akin to employment. Further, even if his relationship with MCFC is taken to be akin to employment, his abuse of the claimants did not take place in the course of that employment.” McClenaghan said: “We do not accept the decision as being correct and will be appealing the decision in the higher courts where we are confident we will secure the correct and just result.” The eight men claimed damages for psychiatric injuries, with six of them also claiming damages for loss of potential football earnings. Bennell, who used to live near Buxton in Derbyshire, had abused schoolboy footballers after inviting them to stay at his home. Despite having been convicted of abusing six of the claimants, Bennell accused four of them of lying. Johnson said they were not lying and praised the claimants, saying their actions had helped to ensure “future generations of children are better protected”. A City spokesperson said the club had “both personally and publicly apologised without reservation for the unimaginable suffering that each survivor experienced as the result of abuse they suffered” and reiterated the apology to all those affected.Twenty-six minutes of unseen footage of the vast and notoriously violent Altamont music festival held in northern California in 1969 have been unexpectedly uncovered. The home-movie footage – which is vividly shot on 8mm film, but frustratingly silent – has been published by the Library of Congress on its website. It is not known who filmed it, as the footage had been left with a film development company and never collected. When the company, Palmer Films, went out of business in the mid-1990s, a cache of its films were acquired by archivist Rick Prelinger, whose large collection was in turn acquired by the Library of Congress who have been working to edit and publish the footage ever since. The Rolling Stones’ headline performance is filmed from the side of the stage, with closeup shots of a smiling, clapping Mick Jagger – as well as more tense and frenetic scenes, as burly Hells Angels flank the stage. The motorcycle gang had been hired to provide security, but had attacked both performers and attenders during the day. During the Stones’ set, one festival-goer, Meredith Hunter, attempted to get on stage along with a number of other fans. Separate film footage showed that Hunter was carrying a gun, and he was stabbed and killed by Hells Angel member Alan Passaro. Mike Mashon of the Library of Congress states that the footage “doesn’t add anything to our understanding” of the killing. Hunter’s death, and the reportedly bleak mood of the event more generally, has become symbolic for the corruption of 1960s hippy idealism. The festival was separately chronicled by directors Albert and David Maysles and Charlotte Zwerin for the film Gimme Shelter. As well as giving a sense of the huge scale, and some choice dance moves and fashion of the era, the lost footage is an opportunity to see performances in more detail that were edited out of the Stones-focused Gimme Shelter. It features an energetic and clearly funky performance by Carlos Santana and his band, and Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp; Young are filmed in the golden light of sunset – they didn’t appear in Gimme Shelter at all, as they told the directors they weren’t happy with their performance. Grace Slick is filmed charismatically fronting Jefferson Airplane, and the film-maker captures scuffles with Hells Angels on stage, including one audience member being pushed off and threatened; singer Marty Balin was infamously knocked unconscious by one of the bikers during the performance. Mashon writes of a barechested and magnificently hirsute Gram Parsons: “It was especially great to see Gram Parsons fronting the Flying Burrito Brothers, since you only see the back of his head in Gimme Shelter. Even better, there are good shots of Mick Jagger and Keith Richards off-stage watching him perform.” Mashon told the Washington Post regarding the unknown film-maker: “If an owner emerges, certainly we’d be interested in hearing that. Somebody with proof. But as far as we know this film was abandoned.”As part of the celebrations for the Queen’s platinum jubilee, Fortnum &amp; Mason is launching a competition for pudding recipes that celebrate the Queen’s 70 years on the throne. We would like to hear your suggestions for what the Queen’s platinum pudding should be. Share your suggestions You can fill in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Covid-19 spurred wealthy motorists to buy more Rolls-Royces than ever before because it made them realise life is short, the luxury carmaker has said. As global cases escalated in 2021, Rolls-Royce Motor Cars, based in Goodwood, West Sussex, booked the highest annual sales in its 117-year history, selling 5,586 vehicles. The company’s chief executive, Torsten Müller-Ötvös, said the pandemic had led to customers, whose average age was 43, responding to the reminder of their own mortality by splashing out on luxury cars. “Many people witnessed people in their community dying from Covid and that made them think life can be short and you’d better live now rather than postpone until a later date,” said Müller-Ötvös. “That has helped Rolls-Royce.” He said the carmaker, owned by BMW, had also benefited from the restrictions the pandemic had placed on wealthy consumers’ opportunities to spend their money elsewhere. “It is very much due to Covid that the entire luxury business is booming worldwide,” he said. “People couldn’t travel a lot, they couldn’t invest a lot into luxury services … and there is quite a lot of money accumulated that is spent on luxury goods.” He said sales had risen in every part of the world, an unusual trend, with Greater China and the Americas remaining the two biggest markets, each at 30% of sales. No other manufacturer sold more cars for more than €250,000 (£208,000), he said. The Phantom model was the company’s biggest seller but its Cullinan SUV accounted for 30% of 2021 sales. Its first fully electric car, the Spectre, is due to be delivered in 2023 ahead of a move to stop producing combustion engines and go fully electric by 2030. With the pandemic showing no sign of curbing the spending power of the extremely rich, Rolls-Royce also announced a “coach-built” service that will allow devotees of the marque to design their own car over four years. This will allow them to purchase “something money normally can’t buy but you can get it with us”, Müller-Ötvös said. He added that Brexit had caused unnecessary difficulties for Rolls-Royce because of restrictions on staff movement and the administrative burden of exporting, a problem for a carmaker that sends 90% of its British-made vehicles overseas. “Brexit definitely didn’t make our life in any way easier,” he said. Any impact on the company’s costs will not show up until it reports full accounts later this year. According to the latest accounts filed at Companies House in June, pretax profit for 2020 was £61m, down from £97m in 2019.Russian oligarchs’ use of London to launder their fortunes is to come under renewed scrutiny after the Conservative-controlled foreign affairs select committee agreed to re-examine the government’s apparent inability to crack down on the practice. The inquiry will be a concern to the Foreign Office, which has frequently been accused of leaving a gap between its tough anti-Russian rhetoric and failure to control either money laundering or those in the UK that enable the corruption. The British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, says the UK has some of the toughest anti-corruption laws in the world, but even in her short period in office she has been repeatedly challenged to review whether the laws are working effectively or adequately policed. The foreign affairs select committee inquiry will take the form of a follow-up to its previous inquiry, Moscow’s Gold, published in 2018 that found gaps in the government anti-corruption armoury. The 2018 report warned: “Turning a blind eye to London’s role in hiding the proceeds of Kremlin-connected corruption risks signalling that the UK is not serious about confronting the full spectrum of President Putin’s offensive measures”. Since then the prestigious thinktank Chatham House has argued the UK does have a problem with Russian money, claiming the law in this area is so poorly constructed and under-resourced that it amounts to self-regulation. But the government is also accused of dragging its heels on implementing relevant laws including a public register of beneficial owners of overseas entities that buy or sell property. The measure was first announced in 2016, but has been repeatedly delayed. In a sign of the damage to the government’s reputation, the government last month published an update of its anti-corruption strategy that reported the UK and overseas territories topped the financial secrecy index, a government recognised global survey of financial transparency. Confirming the fresh inquiry, Tom Tugendhat, the chair of the committee, said: “We have again to address the issue of the dirty money in the UK,” adding: “We will be looking more at where this money is going. We will be highlighting the overseas territories.” In a reference to the still stalled Nord Stream 2 project taking gas from Russia to Germany, he said: “We will be looking at how energy projects are used to exploit our dependence on petrochemicals and our dependence on energy, and to turn that dependence against us.” The inquiry is likely to start in the spring, Tugendhat said, adding the issue may not be the laws on the statute book, but the way they are policed. Chris Bryant, a senior Labour MP on the committee, claimed the UK had been getting its Russia policy wrong for two decades. He said: “We tempt Russian oligarchs to the United Kingdom with easy visas: we had these golden visas that largely went to extremely wealthy oligarchs who had made their money corruptly in Russia, with no questions asked other than: ‘Do you have enough money?’ We did not even ask: ‘Are you going to invest it in the United Kingdom?’ “We boast about our clever lawyers and accountants who can tidy things up so that assets are protected however they have been obtained. We open up our high-end housing market to Russian billionaires even though we know that the best way to squirrel away a dirty fortune or, indeed, to launder £20m is to buy a property that is worth £10m for £20m. “That is precisely what has affected the London housing market so deleteriously. We even grant – government ministers do this – some Russian individuals anonymity in what is meant to be the public register in Companies House of beneficial ownership of companies.” He said: “We must have a public register of beneficial ownership that should apply to the owners of overseas companies operating or purchasing property in the United Kingdom. That still does not exist; I simply do not understand why.” He added unexplained wealth orders, once championed as the way of seizing corrupt cash of the oligarchs, appear to have failed. Only four such orders have been issued and some rejected on the basis that cash can only be seized if it can be proven the cash was gained illegally in the jurisdiction in which the money was made, a high hurdle in some former Soviet Republics. Bryant also called for a review of why overseas territories were still stalling over implementing public registries of beneficial ownership. He said: “We need to ensure that the overseas territories do not become a soft backyard, where people can hide vast amounts of money corruptly, effectively under the British banner. That is not a patriotic commitment by the overseas territories. The patriotic commitment that the overseas territories should be making to Britain is to put public beneficial ownership registers in place as soon as possible.”Graham Thorpe, the interim head coach, described England’s dressing room as like a scene from M*A*S*H during the dramatic drawn Sydney Test. And at the end, after two old warhorses in Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad cussedly held firm, one of the injured had to be airlifted out of this gruelling Ashes campaign. Ben Stokes and Jonny Bairstow, so central to the outcome of a bruising battle, have flown with the squad to Hobart hoping to grit their teeth through Friday’s fifth Test with side and thumb problems respectively. Mark Wood is nursing bruised toes from the Pat Cummins yorker that floored him. But Jos Buttler’s broken finger – collateral damage from a Wood delivery that kept low – was bad enough to end his tour of duty. Bairstow is technically the spare wicketkeeper but the cracked thumb tip he suffered during the first of two belligerent scores of 113 and 41, rules out retaking the gloves. And though Ollie Pope surpassed expectations as a substitute for Buttler behind the stumps, a frontline replacement was sought by an England side trailing 3-0. Enter Sam Billings, fresh from the Big Bash League and having answered a call-up 90 minutes before his intended flight for the T20 team’s upcoming Caribbean tour. Assurances he could still feature against West Indies – even if the first international in Barbados on 22 January comes too soon – were sought by a perennial drinks carrier and now a 10-hour hire car road trip down the east coast, plus isolation at the team hotel, looks set to be rewarded with an unexpected Test debut and becoming England cap No 700. “I am 100% ready if required, and I will give absolutely everything I can,” said Billings. “I have been playing consistent cricket and scoring runs. It doesn’t really matter what format it is, it’s more about rhythm, confidence and mindset. Like any side I go into I will try to make a positive impact on and off the field, in any environment I am put into. “The three guys who came out to bat in Sydney with injuries, that’s incredible courage, and exactly what everyone involved in English cricket is about – playing for each other and that resilience. There’s a lot of inspiration we can take from that as a group, that character and over-my-dead-body attitude.” Billings, 30, makes for interesting case study during English cricket’s current existential crisis. A popular and ever-willing fringe player in the well-stocked white-ball setup – winning 58 ODI and T20 caps from a possible 175 since his debut in 2015 – he is among a generation outside the central contract list who have felt encouraged to pursue globetrotting T20 careers. When picked up by the Indian Premier League in particular, this overlaps with big chunks of the red-ball summer. “It’s a hard one,” said Billings. “I think the contract situation is always a contentious one. As a non-contract [England] player, you have to maximise opportunities because you don’t have that fallback of being picked in the next [national] squad. I’ve only got one career, let’s say five to seven years left of playing cricket. [T20] has been an avenue for me to play cricket. There’s no right or wrong with any of this stuff. It has hampered, I suppose, my chances of playing four-day cricket and ultimately Test cricket.” The 10 first-class matches Billings has played for Kent since a shoulder injury saw him miss out on the 2019 World Cup squad have returned a batting average of 44.58 and three centuries. Along with an orthodox technique, successes against the higher pace of international attacks and solid glovework in all formats, it points to a player who, in a different era, might have stated a greater case than simply being in the same country. His nearest brush with a Test cap came in the summer when he was notably the only IPL returnee to burst out of quarantine and act as reserve wicketkeeper to James Bracey in the 1-0 defeat to New Zealand. Though his career differs to that of Usman Khawaja, his Sydney Thunder teammate, Billings is inspired by the “nothing-to-lose” attitude that saw the Australian seize his chance with sparkling twin centuries at the SCG during what was supposed to be a one-off recall. Billings said: “I thought he spoke fantastically well in terms of having that perspective, having that really open mind to the potential of what’s in front of him, and taking his opportunities. I am in a really good place in my own game. I have made some technical changes over the last few years that I feel have really improved my all-round game regardless of the format, so I’m ready to go if needs be. It doesn’t really matter what format it is, it’s more about rhythm, confidence and mindset.” Billings arrived from the Covid-afflicted BBL but, touch wood, has not contracted the virus since the last English summer. He and Saqib Mahmood, another Caribbean-bound white-ball player, bubbled up and requested separate changing rooms to their Thunder teammates in the past fortnight to cut risk of transmission – with at least four cases in the squad to date, it looks a shrewd call. If picked, Billings would be a fifth Test wicketkeeper for England in the space of 12 months – the sixth if you count Pope’s substitute role – and goes against Chris Silverwood’s stated aim of not wanting to hand out debuts in Australia. As the Ashes battlefield has taught England’s head coach, who rejoins the camp after recovering from Covid-19, plans – best laid or otherwise – can go awry.The last seven years were the world’s hottest on record, with the first analysis of global temperature in 2021 showing it was 1.2C above pre-industrial levels. The assessment of the year, by the European climate agency Copernicus, also found carbon dioxide in the atmosphere reached record levels and that the potent greenhouse gas methane surged “very substantially”, also to a new record. The rise in greenhouse gas concentration means more heat is being trapped than ever before but 2021 ranked as the fifth hottest year on record. This is because a natural and cyclic climate phenomenon called La Niña exerted a cooling influence by bringing cold Pacific waters to the surface. The climate crisis continued unabated with extreme weather striking across the world. Europe suffered its hottest summer on record and broke its maximum temperature record in Sicily with 48.8C, while intense wildfires raged in Italy, Greece and Turkey. Severe floods made up to nine times more likely by global heating also wreaked havoc in Germany and Belgium Extreme heat also caused the “mother of all heatwaves” in the west of the US and Canada. Temperature records were smashed by 5C and scientists calculated the event was made at least 150 times more likely by global heating. In California, the Dixie wildfire was the second largest in history. China’s meteorological agency recently announced that 2021 was the country’s hottest year on record and that its northern region had its wettest year, with extreme weather widespread. Floods in July in Henan province caused hundreds of deaths. Mauro Facchini, the head of Earth observation for the European Commission, said: “The 2021 analysis is a reminder of the continued increase in global temperatures and the urgent necessity to act.” The Copernicus data shows 21 of the 22 hottest years have come since the year 2000. “The [extreme weather] events in 2021 are a stark reminder of the need to change our ways, take decisive and effective steps toward a sustainable society,” said Carlo Buontempo, director of the Copernicus climate service. The average CO2 levels in 2021 reached a new record of 414 parts per million in 2021 – before the Industrial Revolution and large scale burning of fossil fuels the level was 280ppm. The rate of CO2 rise remained the same as it had since 2010, despite Covid-related lockdowns. Methane levels are accelerating with the growth rate in 2021 approximately three times the rate of a decade ago. Methane is emitted through fossil fuel exploitation, cattle and other livestock, and natural wetland processes and scientists are uncertain about the cause of the rapid rises. Vincent-Henri Peuch, at Copernicus, said: “CO2 and methane concentrations are continuing to increase year-on-year and without signs of slowing down. Prof Rowan Sutton, at the University of Reading, UK, said: “At a global level the warming may appear gradual but it is the impact on extreme events in many different parts of the world that is dramatic. We should see the record breaking 2021 events, such as the heatwave in Canada and floods in Germany, as a punch in the face to make politicians and public alike wake up to the urgency of the climate emergency.” Other temperature datasets for 2021 will be published in coming weeks by the UK and Japanese Met Offices and Nasa and Noaa in the US, with similar results expected.In a street market in China, factory recruiters with loudspeakers compete for the attention of job seekers, yelling like they’re selling vegetables: “Seating working available!” “Air conditioning!” Others list restrictions: “No tattoos. No hair dye.” One advertises a salary: $2.99 (£2.21) an hour. Outside the market, inspirational slogans are plastered across billboards extolling the Chinese dream. “Work hard and all your dreams will come true.” When you’re paid $2.99, that’s a lot of hard work. So begins this brilliant documentary by Chinese-American director Jessica Kingdon, which slyly observes China’s transition from the world’s factory to a massive consumer society. It’s a film in the tradition of Koyaanisqatsi or Nikolaus Geyrhalter’s Our Daily Bread. Shot in more than 50 locations in China, it splits more or less into three sections: factory workers, China’s growing middle class and the filthy-rich elite. There’s no voiceover or obvious narrative, just a stream of vignettes – at times an almost surreal compilation of images strung together. There’s an unforgettable scene in a factory where female staff put the finishing touches to high-end sex dolls; deep in concentration, they meticulously hand-paint pink nipples. It’s sort of hilarious; one woman holds a doll’s legs akimbo as she leans in to trim its bikini line. But then, a colleague picks up a phallic-looking hot iron and burns a hole into the plastic flesh. It’s a disturbing image and made me think of the men who buy these anatomically freakish sex dolls. Then more practical concerns arise: where is this worker’s protective gear? Fake Christmas trees, jeans, squirty dispensers for cosmetics, unicorn tat, Make America Great Again merch (oh, the irony) – we watch the dizzying production line of capitalist excess. Nothing screams futility and waste like plastic mineral water bottles popping out of a factory machine by the hundreds. Through it all composer Dan Deacon’s string-heavy score strikes a cautionary note. There’s a lot of humour in the sections on China’s middle class and super-wealthy. In one semi-excruciating scene pupils at a butler school are instructed in how to take crap from a boss: “No matter how he humiliates you, pretend to be obedient.” Part of the film’s genius is in how the images are put together, sometimes to absurd effect, at other times unnervingly. The system is dehumanising but we see the emotions of the humans inside it. It’s a fascinating film about China that has universal things to say about income inequality and aspiration everywhere: how we’re all sold a dream that’s out of the reach of most. • Ascension is released on 14 January in cinemas and on MTVHigher US inflation could lead to a tougher than expected response from America’s central bank that would send tremors through financial markets and put vulnerable countries at risk, the International Monetary Fund has warned. Adding to growing concerns about the sharp increase in price pressures being registered across the globe, the IMF said emerging market nations should brace themselves for muscular action from the US central bank, the Federal Reserve. “For most of last year, investors priced in a temporary rise in inflation in the US given the unsteady economic recovery and a slow unravelling of supply bottlenecks,” the Washington-based IMF said in a blogpost. “Now sentiment has shifted. Prices are rising at the fastest pace in almost four decades and the tight labour market has started to feed into wage increases. The new Omicron variant has raised additional concerns of supply-side pressures on inflation. The Federal Reserve referred to inflation developments as a key factor in its decision last month to accelerate the tapering of asset purchases.” With the headline measure of inflation above 6% and at its highest level in almost four decades, financial markets believe the Fed will raise interest rates four times in 2022 and also sell bonds in a process known as quantitative tightening. Higher US borrowing costs would normally lead to a stronger dollar, making it more expensive for emerging market countries that have borrowed heavily in the currency to service their debts. Slower US growth prompted by higher interest rates would also affect exports to the world’s biggest economy. The IMF said it anticipated falling US inflation later in the year, but stressed the possibility that broad-based wage rises or sustained supply bottlenecks could lead to higher prices and fuel expectations for further upward pressure on the cost of living. “Faster Fed rate increases in response could rattle financial markets and tighten financial conditions globally,” the IMF said. “These developments could come with a slowing of US demand and trade and may lead to capital outflows and currency depreciation in emerging markets.” The prospect of higher US interest rates has led to share prices falling since the start of 2022. Jim Reid, an analyst at Deutsche Bank, said: “To be fair the Fed were starting to catch up with reality late last year but Omicron meant that the market was reluctant to read their more hawkish move as entirely realistic, given the risks that the variant presented. “However the holiday season provided more evidence that Omicron was notably milder, especially among the vaccinated, and the result has been that the market has looked through this more than they were willing to before Christmas while at the same time the Fed have become even more hawkish by upping the ante on quantitative tightening. So a perfect storm.”The EU’s police agency, Europol, will be forced to delete much of a vast store of personal data that it has been found to have amassed unlawfully by the bloc’s data protection watchdog. The unprecedented finding from the European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) targets what privacy experts are calling a “big data ark” containing billions of points of information. Sensitive data in the ark has been drawn from crime reports, hacked from encrypted phone services and sampled from asylum seekers never involved in any crime. According to internal documents seen by the Guardian, Europol’s cache contains at least 4 petabytes – equivalent to 3m CD-Roms or a fifth of the entire contents of the US Library of Congress. Data protection advocates say the volume of information held on Europol’s systems amounts to mass surveillance and is a step on its road to becoming a European counterpart to the US National Security Agency (NSA), the organisation whose clandestine online spying was revealed by whistleblower Edward Snowden. Among the quadrillions of bytes held are sensitive data on at least a quarter of a million current or former terror and serious crime suspects and a multitude of other people with whom they came into contact. It has been accumulated from national police authorities over the last six years, in a series of data dumps from an unknown number of criminal investigations. The watchdog ordered Europol to erase data held for more than six months and gave it a year to sort out what could be lawfully kept. The confrontation pits the EU data protection watchdog against a powerful security agency being primed to become the centre of machine learning and AI in policing. The ruling also exposes deep political divisions among Europe’s decision-makerson the trade-offs between security and privacy. The eventual outcome of their face-off has implications for the future of privacy in Europe and beyond. The EU home affairs commissioner, Ylva Johansson appeared to defend Europol. “Law enforcement authorities need the tools, resources and the time to analyse data that is lawfully transmitted to them,” she said. “In Europe, Europol is the platform that supports national police authorities with this herculean task.” The commission says the legal concerns raised by the EDPS raise “a serious challenge” for Europol’s ability to fulfil its duties. Last year, it proposed sweeping changes to the regulation underpinning Europol’s powers. If made law, the proposals could in effect retrospectively legalise the data cache and preserve its contents as a testing ground for new AI and machine learning tools. Europol denies any wrongdoing, and said the watchdog may be interpreting the current rules in an impractical way: “[The] Europol regulation was not intended by the legislator as a requirement which is impossible to be met by the data controller [ie Europol] in practice.” Europol had worked with the EDPS “to find a balance between keeping the EU secure and its citizens safe while adhering to the highest standards of data protection”, the agency said. Founded as a coordinating body for national police forces in the EU and headquartered in The Hague, Europol has been pushed by some member states as a solution to terrorism concerns in the wake of the 2015 Bataclan attacks and encouraged to harvest data on multiple fronts. In theory, Europol is subject to tight regulation over what kinds of personal data it can store and for how long. Incoming records are meant to be strictly categorised and only processed or retained when they have potential relevance to high-value work such as counter-terrorism. But the full contents of what it holds are unknown, in part because of the haphazard way that EDPS found Europol to be treating data. * * * Only a handful of Europeans have become aware that their own data is being stored and none is known to have been able to force disclosure. Frank van der Linde, who was placed on a terror watchlist in his native Netherlands and later removed, is one of the rare visible threads in an otherwise unseen mesh. The political activist, whose only serious run-ins with police amount to breaking a window to gain entrance to a building and create a squat for homeless people, was removed from the Dutch watchlist by authorities in 2019. But a year prior to this removal he had moved to Berlin, which unknown to Van der Linde at the time prompted Dutch police to share his data with German counterparts and Europol. The activist discovered his entanglement with Europol only when he saw a partially declassified file at Amsterdam city hall. To get his personal data removed from any international databases he turned to Europol. He was surprised when in June 2020 it responded saying it had nothing he was “entitled to have access to”. The activist took his complaint to the EDPS. “I don’t know if they deleted the data after Dutch authorities updated them [that] they don’t consider me an extremist … Europol is a black box.” “The ease of getting on such a list is horrific,” Van der Linde said. “It’s shocking how easily police share information over borders, and it’s terrifying how difficult it is to manage to delete yourself from these lists.” * * * Concerns over Europol’s treatment of sensitive data prompted the watchdog to raise its own questions in 2019. Its initial findings in September of that year showed that data sets shared with Europol were stored without the proper checks to verify whether people scooped up in them ought to be monitored or their data retained. Access to the ark is restricted to authorised personnel and a lot of its content has been examined, cleansed and used legally. When Europol failed to convincingly answer the watchdog’s concerns, the EDPS publicly admonished the police agency in September 2020 making clear what was at stake: “Data subjects run the risk of wrongfully being linked to a criminal activity across the EU, with all of the potential damage for their personal and family life, freedom of movement and occupation that this entails.” The tussle that followed is captured in a series of internal documents obtained under freedom of information laws. They show Europol stalling for time and the watchdog telling them that they have failed to resolve “the legal breach”. The police agency appears to be holding out for new EU legislation to provide retrospective cover for what it has been doing without a legal basis for six years. The European Commission’s nervousness over a public clash was enough to pull Monique Pariat, the EU’s director general for home affairs, into a meeting between the two agencies in December 2021. Sources said the watchdog had been encouraged to “tone down” its public criticism of Europol. But the head of EDPS, Wojciech Wiewiórowski, told the Guardian that the meeting was “the last moment for Europol to add some information that wasn’t added in their last replies to our letter”. As the meeting did nothing to answer Wiewiórowski’s concerns on lawful retention of data “there was no other way to solve the problem, for us” he said, “than to issue a decision to erase the data which is over six months”. Niovi Vavoula, a legal expert at Queen Mary University of London, said: “The new legislation is actually an effort to game the system. Europol and the commission have been attempting an ex-post rectification of illegally retaining data for years. But putting new rules in place does not legally resolve previously illegal conduct. This is not how the rule of law works.” Experts’ concerns are not confined to Europol’s flouting of rules on data retention. They also see a law enforcement agency that aspires to conduct mass surveillance operations. Members of the civil liberties, justice and home affairs committee of the European parliament during a hearing in June 2021 compared the agency to the NSA. Wiewiórowski surprised attenders by endorsing the comparison in relation to Europol’s practice of retaining data. He pointed out that Europol was using similar arguments to those used by the NSA to defend bulk data collection operations and mass surveillance as revealed by Snowden. “What the NSA said to Europeans after the Prism scandal started was that they are not processing the data, they are just collecting it and they will process it only in case it is necessary for the investigation they are doing,” Wiewiórowski told MEPs. “This is something that doesn’t comply with the European approach to processing personal data.” Eric Topfer, a surveillance expert at the German Institute for Human Rights, has studied the proposed new Europol regulation and said it foresees the agency pulling in data directly from banks, airlines, private companies and emails. “If Europol will only have to ask for certain kinds of information to have them served on a silver platter, then we are moving closer to having an NSA-like agency.” * * * The struggle with EDPS over data storage is the latest evidence of Europol favouring technosolutions to security concerns over privacy rights. Europol’s boss, previously Belgium’s top cop, co-wrote an op-ed in July 2021 which argued that the needs of law enforcement agencies to extract evidence from smartphones should trump privacy considerations. The article argues for a legal right to the keys to all encryption services. No mention was made of Pegasus spyware revelations that showed that many governments, including some in Europe, were actively attempting to intercept the communications of human rights defenders, journalists and lawyers for whom encryption offers their only protection. In 2020, Europol trumpeted its involvement together with French and Dutch police in hacking the encrypted phone service EncroChat, unleashing a torrent of personal data into the ark. When the secret operation was revealed by Europol and its judicial counterpart, Eurojust, it was hailed as one of the biggest successes in battling organised crime in Europe’s history. In the UK alone, about 2,600 people were taken into custody by August 2021 and Nikki Holland, the director of investigations at the UK National Crime Agency, compared the hack to “having an inside person in every top organised crime group in the country”. Europol copied the data extracted from 120m EncroChat messages and tens of millions of call recordings, pictures and notes, then parcelled it out to national police forces. The flood of evidence of drug trafficking and other offences drowned out qualms about the implications of the operation. The hacking operation that turned EncroChat phones into mobile spies acting against their users has important similarities with surveillance malware such as Pegasus. Lawyers from Germany, France, Sweden, Ireland, the UK, Norway and the Netherlands, all representing clients caught up in the aftermath, met in Utrecht in November 2021. They found that cases were being built across Europe based on evidence of which authorities were unwilling to reveal the provenance. “Investigators and prosecutors were hiding or deforming the facts,” said the German attorney Christian Lödden. “We all agree that these are not the best people in the world, but what are we ready to sacrifice in order to convict one more person?” EncroChat clientele included non-criminals, people such as lawyers, journalists and business people. The Dutch attorney Haroon Raza was one of them and said he bought an EncroChat handset at a phone shop in Rotterdam. He demanded that his data be erased. “As far as I could understand, a copy still lies in Europol’s databases where it could remain forever.” French lawyer Robin Binsard is convinced that the whole operation amounts to mass surveillance. He said: “Dismantling a whole communication system is like the police searching all the apartments in a block to find the proof of a crime: it violates privacy and it’s simply illegal.” Since 2016, Europol has also been running a mass screening programme in refugee camps in Italy and Greece, sweeping up data from tens of thousands of asylum seekers in search of alleged foreign fighters and terrorists. According to a partially declassified EDPS inspection report obtained under freedom of information laws, “routine checks” by Europol of migrants crossing EU borders “are not allowed” as there is “no legal basis” for such a programme. The screening may have resulted in migrants’ personal data being stored on a criminal database regardless of any links being found to crime or terrorism. Europol has declined to reveal any operational details. * * * Internal documents make clear that by spring 2020 Europol was developing its own machine learning and AI programme, even as the EU data watchdog was snapping at its heels. Finding itself with a growing cache of data, the agency turned to algorithms to make sense of it all. A month after the data supervisor publicly admonished Europol, the agency came back with a question: if it wanted to train algorithms on the data it had already been admonished for retaining, could it start the data protection impact assessment process for this without EDPS oversight? The request makes it clear that the algorithms, which included facial recognition tools, would not be designed nor used to retrieve sensitive data such as health status, ethnic background, sexual or political orientation, even though, as Europol admitted, such data would inevitably be processed by the tools: “We recognise that the produced results will contain sensitive data and its processing will be in line with Europol Regulation.” When the watchdog did not provide the green light, Europol decided in effect to sideline the EDPS and go ahead regardless, confirming as much in a January 2021 letter. The watchdog responded by saying it would open a formal monitoring procedure. By the end of February 2021, Europol pulled the brake on its machine learning programme. Europol told the Guardian that, to date, it “has not made use of own machine learning models for operational analysis and has also not carried out ‘training’ of machine learning.” But there are clear signs that the brake will be released soon. Europol has already started a recruitment round for experts to help with the development of AI and data mining. The emerging shape of Europol is alarming some MEPs such as Belgium’s Saskia Bricmont. “In the name of the fight against criminality and terrorism we have an evolution of an agency, which performs very important missions, but they are not executed in the right manner. This will lead to problems,” she said. Chloé Berthélémy, an expert with the European Digital Rights network of NGOs, said that while Europol lags behind the US in terms of technological capacity, it is on the same path as the NSA. “Europol’s capacity to hoover up huge amounts of data and accumulate it, in what could be called a big data ark, after which it is almost impossible to know what they are used for, makes it a black hole.” Reporting for this investigation was supported by a grant from the IJ4EU fund and in collaboration with Lighthouse ReportsLalage Bown, who has died aged 94, was appointed to her first teaching post in the new University of the Gold Coast (Ghana) in 1949. Although only 22, she immediately questioned the department’s British literature-oriented curriculum, believing that poems such as Wordsworth’s Daffodils (I wandered lonely as a cloud) had little meaning for African students, and that it was important for them to encounter writing by and about African people. Challenged by the department’s senior members, who doubted that such texts existed, she bet them a bottle of beer that she could produce numerous passages written in English by African authors over the previous 200 years. Within two weeks she won her beer, and mimeographed copies of the relevant works were distributed to students and teachers. Eventually Bown edited the resulting anthology, Two Centuries of African English, including prose by the 18th-century writers Ignatius Sancho and Olaudah Equiano, as well as more contemporary politicians and authors such as Jomo Kenyatta, Julius Nyerere and Chinua Achebe. The anthology was published in the Heinemann African Writers Series in 1973, rapidly becoming a core text for adult education and other classes throughout Africa. This was just one of numerous books she edited and co-edited. Throughout her three-decade career in Africa, Bown established a network of adult education institutions and organisations in Ghana, Nigeria, Zambia, Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania. Her energy and formidable abilities as a manager, linked to a talent for encouraging collaboration, brought lasting achievements for adult literacy in these countries. Together with her African colleagues in Zambia, for example, she established a national extramural programme that emphasised current issues, introduced special courses for trade unionists, politicians and police, and drew on radio and television as a media for education. She also set up the first systematic training for adult educators in Africa, and was the founding secretary of the African Adult Education Association. When she returned to Britain permanently in 1980, she devoted her considerable energies to widening access to adult education throughout the UK. Bown gave particular attention to helping women in Africa learn to read and write. In a 2009 interview for the Unesco education sector newsletter, she commented: “I was left with the huge conviction that even the simplest acquisition of literacy can have a profoundly empowering effect personally, socially and politically. When it comes to women, there is a huge change in their self-worth and confidence.” In 1990 she drew on experience in Africa, the US and Britain, and as an active member of the Canadian-based International Council for Adult Education, to produce a widely cited report for ActionAid, Preparing the Future: Women, Literacy and Development. Born in Croydon, Surrey (now in the London borough of Croydon), the daughter of Dorothy (nee Watson) and Arthur Bown, Lalage was the eldest of four children. Her unusual name, pronounced Lallagy, derives from an ode by the Roman poet Horace. Her father worked for the Indian civil service in Burma (now Myanmar), but the children stayed in children’s holiday homes and boarding schools in Britain, visited by their mother during the summer holidays, and their father only when he was on leave once every three years. Lalage was educated in Wycombe Abbey school and Cheltenham Ladies’ college, before studying modern history at Somerville College, Oxford, graduating in 1949. She subsequently took an MA in adult education and economic development. After six years as resident tutor at the University of the Gold Coast, Bown taught in the extramural department at Makerere University in Kampala, Uganda. In 1960, she marked Nigeria’s independence while serving as assistant director of extramural studies at the University of Ibadan. Following four years as director of extramural studies at the University of Zambia, and the end of the Nigerian civil war, she was appointed professor of adult education in Ahmadu Bello University, northern Nigeria. In 1977 Bown moved to the University of Lagos, where in 1979 she was appointed dean of education. While in Nigeria, she took into her home five-year-old twin girls, Taiwo and Kehinde, whose family had been victims of the war, and she became their permanent foster mother. Bown’s achievements in the field of adult studies did not go unnoticed outside Africa. She was appointed OBE in 1977. In 1975 she received an honorary doctorate from the Open University for services to the education of the underprivileged, and was the first woman to receive the William Pearson Tolley medal from Syracuse University, New York, for outstanding contributions to lifelong and continuing education. In 1981 she was appointed director and titular professor to the University of Glasgow’s department of adult and continuing education. Under her leadership, that department offered the widest range of subjects of all continuing education departments in the UK. After her retirement in 1992, Bown remained an active member not only of her local Rotary Club in Shrewsbury but also of numerous international societies and boards, including the Council for Education in the Commonwealth from 1999 till 2006. She was made a fellow of the Educational Institute of Scotland and also of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1991, and was inducted into the International Adult and Continuing Education Hall of Fame in 2009. She is survived by a brother, Hugh, and by Taiwo and Kehinde. • Lalage Jean Bown, educator, born 1 April 1927; died 17 December 2021Given their decades-long ubiquity, it’s weird to realise that Ant and Dec don’t actually make a lot of television shows. Just three really, at the moment: Saturday Night Takeaway, I’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here! and Britain’s Got Talent. In TV years, all three are positively ancient, with the first two starting in 2002 and the third in 2007. With hits as perennial as these, it’s little wonder that Ant and Dec don’t choose to branch out more, especially when their efforts to host new shows tend to flounder and die in the space of a year or two. Anyone remember PokerFace? Push the Button? Red or Black? In all honesty, probably not. Which brings us to Limitless Win. On the face of it, this is a shiny-floored Saturday night gameshow like any other. There are questions. There’s a Who Wants To Be a Millionaire-style money ladder. There are absurdly chipper contestants. On the face of it, Limitless Win is utterly anonymous. It could be presented by Bradley Walsh or Nick Knowles or Davina McCall or the ghost of Bob Monkhouse or a photofit of a horse. So why have Ant and Dec chosen this to be their first new series proper in a decade? Probably the format. Limitless Win is, with the exception of a few bells and whistles that we’ll come to in a moment, Who Wants To Be a Millionaire. The more questions you answer, the more money you win. But, as the title suggests, there is no upper limit. On Millionaire, you answer 15 questions and go home a – well, millionaire. But here, you can just keep going until you lose. That might be when you reach a thousand pounds. It might be at a million pounds. The onscreen money ladder goes all the way up to £12m, but it doesn’t stop there. In theory, a genius could take part on Limitless Win, and be its only ever contestant, and slowly drain the entire planet of all its financial reserves. That is unlikely to happen, of course – largely because Limitless Win suffers from the annoying gameshow trope of slowing everything to an agonising crawl wherever possible. We meet the contestants. We see them backstage. We get to watch them debate every single possible answer to every single question, at length, in real time. Maybe I’m the only one who finds this sort of thing infuriating. Maybe the general public is crazy for watching couples passive-aggressively bickering about the number of sails on the Blue Peter ship like the world’s worst dinner party guests. Who can really say? On the subject of annoyances, Limitless Win also seems to be the recipient of several gratuitous complications. For instance, the answer to every question is a number. You lose lives depending on how much your answer varies from the correct answer. You gain lives in a quickfire 60-second round. You pick the number by twisting a dial. There are also lifelines, which come at random and are so numerous that each has to be explained at length every time. If you want to use a lifeline, you have to hit a button. There is another button for when you want to cash out. It is all so unnecessarily complicated that, when your auntie inevitably pulls the home game edition out of the cupboard three Boxing Days from now, she’ll get three lines into the instructions before your entire family loses their minds with rage. And yet, despite all this, Limitless Win resides in the upper echelons of gameshows. The reason for this, of course, is Ant and Dec. As hosts, they are absolutely effortless. They can explain the rules without battering you over the head. They can chat to the contestants like old friends. When the prize amount starts to gain altitude, they ramp up the tension like a pair of pantomime dames, clutching their temples and pulling faces at the crowd. The thing is, they sell all this like a dream. Another host might be tempted to overdo it, plunging the show into the realms of insincere melodrama. Not Ant and Dec: theirs is a perfectly weighted performance. It doesn’t show off their skill set perfectly – that’s still I’m a Celebrity – but it’s beautiful to watch nonetheless. Are they enough to keep me watching Limitless Win? In all honesty, probably not. Once you’ve seen one episode, the only reason to stick around is to see how much money the contestants will win, and you sense that the press will make a lot of noise about the big episodes ahead of time. Still, this is Ant and Dec’s most effective new venture in probably two decades and, as such, you shouldn’t be surprised if it becomes an ITV mainstay.After landing in Melbourne late on 5 January, Novak Djokovic is questioned by an officer of the Department of Home Affairs, from 00.21am on 6 January, about why he has travelled to the country. After clarifying that he has come to play in the Australian Open, the officer asks him about his vaccination status. The quotes are taken from the transcript agreed between both parties and released by the Federal Circuit Court in Melbourne on Monday. INTERVIEWER: Are you vaccinated? DJOKOVIC: I am not vaccinated. INTERVIEWER: Thank you. Have you ever had Covid? DJOKOVIC: Yes. I had Covid twice … in June 2020 and recently – I was tested positive, PCR 16th of December 2021 … I have the documents as well to confirm that. If you want I can provide. The interview is then suspended while Djokovic’s documents are photocopied. When it resumes at 00.35am, the world No 1 confirms that his manager filled in his visa application and claims that he has a medical exemption to enter Australia from the federal government. INTERVIEWER: OK, so this letter here, medical exemption pretty much talks about a review panel by Tennis Australia, it doesn’t talk about the federal government? But you are sure definitely … DJOKOVIC: Yes, the process was, yes, the process there was two indepen … two medical panels … there was one that was related to the federal government for sure. The interview is then suspended for a second time before recommencing. It turns out that Djokovic has got confused - and the exemption certificate he has is from the state government instead. DJOKOVIC: Yes, so I just checked with my agent … this certificate for exemption has been provided by independent expert medical review panel commissioned by Tennis Australia and the decision of the panel has been reviewed and endorsed by independent medical exemption review panel of the Victorian state government. INTERVIEWER: So previously you said to me that it was done by the government. DJOKOVIC: Yes, I, I, well I probably made a mistake, it was not the federal government, it was the Victorian government that had selected the independent medical panel that has reviewed together with the Australian Open. INTERVIEWER: That’s absolutely fine, but the thing is like you [inaudible] come to Australia and it is pretty much governed by Federal government. DJOKOVIC: This I understand. So do you need any additional documents from me? INTERVIEWER: Yeah, if you are claiming that you did receive emails from federal government … because, yeah, we want to give you every opportunity to provide as much information as you can. DJOKOVIC: All right. OK, so no we did not get any emails from the federal government. This is what we got from the Australian Open player medical team, because they are the organisers of the event, so this is what we got. INTERVIEWER: OK, that’s fine. DJOKOVIC: And I am sorry, I apologise. The interview is then suspended at 00:52am, and Djokovic has to wait another three hours before it resumes at 3:55am. Immediately he is issued with a notice of intention to consider cancellation of his visa. INTERVIEWER: So I’m just going to read out all the information. DJOKOVIC: I don’t understand, you’re cancelling my visa, or? INTERVIEWER: This is a notice of intention to consider cancellation under s 116 of the Migration Act 1958. So once I serve this notice to you I will give you like, you know, 20 minutes – or whatever if you need more time you can request that – and you need to provide us reasons why we shouldn’t cancel the visa. DJOKOVIC: I mean, I am really failing to understand what else do you want me to provide to you. I have provided all the documents that Tennis Australia and Victorian government has asked me to do in the last three/four weeks, this is what we have been doing. My agent and I have been in a constant communication with Tennis Australia and Victorian state government, the medical panel… INTERVIEWER: Yep. DJOKOVIC: They have allowed to have the medical exemption for the Covid vaccination. I applied, they approved, I just really don’t know what else do you want me to say … I just really don’t understand what is the reason you don’t allow me to enter your country – just I mean, I have been waiting four hours and I still fail to, to understand what’s the main reason – like – lack of what papers? Lack of what information do you need? Or? INTERVIEWER: Ah yep, so I am just going to read out all of the information to you and I’m going to give you a copy of this as well … DJOKOVIC: So you’re giving me legally 20 minutes to try to provide additional information that I don’t have? At 4 o clock in the morning? I mean you kind of put me in a very awkward position where at 4 in the morning I can’t call director of Tennis Australia, I can’t engage with anybody from the Victorian state government through Tennis Australia. I just, you put me in a very uncomfortable position. I don’t know what else can I tell you. I mean everything that that they – I was asked to do, is here. INTERVIEWER: Yeah. DJOKOVIC: And I wouldn’t be here sitting in front of you if I if I wasn’t complying to all the rules and regulations set by your government. So I just – I don’t know what I mean – to me it is a little bit shocking that you are, that you are going to give me the notice to cancel my visa based on what? If you can, we wait for 8 in the morning and then I can call Tennis Australia and then we can try and figure this out. But right now? They’re all sleepy… I don’t know what else I can do at this moment. So I really, I know legally you’re following – but it just doesn’t make any sense. I mean I have done everything I possibly can. Right now I can call my agent. You – you told me not to use my phone, so I’m not communicating with anybody, no one knows what’s going on. INTERVIEWER: Mmhm. DJOKOVIC: But I really need to understand from you because you’ve been giving me very vague answers, or literally no answers at all, for the last four hours… the intention to consider to cancel, which I don’t really understand what it means. The interviewer explains that under the Biosecurity Act 2015, there are requirements for entry into Australian territory - and that previous infection with Covid-19 is not considered a medical contraindication for Covid-19 vaccination in Australia. DJOKOVIC: Sorry to interrupt but that’s not true. The independent medical panel of Victorian state government has stated explicitly that if you have recovered or if you had the positive test of coronavirus and negative test of coronavirus in the last six months and you have a sufficient amount of antibodies, you’re you’re considered to be part of the process of getting a medical exemption. That’s how I got it. I mean I communicated directly with the Victorian state government, that’s absolutely not true. The interviewer then reads out a long statement to Djokovic, telling him that unvaccinated persons create a greater health risk of contracting Covid-19 and spreading Covid-19 to others, either of which will further burden the Australian health system. He adds that if his visa is cancelled he may be prevented from entering Australia for three years. He then asks Djokovic to sign a document. DJOKOVIC: So I don’t know really what to do at 4am. If you allow me to switch on my phone and make a call to my agent and try and get a hold of people from Tennis Australia. There’s absolutely no way I would put myself in a position to come and sit here with you and it would definitely come to my attention, the attention of my agent or the team of people around me that the six months Covid regulation was not in place. INTERVIEWER: That’s fine, but I need to go through this process, and so, that’s fine if you don’t want to sign it, but I will still, I will make a photocopy of it, I will give it to you, so I’m just going to say you’re not going to sign. DJOKOVIC: OK so can you just explain to me whether you will allow me to acquire more information from through my phone with my agent? INTERVIEWER: So not at this stage, once I finish off this or suspend this interview I will come back and I will let you know. The interview is then suspended for a fourth time at 4.23am before recommencing nine minutes later. Djokovic is told he can now use his phone. The interview is again suspended before resuming at 5.20am, when Djokovic is told that he will be moved to a hotel in the city. DJOKOVIC: But that hotel? Is it like a Covid hotel or is it, what is it? INTERVIEWER: No, it’s, I don’t know the name of it, it’s just a place … I’m guessing the department has contracted with the hotel to allow people in … who’s refused entry to the country to stay at the hotel there. DJOKOVIC: OK. So does that mean I can take my bags with me or? INTERVIEWER: First thing is, I just wanted to see… what’s your response to the NOIC, notice of intention to cancel to consider cancellation, so do you have anything to say, why the visa shouldn’t, why shouldn’t we consider cancelling the visa? Djokovic again states his reasons why he should be allowed his visa. The interview is then suspended for a sixth time at 6.14am before resuming at 7.38am. Djokovic is then notified that the Australian government intends to cancel his visa under section 116 of the Migration Act 1958. INTERVIEWER: Other relevant agencies will be advised that your visa has been cancelled. Um, so this is the notification and the time is 7:42 am. Um, up to you, your choice if you wish to sign. DJOKOVIC: No. INTERVIEWER: That’s fine. I’m just gonna invite another officer into the room and she’s gonna detain you. DETAINING OFFICER: My name is Beck, I’m an officer of the Australian Border Force. It has come to my attention that you are an unlawful non-citizen in Australia. Therefore, I am detaining you under section 189(1) of the Migration Act of 1958 at 07:43 hours on the sixth of January 2022. Now I’ll leave you with my colleague. DJOKOVIC: Ah, just regarding the next step am I going to be escorted to a hotel? INTERVIEWER: Yeah so, the next step is gonna be you would be escorted to a hotel. That’s where you will stay, and then inform the airline, and once we get some more information. SERCO - it’s another agency who takes care of it - they’ll inform you and then they’ll bring you back to the airport. DJOKOVIC: OK. Which airline are you – because I, do I have any, decision in where I’m gonna go or – travel? Because I can buy my own ticket to go back. INTERVIEWER: Yeah – that – that’s right. Pretty much the way it works whichever airline you flew with, we’ll inform them and it’s their responsibility. So you came with… DJOKOVIC: Emirates, yeah, so will go back to Dubai. NTERVIEWER: Yep. So if you don’t have any more questions, yeah, I’ll just cease this interview. DJOKOVIC: OK. INTERVIEWER: All right, so the interview is being ceased at 7:45 am on 6 January 2022. Djokovic is then taken to a government detention hotel.The Ohio Republican Jim Jordan is the second sitting congressman to refuse a request for cooperation from the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack. In a Sunday night letter to the committee chair, Bennie Thompson of Mississippi, the Trump ally accused the panel of “an outrageous abuse” of its authority. He also claimed “an unprecedented and inappropriate demand to examine the basis for a colleague’s decision on a particular matter pending before the House of Representatives”. “This request is far outside the bounds of any legitimate inquiry,” he said, “violates core constitutional principles and would serve to further erode legislative norms.” Scott Perry of Pennsylvania, who was also closely involved in Donald Trump’s attempt to overturn his election defeat, has also refused to cooperate. The former Trump strategist Steve Bannon has pleaded not guilty to a charge of criminal contempt of Congress, for refusing cooperation. His trial is set for July. Mark Meadows, Trump’s final White House chief of staff and a former congressman, has also refused. The committee has recommended a criminal charge. Citing committee sources, the Guardian has reported that the panel is considering whether Trump himself might be charged with criminal conspiracy. But Thompson has suggested the panel may have few options to compel testimony from sitting members of Congress. An alternative path may be a series of primetime public hearings, seeking as wide an audience as possible. In columns for the Guardian, the former Clinton aide Sidney Blumenthal has laid out Jordan’s extensive contacts with Trump before and on 6 January, throughout legalistic efforts to throw out results and the Capitol riot itself. Blumenthal has also suggested precedent exists for compelling Jordan to testify – in the investigation of John Brown’s anti-slavery raid on Harper’s Ferry, Virginia, in 1859. That event preceded the civil war, fought from 1861 to 1865. Many academics and observers have warned that Trump’s assault on democracy could stoke such conflict. Five people died and more than 140 police officers were injured around the attack on Congress, which failed to stop the certification of electoral college results. Trump was impeached, for inciting an insurrection, and acquitted. Jordan, a former wrestling coach and member of the hard-right Freedom Caucus, is a leading Trump ally in Congress. Kevin McCarthy, the House Republican leader, proposed Jordan as a member of the 6 January committee. Democrats blocked it. Only two Republicans sit on the panel: Trump critics Liz Cheney, of Wyoming, and Adam Kinzinger of Illinois. On Sunday, Kinzinger asked on NBC: “What did the president know about 6 January leading up to 6 January? “It’s the difference between, was the president absolutely incompetent or a coward on 6 January when he didn’t do anything or did he know what was coming? That’s a difference between incompetence with your oath and possibly criminal.” On Sunday night, a spokesperson said the committee would respond to Jordan soon and “consider appropriate next steps”. “Mr Jordan has admitted that he spoke directly to President Trump on 6 January and is thus a material witness,” the spokesperson said. “Mr Jordan’s letter to the committee fails to address these facts.”In a novel talking-up of his boss, Michael Gove has described Boris Johnson as “the Pep Guardiola of politics”. Asked whether the PM had lost the support of his MPs the communities secretary likened him to the Manchester City manager, telling LBC: “He is the true blue champion and even though we don’t necessarily win every match, he’s an inspirational leader.” So how do the pair measure up? Full names Guardiola: Josep Guardiola Sala Johnson: Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson Ages Guardiola: Almost 51 (born 18 January 1971) Johnson: 57 (born 19 June 1964) Titles Guardiola: As a Barcelona player, six league titles and a string of other honours, including the European Cup. As a manager, nine league titles and two Champions League wins with Barcelona, Bayern Munich and Manchester City. Johnson: Elected as an MP five times in two constituencies. Two London mayoral election wins, and an 80-seat majority in the 2019 general election. Personal style Guardiola: Trim, neatly bearded, immaculately bald. Pitchside outfits have moved from the full business suit to a more upmarket-leisurewear approach, with an unfortunate digression in the “jardigan”, a curious knitted jacket with a hood. Johnson: Being dishevelled is part of the Johnson brand, but still now the sheer disarray of his hair and his crumpled outfits can cause comment. Once described as looking as if someone had “shaved the Honey Monster and put him in a suit for a court appearance”. Approach to leadership Guardiola: Famously focused and organised, with his players knowing in detail exactly what he expects them to do on the pitch. While imposing rigorous systems, Guardiola is also flexible when required, adapting to the needs of the various teams he has managed. Johnson: Somewhat different. While as London mayor Johnson successfully delegated much decision-making to trusted aides, his Downing Street has been marked by disorganisation, high staff turnover and brutal infighting. Current position and popularity Guardiola: Manchester City are 10 points ahead in the Premier League and seem in a strong position to bring Guardiola a fourth title with the club. He is still hugely popular with their fans, even if he has yet to deliver a Champions League win, losing last year’s final to Chelsea. Johnson: Feted by his party after the 2019 election win, but faces increasing unrest from Tory MPs over tax rises, Covid restrictions, the cost of living and reports about allegedly lockdown-breaking Downing Street parties. Might not survive another season. Personal life Guardiola: Married entrepreneur Cristina Serra in 2014, after the pair had already been a couple for around 20 years. They have a son and two daughters. Johnson: Married three times, most recently to former Conservative party PR head Carrie Symonds, with whom he has two young children. Has four grown-up children from his second marriage, to barrister Marina Wheeler, and at least one other child, possibly more.France will press the EU to negotiate an asylum and migration treaty with the UK in an attempt to deter people from making the dangerous Channel crossing. The French government, which last week took up the six-month rotating presidency of the EU council of ministers, wants the whole bloc to act, despite warnings that other member states have no appetite for a migration treaty with Britain. A senior French government official said the purpose of an EU-UK treaty would be to open up “a legal means of immigration with Great Britain, so people can legally go to Great Britain to seek asylum”. The source added that “obviously that means reciprocity”, suggesting British authorities could send people denied asylum back to the European country in which they had arrived. “We would be prepared to consider this. The idea is to have a zero balance at the end of the day.” Yet it remains unclear if the UK would agree to such proposals. During Brexit negotiations, the government was refused an asylum pact that would have allowed UK authorities to return people denied asylum to the EU, an arrangement that existed under Britain’s EU membership. The government, however, has long opposed allowing people to apply for asylum outside the UK, fearing it will trigger bogus claims. The EU commissioner for home affairs, Ylva Johansson, told the Guardian last month that other member states had limited appetite for an asylum and migration treaty with the UK, citing the Brexit dispute over the Northern Ireland protocol. The French government source countered that it was “a very important European question, not just a French question”, noting that France, Belgium and the Netherlands were “struggling with a major problem” as thousands of people came to their countries seeking to reach the UK. France and Britain had a spectacular diplomatic fallout last year, after 27 people drowned in the Channel trying to reach the UK. Emmanuel Macron, the French president, accused Boris Johnson of not being serious, after the UK prime minister published proposals on Twitter in time for newspaper deadlines, before the Élysée had received them. The French government argues the UK has lax labour market laws that act as a magnet for irregular migrants. Clément Beaune, France’s Europe minister, has accused the UK of “an economic model, of sometimes, quasi-modern slavery”. For its part, the British government blames the EU’s border-free travel zone: the home secretary, Priti Patel, said last year that “the real problem on illegal migration flows is the EU has no border protections whatsoever”. France received more than three times as many applications for asylum as the UK in 2020, with 93,470 claims, second in the EU only to Germany, which received 121,955 applications. In the same year 29,456 people applied for asylum in the UK The mooted treaty with the UK is part of a broader French agenda of tighter oversight of the free movement of people. Macron, who is expected to seek re-election this spring, wants to reform the EU’s passport-free Schengen zone and make progress on a long-stalled asylum law governing how to distribute refugees around the bloc. France would like greater political oversight of the 26-country Schengen zone, with regular meetings of home affairs ministers, akin to the monthly gatherings of the 19 finance ministers of the eurozone. “Our plan is to put more politics into the governance of Schengen,” said the government source, who said the agreement had been drawn up in a different era. The Schengen area, which now covers 400 million people, grew out of a 1985 accord between France, Germany and the Benelux countries.Dairy and meat producers are pleading for more government help to cope with Covid disruptions in their industries as supermarket shelves empty and farm workers are hit by the virus. One big abattoir in South Australia has requested its staff return to work, despite 140 of them testing positive, while other farmers are facing filling milk vats or rotting produce as goods are held back from the market due to the lack of staffing. Grant Crothers, president of the Australian Dairy Products Federation, said as many as 40% of workers in some parts of the dairy food chain were absent because of Covid or because they were close contacts. “We’ve obviously got an extremely time-sensitive raw material that relies on an excellent supply chain to get it to the processing point,” he said. “You can leave a cow in a paddock, you can leave grain in a silo, but you can’t leave milk in a vat on a farm.” Few dairy farmers would have more storage than about 1.5 days’ worth of milk production on their farms, Crothers said. Conditions had “changed dramatically” in the past couple of weeks, with the whole supply chain (including for exports) stretched or disrupted. “If you lose 24 hours, you’re in crisis mode because the milk can’t be stored on farm and therefore you risk dumping the milk, which triggers a whole lot of other issues around effluent and contamination of the waterways,” Crothers said. Meat producers were facing similar disruptions as every stage from trucking to deboning was being hit by staff shortages of varying levels, said Tim Kingma, a pig farmer near Echuca in northern Victoria. “One particular buyer of mine has over half their staff out with Covid.” “Australia has the meat,” said Kingma, who also heads the Victorian Farmers Federation pig group. “We’ve just got to get it to the plate.” In Kingma’s case, his farm would typically ship 600 pigs a week to market. “I’ve had to cut back 100 this week just because of the Covid issues,” he said. “They don’t stop growing. I can’t just put them out into the paddock to relax and forget about.” Both Crothers and Kingma welcomed changes announced on Monday by the Victorian government that will kick in from Wednesday 11.59pm, AEDT. Workers in the food sector, including supermarkets, may be exempted from close contact isolation requirements provided they are asymptomatic, undertake daily rapid antigen tests for five days and return a negative result prior to returning to work. The Victorian changes bring the state into line with Queensland and NSW. All states and territories, except WA, were expected to sign off on the changes on Monday. To work, though, they needed to be backed up by the supply of rapid tests to regional areas, Crothers said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In South Australia, Teys Australia has ordered back workers at its Naracoorte meatworks even if they are Covid positive. According to a notice to staff seen by Guardian Australia dated 9 January, the company said: “As per our call to you today – and as confirmed by SA Health – you are required to present for work tomorrow (Monday) as normal unless you are feeling unwell.” “This applies even if you have tested positive to Covid either by a PCR or RAT rapid test, and also if you are currently isolating because you are a close contact,” it said. Sharra Anderson, branch secretary of the Australasian Meat Industry Employees Union for SA and WA, said that almost 100 of the meatworks’ 400 staff had been infected. “This is absolutely disgusting. I’m absolutely gobsmacked,” Anderson said, adding that other abattoirs had just closed their doors when affected by Covid, rather than risking spreading the virus further. Staff will “go home to their family, who are also involved within the community” and give the virus to them. “It’s absolutely ridiculous,” Anderson said. Guardian Australia has approached Teys for comment. A spokesperson for the SA department of health said: “To ensure food security, SA Health has allowed a small group of critical staff who have tested positive and are asymptomatic, to continue to work in an isolated area away from others.” “These workers must remain at home and isolate when they are not at work until they are cleared from Covid,” the spokesperson said, adding SA Health had sent a Covid rapid response team to the abattoir in Naracoorte to test “all relevant staff”. “We are working closely with management to ensure the business can continue to operate safely and continue food production at the site,” the official said. Meanwhile, the Australian Meat Industry Council (AMIC) welcomed the response by federal and state governments to protect food supply chains. National cabinet on Monday endorsed interim guidance by the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee on permissions and restrictions for workers in food and grocery supply. “We welcome national cabinet’s endorsement today of the medical expert panel’s new set of arrangements, which allows workers who are close contacts to return to work if they have no symptoms and are fully vaccinated,” said AMIC CEO Patrick Hutchinson. Michael Coote, chief executive of the Ausveg industry group, said some growers were reporting staff shortages, particularly in the field and in packing sheds. “This is resulting in growers working longer hours, and in some cases redeploying staff to other areas of the business, to get product from the field to consumers,” Coote said. Growers were already under pressure to find pickers and packers because of visa restrictions. “Perishable products that have a limited shelf life are at most risk of disruptions across the supply chain, given the increased time that it can take for product to get from the farm to consumers,” Coote said. He said it was critical that essential workers who work in agriculture were able to continue to work if they test negative for Covid and are fully vaccinated.The joyful excesses of Christmas can lead to post-bacchanalian turmoil: how much is too much of a good thing? How greedy is acceptable, even at a time when greed is de rigueur? Never be tempted into sudden self-denial to answer such disquietudes, though. Far better to comfort the soul with soothing plates of goodness; put on the radio, a record or podcast, and spend a happy time preparing simple but delicious feasts. January is not a month for abstinence, but for nourishment. Potato and jerusalem artichoke soup with smoky pangrattato Silky-smooth, nuttily delicious, fragrant and garlicky with a crispy crumb: this is a blissful soup. Prep 15 min Cook 40 min Serves 4-6 3 tbsp olive oil 35g butter 1 large onion (about 200g), peeled and finely chopped A few bay leaves, fresh for preference 3 sprigs fresh thyme, leaves picked, plus extra to serve Salt and pepper 3 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped 500g jerusalem artichokes, scrubbed clean and cut into large chunks 2 large floury potatoes, peeled and chopped into large chunks 1.25 litres good chicken or vegetable stock Zest and juice of ½ lemon For the pangrattato 100g day-old white sourdough, crusts removed 2 tbsp olive oil 1 garlic clove, peeled and cut in half lengthways 2 tsp sweet smoked pimentón Warm the oil and butter in a medium casserole and, once sizzling, add the onion, bay and thyme, season generously and sweat gently, stirring, for eight to 10 minutes. Add the garlic, cook until softened but not coloured, then tip in the artichokes and potatoes and stir to coat them in the fat. Pour in the stock, bring up to a boil, then turn down the heat and simmer gently for 20-25 minutes, until the vegetables are tender. Meanwhile, tear the bread into chunks, put these in a food processor, and pulse or blitz to crumbs. Warm the oil in a large frying pan over a medium heat, then fry the garlic until it’s just beginning to colour. Add the breadcrumbs and fry, stirring constantly, for about three to four minutes, until golden; stir in the pimentón halfway through. Remove the garlic, season generously, then transfer to a plate and stir in the lemon zest. (The crumbs get crispier as they cool.) Blitz the soup with a hand blender until smooth, add the lemon juice, then taste and adjust the seasoning; if you prefer a looser soup, thin it down with hot water. Ladle into warmed bowls, top with a sprinkling of pangrattato and serve. The simple flex … While I love this soup made with chicken stock, it will work well with vegetable stock. It’s also nice topped with crisp pancetta and grated parmesan. • This article was amended on 10 January 2022 to remove an instruction to preheat an oven, which was included due to an editing error. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoThere had been serious doubt over whether it would happen and even though it eventually did, many pondered whether it should have. In most other contexts this game would have been something to savour rather than to fret over, with Borussia Mönchengladbach the closest Bayern Munich have had to a bogey team during their near-decade of plenty, thus providing a worthy curtain-raiser for the Bundesliga’s Rückrunde. Perhaps there should have been some relief as Robert Lewandowski rolled Nico Elvedi before smashing home authentically, in time-honoured style, for the first Bundesliga goal of 2022. We had a storyline too, childhood Bayern fan Florian Neuhaus scoring with Gladbach’s first shot of the game and prompting an improbable comeback win for the visitors, and the merest soupçon of a title race to come. Elsewhere in the Bundesliga there were plenty of other welcome indicators that it was business as usual – an Anthony Modeste headed goal for Köln, a thrilling match involving Borussia Dortmund in which the spectacle was almost entirely fuelled by, and their win achieved despite, their defensive incompetence – but this wasn’t quite the real thing. As Erling Haaland and Martin Hinteregger confronted each other when the Norwegian struggled to retrieve the ball from the net and get on with the game after Jude Bellingham’s equaliser for BVB, Haaland shouted at the Eintracht Frankfurtdefender that he was a “fucking idiot”, with viewers getting it loud and clear all over again in the echoes of the empty Deutsche Bank Park. There may have been amusement value at earwigging the players last year, but the novelty has worn off. On this opening weekend of the league’s second half of the season, it was impossible to escape the shadow of Covid-19. Bayern were at the heart of it and not just because of the long-awaited return of Joshua Kimmich, who stumbled into his well-documented vaccine controversy before Christmas and was fit and well enough to play for the first time since November (for the record, he “played outstandingly well in the first 75 minutes,” according to Julian Nagelsmann, before an understandable swell of fatigue in the game’s closing stages). For once, there could be no groaning about Kimmich being shunted to right-back. This was a genuine sporting emergency. On paper, Bayern’s line-up looked almost as formidable as ever, and casual observers might have wondered if the midweek questions over whether the game could go ahead were overblown. Yet after a week in which players at the club’s Säbener Straße training base were separated into three different changing rooms to try and stop the spread, it was a clear case of next man up. Marcel Sabitzer was shoehorned into the left-back spot, the teenager Malik Tillmann handed a first start on the left of midfield and Benjamin Pavard given a go at his preferred position of centre-back. There was even the sight of Paul Wanner, who only turned 16 on 22 December, stepping off a bench full of kids to become the youngest first-team player in the club’s history. It was a game that Bayern could, and probably should, have won – with Yann Sommer looking somewhere near his best in the Gladbach goal – and Nagelsmann had already embraced the challenge in the days leading up to the game. You could argue that not many coaches in his fashionable trainers would do the same, or that Bayern’s superiority has earned a level of comfort in which unfavourable conditions in a game are not a global difference-maker. Nagelsmann was blunt enough about his side’s culpability in the Gladbach equaliser, for example (“I don’t know why we’re defending it like that,” he told Dazn, exasperated), yet even he found himself incapable of avoiding the elephant in the room in picking apart the defeat. Sabitzer, playing a full 90 minutes for the first time in Bayern colours, was “dead after an hour” according to the coach. “Football is different from getting on the treadmill or running through the forest,” he added. It all felt, though, like detail rather than desperately important. The dreaded emptiness in the stands will take some getting used to again, though hopefully not for too long. The Geisterspiele – ghost games – were back and if a dearth of atmosphere doesn’t help football anywhere, it is particularly strongly felt in a league which counts noise and rancour from the stands as one of its greatest assets. There were spectators at Hertha’s game with Köln, with the Berlin senate allowing a 3,000 capacity at outdoor events – but by the time matchday staff and media had been admitted, that left room for 2,000 paying spectators. Better than nothing, perhaps, but a pretty sad sight in the Olympiastadion, which holds a touch under 75,000. The available tickets were raffled among season ticket holders, with 100 given over to the away side. This time, there is resistance to the concept as well. The Union Berlin president, Dirk Zingler, and Dortmund CEO Hans-Joachim Watzke have both accused politicians of using football to score political points rather than really actioning what’s needed. While Bavaria’s state president, Markus Söder, took to Sport 1’s Doppelpass show on Sunday to defend Geisterspiele, and to detail that he was “totally annoyed” by a lack of national uniformity in German football’s approach, patience in boardrooms is wearing thin. Speaking to Der Spiegel last week, Watzke suggested that “with 8,000 spectators in our place (at the 81,000-capacity Signal Iduna Park), the risk of infection would be very slim, and everybody knows it.” With supporters still attending in bigger numbers in England, Spain and Italy, fatigue is not just an issue for on the pitch. “Every match behind closed doors costs us €4m,” continued Watzke. “It’s economically unbearable, and it also pulls apart the link between the club and the fans bit by bit.” If Söder is right to say that Germany is not out of the woods with the virus, then it’s also fair to point out that the Bundesliga has pandemic issues that still need addressing too. Talking points • Back on the field, Köln are thriving under Steffen Baumgart, with Modeste’s ninth (!) header of the season taking him up to 12 goals in the Bundesliga, setting his team on the way to a 3-1 win at Hertha and moving them up to sixth. What the Berliners would give for a touch of that upward mobility, though at least the loan move of Krzysztof Piatek (and his €4m annual wages) to Fiorentina might give sporting director Fredi Bobic a bit of latitude in the transfer market this month. • It could be worse for Hertha – they could be Wolfsburg. Florian Kohfeldt’s team are in freefall, losing at Bochum in Sunday’s late game to make it six Bundesliga defeats on the spin, and eight in all competitions. “We can’t be too dramatic because we still have 16 games to go,” striker Wout Weghorst told Dazn, “but we have to look at where we stand and change something really, really quickly.” • Wolfsburg are now in a relegation battle with, among others, Augsburg, whose new headline signing Ricardo Pepi made a debut as substitute in the loss at Hoffenheim (who, remarkably, are third). “We have to calm down a bit with him,” a protective Florian Niederlechner said of his new American strike partner.Landlords who illegally dump the remains of cannabis farms will be traced using “smart water” spray in what is thought to be one of the first trials of its kind in the UK. Council officials in Bradford said they were taking action after a rise in the number of cannabis farms that had been fly-tipped in streets, along streams and in country lanes. It is thought that landlords, rather than drug dealers, have been dumping the illegal waste following police raids. In a new approach to be approved by councillors on Tuesday, police officers will spray cannabis farms that have been shut down with so-called smart water so they can trace the drugs to a specific property if it is fly-tipped. The spray leaves an invisible marker on items or people so their movements can be more easily uncovered. It has been used by police in the UK to tackle domestic abuse and to ward off burglars. Officials at Bradford city council said they believed it was the first time such an approach had been used to tackle cannabis farm fly–tipping. They said in a report: “This is a new and innovative approach which we believe may not have been tried elsewhere in the country and clearly demonstrates the strength of the partnership between the council and the police to tackle environmental crime.” Environmental officers across the the UK have tried for years to tackle the dumping of illegal and harmful substances. Fly-tipping is a criminal offence under environmental laws and can be punished with unlimited fines or imprisonment of up to five years. The remains of cannabis farms are often dumped in rural locations under the cover of darkness, making it difficult to prosecute the culprits. Farmers and landowners often have to foot the bill to clear up the mess. In 2020, police surveyed more than 75 farmers and landowners in North Yorkshire about fly-tipping – 10 of whom reported having cannabis waste dumped on their land within the previous 12 months. One farmer said the remains of cannabis farms were being fly-tipped on their land every couple of months. In Bradford, bags have been found to contain dead cannabis plants, lamps, wiring and tubs of fertiliser. The council report, which is due to be discussed by its regeneration and environment scrutiny committee on Tuesday, said it collected 4,882 tonnes of fly-tipped waste and litter in the year from April 2020. Referring to cannabis, it added: “Over recent months, there have been a number of fly-tipping incidents that have involved cannabis farm waste.”“So, Mum/Dad, what are the railways for?” That is the question the UK rail industry will be dreading hearing in a post-pandemic world. This is not quite the existential crisis rail faced in the aftermath of the extensive Beeching cuts to the network in the mid-1960s, but that’s cold comfort. There is a considerable risk that services are going to deteriorate massively in 2022, sending the sector into the kind of downward spiral that was last experienced in the 1970s and 1980s. By the financial year’s end, passengers may well be paying higher fares for a service of fewer and more crowded trains, departing from stations stripped of staff. And the result of that will be to push more people into using cars, but also to critically undermine the government’s “levelling up” promise, since poorer people are far more dependent on public transport. It’s a perfect storm. Unsurprisingly given the restrictions on travel and the instruction to work from home, revenue from rail fares dropped to a fifth of pre-pandemic levels during the 2020-21 financial year. The need to keep services running for key workers throughout lockdowns meant government subsidy rose from about £5bn to a very generous £17bn to prevent the network from collapsing. While this figure does include some modest investment to improve the network, that level of support will not be sustainable for long. The pandemic already led to significant change in the funding of the railways, when in September 2020, the franchise system created during privatisation in the mid-1990s was scrapped. Under franchises, private operators kept the fares, giving them an incentive to generate income through price increases and extra passenger numbers. Now the industry is being run through management contracts, which means the government effectively keeps all the fares but bears the risk if fewer people use the railways. The end of franchising was initially a temporary fix but has now become a permanent change as recommended by last year’s Williams-Shapps review of the industry. That review was already under way at the start of the pandemic – triggered by the chaotic May 2018 timetable change which resulted in widespread disruption because of the lack of coordination between operators and Network Rail. In light of the pandemic, its recommendations have led to the Treasury now demanding operators cut costs by 10% over the next year and a 3.8% fare rise in March, while the Department for Transport is looking at reductions to the timetable. But these cuts will have a severe impact on the level of service because the biggest spending areas for rail operators are on fixed costs such as station buildings, rolling stock and track maintenance, which are the same regardless of how many people use services. Other costs, such as fuel, electricity, platform staff and drivers are relatively low. The only way to save money is to dramatically reduce staff or to make severe inroads into the timetable, which will in turn impact revenue, creating a vicious circle. The unions are already preparing industrial action to combat these cuts, which will further disrupt services. At the same time, £500m is being spent on schemes to reverse some of the Beeching cuts. While that is welcome, reopening lightly used lines with an infrequent service seems an odd priority. Meanwhile, about £98bn may be spent over the next few years on HS2. This apparently contradictory position of building new services while existing ones are being cut reflects the Treasury’s view that capital expenditure is a “good thing” while operating expenditure, which by its nature recurs every year, is inherently “bad”. But this largesse in favour of HS2 is also putting the squeeze on other more modest enhancements and will result in a poorer service as temporary speed restrictions are imposed on dodgy sections of track. Escape from this perfect storm is possible. The Williams-Shapps report recommended the creation of a strategic body to oversee the railways, to be called, in a flourish of boosterism, “Great British Railways”. It will take over Network Rail, which is already state-owned, and provide a long-term plan for the railways. But as ever, the devil is in the detail. A government with a sense of history and an open mind would look to the British Rail of the past for a blueprint of how to run a successful railway. In its final decade before privatisation, it created three sectors – InterCity, Network SouthEast and Regional Railways – that had considerable independence in the areas of investment and timetabling. Allowing British Rail this freedom resulted in a blend of business imperatives backed by a strong public sector ethos that was successful. It became Europe’s most efficient railway. Sadly, all that was lost to privatisation, and while the collapse of the franchising system could provide an opportunity to recreate it, a continuing ideological obsession with private-sector involvement means that the increased costs and complexity that have characterised the railways in the past quarter of a century will remain. This matters for our transport system, but it matters more than that – because a good rail connection is a passport to prosperity. Look, for example, at how Margate has been transformed thanks to the half-hour reduction in journey time to London. As a corollary, look at how decline has been hastened in towns cut off from the rail network by Beeching. Railways have always been a catalyst of economic growth and prosperity, but politicians throughout history have often failed to recognise this. Some are commercially successful, some aren’t. So what? No one ever asks why the B-road to Nether Hopping should be kept open even though few cars use it on a daily basis. A properly funded, properly configured railway would cost a lot of money over the next few years until passenger numbers recovered, but railways are more than trains and tracks: they are an essential part of the fabric of the country. There is a moral case here, and politically there is the opportunity to make a popular case for a publicly owned, integrated railway – run independently of state interference. Labour should take it. Christian Wolmar is a writer and broadcaster specialising in transport. He has recently updated his book The Crossrail Story, and his history of British Rail will be published in JuneMartina Navratilova responded to Novak Djokovic’s release from immigration detention on Monday by saying the “unbelievable” chain of events could have been avoided if he had simply been vaccinated while Rafael Nadal branded the situation “a circus”. A judge ordered Djokovic’s visa cancellation be quashed after determining unreasonableness in the way that the Australian Border Force had conducted its procedures during the world No 1’s entry interview at Tullamarine airport last week. However, Djokovic could still be denied the right to defend his Australian Open title next week if the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, cancels his visa again. Djokovic had been sent to Melbourne’s Park Hotel last Thursday awaiting deportation after officials determined his medical exemption due to a previous covid infection to compete at the Australian Open which starts on Monday 17 January, was not valid under federal law. Dramatic scenes followed the judge’s decision outside the offices of Djokovic’s lawyers at the Rialto Tower in central Melbourne when vocal Serbian supporters were pepper-sprayed by police after clambering on to a vehicle they believed to be transporting the tennis player following his release. Navratilova, who won a record 59 major titles, told Good Morning Britain that everything was “getting crazier by the minute” and that Djokovic should have put others’ health before his own ambitions. “It’s unbelievable, what a saga. It could have been avoided. I just wish Novak had taken that vaccination to begin with,’ the 65-year-old said. ‘I admire him so much but I can’t defend the choice to not get vaccinated. “You have to take one for the team. It’s getting crazier by the minute. We’re in such close contact in the locker rooms. I couldn’t wait to get vaccinated. I admire Novak and I know what it takes to be that committed. “I would be much more scared of getting sick from not being vaccinated than whatever side effects I might have from the vaccination. You really need to be more aware of everybody else.” Nadal, who is level with Roger Federer and Djokovic with 20 grand slam titles apiece, joked that he would prefer the Serbian didn’t play at the upcoming Australian Open after describing the fallout from the controversy as a “circus”. “Whether or not I agree with Djokovic on some things, justice has spoken and has said that he has the right to participate in the Australian Open and I think it is the fairest decision to do so, if it has been resolved that way. I wish him the best of luck,” Nadal told Spanish radio Onda Cero on Monday. “On a personal level, I’d much rather he didn’t play,” Nadal said, laughing along with interviewer. “It’s sports, many interests move around it, on a general level, at an economic, advertising level. Everything is much better when the best can be playing,” Nadal said, before once again defending vaccination. “The most important institutions in the world say that the vaccine is the way to stop this pandemic and the disaster that we have been living for the last 20 months.” Other players past and present also weighed in. John Isner, the American world No 24, who has been a prominent supporter of Djokovic’s situation tweeted: “Only thing left to do is win the trophy again and leave town never to return ...” while Spain’s Feliciano López posted: “Judge Kelly solving the mess-disaster-absurdity that other parties involved have created. Tennis wins #AO2022.” The British player Laura Robson, however, focused on the plight of refugees and asylum seekers without Djokovic’s resources who remained at the immigration hotel, asking: “What about the other people still stuck in the Park hotel? Elsewhere, some were keen to move on with the former Australian Open chief executive, Paul McNamee, tweeting: “Djokovic has had his day in court, with all the evidence presented, and comprehensively won … let’s respect the court’s decision and move to the other court where sport is played.” Whether Djokovic can do that or not is now in Hawke’s hands.The number of knitters in the UK has jumped by around one million since the start of the pandemic, according to the UK Hand Knitting Association (UKHKA), with people taking up the meditative hobby through lockdowns. The rise in people picking up knitting needles in 2021 has partly been put down to the ‘Tom Daley’ effect, which has seen the number of male knitters increase since the Olympic athlete was seen making a jumper at the Tokyo Games. The UKHKA says the proportion of men using its site has risen from 10 to 25% since the Olympics. We would like to hear from people in the UK who have started knitting in the last couple of years, including those influenced by Daley. What does the hobby offers you? Have you created anything you’re particularly pleased with (or anything that’s not gone quite as planned?) We’d like to see your pics too. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Afghans who fled the Taliban risk dying in freezing temperatures in Calais, NGOs have warned. People who left Afghanistan after the US withdrawal this summer have started to arrive in northern France in the hope of reaching the UK by crossing the Channel in dinghies. But charities have raised the alarm that conditions are deteriorating sharply, putting thousands of lives at risk. A combination of freezing temperatures, increasingly forceful evictions of refugees from makeshift shelters by police and cuts to funding for charities working on the frontline has created a perfect storm, the organisations said. A legal challenge is under way against Priti Patel’s plans to use jet skis to turn back small boats mid-Channel. The Times has reported Home Office sources as saying the controversial pushback tactics could be used for the first time this month. While thousands were airlifted out of Afghanistan to safety in the UK when the Taliban took over, many others were forced to make the same hazardous journey across land and sea as those fleeing persecution in countries such as Sudan, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Syria, Yemen and Somalia. Charities say that at least 150 evictions have taken place by police in northern France since Christmas. Care4Calais has reported that some of the refugees they work with have been injured by teargas, rubber bullets and batons used by the French police during evictions. The French authorities have said that more than a dozen of their officers have been injured during these evictions. The French authorities are issuing increasingly long lists of roads where charities are not allowed to distribute food and other essentials to refugees. The celebrity-backed funder Choose Love pulled the plug on £600,000 of funding to organisations providing food, water, blankets and other essential aid to refugees in northern France at the end of last year, with the charities affected warning they may be forced to close. Louis Woodhead, facilitator with Calais Food Collective, said: “The lack of certainty about future finding means we will have to start rationing how much food we distribute. People here are already exposed to police brutality, human rights abuses and have no safe way to claim asylum in the UK. It is already a humanitarian crisis and if we’re forced to cut services the situation is only going to get worse.” Imogen Hardman, operations manager for Care4Calais in northern France, said the situation was dire and deteriorating. “The weather is awful at the moment. It’s incredibly cold. We are trying to ensure that people have access to tents, sleeping bags, boots and warm clothes. Police are evicting every 48 hours. Trees are being cut down and land cleared across a lot of different living sites, meaning that people have no shelter and the land becomes more muddy. We are seeing an increase in the Afghan community here, people who fled after the Taliban took over have now arrived in Calais. Every single person here is a human being who has experienced really horrible things.” A 15-year-old refugee from Sudan called Yousef said he had been sleeping behind the French supermarket Auchan in Calais. He said: “Sometimes we have a tent if the police don’t take it. If we have firewood we cook with whatever we can find, scraps or anything. We use tins to cook in as the police take the pans charities give us. I try to cross the Channel most nights. If I can get to England most of all I want to go to school.”West Ham are hopeful that Kurt Zouma will boost their push for Champions League qualification by returning ahead of schedule from a hamstring injury. David Moyes has been considering whether to sign a defender after losing both of his first-choice centre-backs to serious injury before Christmas. Angelo Ogbonna was ruled out for the rest of the season after having surgery on an anterior cruciate ligament injury in November and West Ham’s selection problems increased when Zouma, who has been outstanding since his £29.8m move from Chelsea last summer, damaged a hamstring tendon against his former club at the start of last month. There were fears Zouma was going to be out for up to three months, leaving West Ham reliant on Craig Dawson and Issa Diop for a prolonged period, but the Frenchman’s swift recovery could convince Moyes to alter his transfer plans this month. The former Chelsea defender is expected to return to training soon and will be hopeful of proving his fitness before the east Londoners visit Manchester United on 22 January, although the trip to Kidderminster in the fourth round of the FA Cup at the start of February could be a more realistic target. However, West Ham, who have not been as defensively sound without Zouma and Ogbonna, could still look for a defender. Dawson has been playing with an injury – Aji Alese and Jamal Baptiste are inexperienced alternatives – and Moyes has been tracking Liverpool’s Nat Phillips and Bournemouth’s Lloyd Kelly. It is understood that a move for Burnley’s James Tarkowski, who is out of contract at the end of the season, is increasingly unlikely this month. West Ham, who are fifth in the Premier League before hosting bottom club Norwich on Wednesday, could decide they need extra depth given they are in the last 16 of the Europa League. They have also considered bringing in cover at left-back, with Aaron Cresswell yet to return from the back injury he sustained against Manchester City in November. But Cresswell should be fit soon and West Ham feel that Lucas Digne, who is out of contract at Everton, is too expensive. Other than defensive reinforcements West Ham want a striker to provide competition for Michail Antonio. Blackburn’s Ben Brereton Díaz is on their radar, although an asking price of £25m for the Chile forward could prove prohibitive. West Ham retain an interest in Manchester United’s Jesse Lingard, but they fear the England forward wants to wait until the summer before leaving Old Trafford on a free transfer. Jarrod Bowen, whose sixth goal of the season helped West Ham knock Leeds out of the FA Cup on Sunday, is not worried about whether his form leads to his first England call-up. “I think this season was about progression and getting the call-up for England is the ultimate dream,” the forward said. “That is out of my hands. My job is to deliver on the pitch and show what I am about. If it happens then it happens. I can only control what I am doing. It is not on my mind. The more you think about these situations which are not in your control, the more it plays on your mind and affects you.”Boris Johnson has said the government is “looking at the science” of moving to an isolation period of five days in England instead of seven for a positive Covid case, after calls to ease staffing shortages across the economy. The prime minister confirmed the government was examining the proposal, after several cabinet colleagues made clear they would like to see a shift to five-day isolation if possible. Asked about the issue on a visit to a vaccine clinic at a pharmacy in his Uxbridge constituency, Johnson said: “The thing to do is to look at the science. We are looking at that and we will act according to the science.” The debate arose after the US shifted its isolation requirements to five days after a positive test. The situation in the UK is different, as isolation in symptomatic cases begins from the start of symptoms rather than a test, but some senior Tories are pressing for a cut from seven to five days in asymptomatic cases at least, where isolation begins from the point of a positive test. The government has sounded a cautious note until now, since it only recently cut isolation requirements from 10 days to seven days for asymptomatic cases if a person tests negative by lateral flow on days five and six of isolation. However, the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, broke ranks to say on Sunday that a move to five-day isolation would be “helpful” if it were supported by the evidence. The Telegraph reported that Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, takes a similar position. Speaking on his visit to the vaccine centre, the prime minister also pledged that free lateral flow tests would be available for “as long as it is necessary” after reports over the weekend that individuals and businesses would soon have to pay for them. Johnson’s official spokesperson also stressed that free lateral flows would stay for the time being. “There’s absolutely no plans to change that,” he said. “We will use testing as long as necessary. It’s a vital line of defence alongside our vaccine programme. With cases high across the country there’s no doubt that the use of lateral flow devices are both disrupting chains of transmission and saving lives. We’ve got 425m tests coming in January, as we’ve set out. “Those of you who read through the autumn and winter plan will know that we set out then that at a later stage, as the government’s response to the virus changes, universal free provision of these tests will end. I think that’s what the public would expect.” He also said it was too early to say whether the UK was in the process of moving from a pandemic stage of Covid to an endemic stage, after Zahawi suggested the UK should show the rest of the world how to get back to normal. Michael Gove, the levelling up secretary, set out a similar view in his broadcast interviews on Monday morning, as he said the country was moving to a stage where it could “live with Covid”. Having previously argued for caution around Omicron, the senior cabinet minister said the easing of restrictions would have to be guided by science, but “the sooner the better”. He told Sky News: “We are moving to a situation, we’re not there yet, but we are moving to a situation where it is possible to say that we can live with Covid, and that the pressure on the NHS and on vital public services is abating.” The UK Health Security Agency estimates that 10-30% of people who self-isolate after a positive Covid test are still infectious on day six, dropping to about 5% after day 10. Their modelling suggests a similar risk of being infectious – about 5% – if people end isolation after two negative tests on days six and seven. The work underpins the existing guidance on Covid isolation, but the thinking may change as more data come in on Omicron. Preliminary findings from Japan’s National Institute of Infectious Diseases hint that people who have asymptomatic Omicron infections may stop shedding the virus sooner than those who have symptoms. This is not unexpected, but the study includes only 21 cases, so the results are considered tentative. The researchers took 83 respiratory specimens from 21 people infected with Omicron. Only two of the people were unvaccinated and four had no symptoms. Tests showed that people shed most virus three to six days after either diagnosis or the onset of symptoms, with the amount falling gradually from then on. While those with Covid symptoms harboured infectious virus until day 10, the researchers did not obtain any infectious virus from the four asymptomatic people beyond day five. The scientists are cautious about the results, concluding only that vaccinated people with Omicron are unlikely to shed infectious virus 10 days after diagnosis or the onset of symptoms.Elon Musk’s satellite internet company, Starlink, has ambitious plans to bring internet access to people anywhere in the world. But it turns out the venture is providing another service: warming up cats. A customer tweeted a photo of five cats huddled on his Starlink dish, which links homes to more than a thousand satellites, and noted that the presence of the furtive felines had slowed his internet performance. “Starlink works great until the cats find out that the dish gives off a little heat on cold days,” Aaron Taylor said. After the photo was widely shared online, Taylor clarified that the cats had taken to the dish by choice, rather than necessity. “They have a heated cat house, with water and food, but -25C and they decide to sit on the Starlink dish. When the sun goes down, they head back to their house,” he said. The attraction may be due to a “self-heating” feature on the dish which is designed to melt snow. In 2020, Starlink engineers touted efforts to “upgrade our snow melting ability”. Taylor said the cats’ attraction to his Starlink dish interrupted movie streaming and affected internet speed. “Doesn’t shut it down completely but definitely slows everything down,” he said. He also said he planned to move the dish from the ground to a higher location. Futurism first reported on Taylor’s photo. Starlink, a division of Musk’s SpaceX company, has launched more than 1,600 satellites. The company, which has permission from US authorities to launch up to 12,000 satellites, says the service is “ideally suited for areas where connectivity has been unreliable or completely unavailable”. The apparent attraction of Starlink dishes to cats has not been the only hiccup, however. In December, China accused the US of ignoring international treaty obligations after the Tiangong space station was nearly struck by Starlink satellites. Tiangong had to take “preventive collision avoidance control” during two “close encounters”, China wrote in a note to the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. The note said the incidents “constituted dangers to the life or health of astronauts onboard the China space station”, and asked the UN secretary general “to circulate the above mentioned information to all states parties to the outer space treaty”.Protesters opposed to Covid regulations pelted a French MP with seaweed and stones outside his home in the overseas territory of St-Pierre-et-Miquelon at the weekend. Stéphane Claireaux, a member of the governing La République en Marche (LREM) said he had made an official police complaint after the attack, which fellow MPs described as a “lynching”. Claireaux said he had gone outside to speak to the protesters who were angry about the decision by local authorities to impose the “health pass”. When his wife joined him she was also attacked, he said. The rule was announced by the state representative, the prefect, on 2 January and has angered residents of St-Pierre-et-Miquelon, an overseas territory in the north-west Atlantic near Canada. In mainland France, the health pass, or pass sanitaire, has been in effect since last summer, and requires people to have been vaccinated, have recovered from coronavirus or have a negative Covid test to access public places including bars, cafes, restaurants, museums, theatres and long-distance trains. Proposed legislation is going through parliament to tighten these restrictions and introduce a “vaccine pass”. If passed, it would make access to many public places conditional on a person being fully vaccinated. “I will be complaining to the police, that’s a given,” Claireaux told France Info radio on Monday. He said he was waiting in front of his house to talk to the demonstrators when they began pelting him. “There was a car loaded with seaweed and people started throwing it in my face. It was like a stoning,” he continued. “My wife came to meet me on the front steps of the house. I dodged a pebble that missed our faces by about 5cm,” he added. The vaccine pass bill was passed by a large majority on first reading by the national assembly, the lower house, last week after a bitter debate. It is being considered by the senate before it returns to the national assembly for a final vote. If it is approved, the government says the law will come into effect on 17 January. Annick Girardin, the minister of the sea, denounced the “attack” on Claireaux, saying he had been on the receiving end of “numerous projectiles violently thrown at his face followed by stone throwing”. Marc Fesneau, another minister, remarked upon “the cowardice of targeting a single, peaceful and defenceless man who was attacked in front of his own home”. “An intolerable line has been crossed,” Fesneau said. Sébastien Lecornu, the minister for France’s overseas territories, said Claireaux had been “lynched in front of his family home”. Lecornu said he and Gérald Darmanin, the interior minister, had “instructed the prefect of St-Pierre-et-Miquelon to ensure the protection of the deputy”. Christophe Castaner, the head of the LREM group in the national assembly, said there had been 322 threats against MPs in 2021. There have been numerous reports of attacks on MPs and their property. Cars and garages have been set alight, property covered with graffiti as well as MPs receiving intimidating messages including death threats. More than 100,000 protesters rallied across France on Saturday against further restrictions on the unvaccinated. The protests attracted four times the number of those held in December, according to government estimates, and came after the French president, Emmanuel Macron, said he wanted to “piss off” those who refused to have the vaccine by making their lives more difficult. Valérie Pecresse, a conservative presidential hopeful, said Macron was driving a wedge through the country.American democracy suffered two brutal blows on 6 January. The first has been seared into the national psyche: costumed insurrectionists ransacking the US Capitol, attacking Capitol police, and interrupting the constitutionally mandated electoral college count. They got closer than anyone could imagine to Vice-President Mike Pence and other terrified leaders, some hidden behind makeshift office-furniture barricades. Then, with the marble corridors still stained with blood, 147 elected Republicans maneuvered across broken glass only to vote with the insurrectionists. Around 11pm, a majority of House Republicans voted to reject free and fair election results from Arizona; two hours later, as a weary nation slept, a similar number refused to accept results from Pennsylvania. One year later, it’s the second band of insurrectionists, the ones wearing suits and ties, that pose the most serious threat. The next attempted coup will not be a violent overthrow of the Capitol, but a carefully plotted and even technically legal one, subverting election machinery and exploiting various constitutional loopholes. It is well under way. Its plotters have learned important lessons from last year’s rushed and often-buffoonish dress rehearsal. New laws have been passed by state legislatures under the pretext of halting “election fraud” that will instead abet the next big lie. It’s frighteningly imaginable to see how it succeeds. These are the steps that Republicans are undertaking, now, to create a different outcome next time. 1. Gerrymandering swing-state legislatures. It all begins here. Any effort to change election laws or to argue that legislatures have the power to appoint electors themselves requires Republican control of battleground state legislatures. 2. Restricting access to the polls. In 2021, 19 states enacted 34 laws making it more difficult to cast a ballot. They included 2020’s fiercest battlegrounds, Arizona (decided in 2020 by just 10,457 votes) and Georgia. 3. Capturing electoral administration. Republican legislatures in eight states, sometimes overriding the vetoes of Democratic governors, have claimed partisan control of crucial electoral responsibilities or shifted them away from elected secretaries of state. Georgia Republicans censured Brad Raffensperger, the Republican secretary of state who refused to be cowed by Trump’s attacks on the electoral process, then removed him as chair of the state election board – and seized that power for the legislature itself. Another law gives this board the power to claim control of the vote-counting process in individual counties, such as heavily Democratic Fulton county, home to Atlanta. Arizona barred its secretary of state from representing the state in litigation defending its election code – that is, until 2 January 2023, when the Democrat who currently holds the position leaves office. Texas now requires the governor, lieutenant governor and the house speaker each to sign off on any grants over $1,000 to local election boards, grants having been a popular method of expanding voting access in cities and rural areas in 2020 when states cited financial reasons for shuttering precincts. 4. Pressuring – and criminalizing – the work of election officials. Many new state laws don’t simply make it harder for citizens to vote, they make it tougher for non-partisan election workers to do their jobs. Georgia, Texas and Florida have created civil penalties and fines of up to $25,000 for minor, technical infractions – for the kind of help non-partisan officials offer when needed, or obstructing the view of partisan poll workers – and even opened them to criminal prosecution. According to a Brennan Center and Bipartisan Policy Center study, a third of election workers report feeling unsafe in their jobs. As many as 25% say the toxic, bullying climate could cause them to leave their jobs. Their replacements, in positions that had once been non-partisan, non-competitive and volunteer? The big lie’s truest believers, seeking the offices some believe stole the 2020 election from them. This is a “five-alarm fire”, the Michigan secretary of state, Jocelyn Benson, told the New York Times. 5. Targeting key elections in 2022. The only thing that has prevented Florida/Georgia/Texas-style omnibus voting restrictions in deeply gerrymandered Wisconsin, Michigan and Pennsylvania are Democratic governors with veto power. Should Republicans claim those offices in 2022, anything is possible. Republican lawmakers in Wisconsin and Pennsylvania have previously proposed allocating electoral college by congressional district rather than statewide, which would exacerbate the impact of partisan gerrymanders and probably benefit Republicans in otherwise Democratic-leaning states. Under the Wisconsin proposal, Trump would have won eight of 10 electors even though Biden received more votes. Trump has endorsed a former Fox anchor as the next governor of Arizona who he said “will fight to restore Election integrity (both past and future!)”. The two leading Republican candidates for Arizona’s secretary of state, meanwhile, are two state representatives, one of whom attended the 6 January Capitol riot. The other sponsored a bill that would have allowed the legislature to reject the certification of electors, potentially overturning free and fair results. Nationwide, of the top 15 candidates for secretary of state in five crucial battleground states, 10 question the results of the 2020 race. 6. Convincing the base. According to a new NPR/Ipsos poll, two-thirds of Republicans believe that “voter fraud helped Biden win the 2020 election”. In a new University of Massachusetts poll, 71% of Republicans said Biden was not legitimately elected president. A third of Trump voters told NPR they believe the conspiracy theory that the 6 January attack was a false-flag operation by “opponents of Donald Trump, including antifa and government agents”. Trump couldn’t overturn the 2020 results, but he achieved something perhaps nearly as damaging: The “big lie” not only took hold, but it has become sacred to large majorities of angry Republicans convinced that Trump was cheated out of a second term. If this same fealty to phony fraud claims drives Republican elected officials in Congress and state legislatures in 2024, it’s disturbingly easy to imagine competing sets of electors emerging from states won by a Democratic candidate but controlled by a Republican legislature, forcing a constitutional showdown and testing the powers of state legislatures over electors. 7. Ensuring that the courts won’t save us. Beware the Independent State Legislatures doctrine (ISL). Once a stealth effort in Federalist Society legal circles, this extreme reading of the US constitution has as many as four supporters on a US supreme court packed with conservatives. It argues that the constitution gives state legislatures the sole authority to set all election rules – including the assigning of electoral college votes – independently, and immune from judicial review. Taken to its furthest edge, it effectively concludes that there can be no possible checks and balances on state legislatures’ authority when it comes to election law. It might sound bonkers. But in February last year, when the US supreme court dismissed as moot a challenge to Pennsylvania’s absentee ballot extension, three justices dissented and cited the ISL. If 2020 repeats itself in 2024 – a Democratic candidate with a 7 million-vote edge in the popular vote, the same slender margins in Arizona, Georgia and Wisconsin, and embittered Republicans controlling gerrymandered legislatures – it’s hard to imagine the system holding quite the way it did, just barely, a year ago. Of course, Republicans could always win the 2024 election outright. But make no mistake: with preparations like this, they’re ready either way. They have almost three years to perfect this playbook. Those of us who believe in American democracy have much less time left to prevent it – and a much more complicated road. David Daley is the author of Ratf**ked: Why Your Vote Doesn’t Count and Unrigged: How Americans Are Battling Back to Save Democracy. He is a senior fellow at FairVoteThe gorse bushes that have invaded many Scottish landscapes could produce enough protein to feed millions of people, according to the leader of a Scottish government research programme. The surprising suggestion by Prof Wendy Russell, at the University of Aberdeen, comes from research on the protein content of invasive plants that have to be doused with herbicides or burned back to keep them under control. Gorse contains 17% protein and broom has 21% protein, she said, adding: “Gorse and broom were fed to cattle at times when crops failed in the past, so we think protein from these types of plants could be used as animal food. If protein isolates are produced in the correct way, so to be safe, they could be considered as human food in the future.” “The whole point about gorse is it is actively being removed from marginal lands – it’s something we can gain protein from at no extra cost,” she said. “We have a huge amount of gorse all over Scotland and when we did the calculations, just by active removal from marginal land, there’s enough gorse protein to easily feed [Scotland’s] population.” Russell was speaking at a Science Media Centre event on alternative proteins that looked at the health and environmental benefits and drawbacks of alternatives to meat and dairy. The Food Standards Agency (FSA) launched a polling report at the event that showed 60% of people in the UK were willing to try plant-based alternatives to meat and dairy; a third were willing to try lab-grown meat and a quarter were willing to try edible insects. Livestock and fodder production occupies 83% of the world’s farmland but produces only 18% of protein. It also has a very heavy environmental impact, driving the climate crisis and pollution. Studies have shown sharp cuts in meat eating in rich nations are needed to halt global heating. From 1950 to 2000 the global population doubled, but meat intake increased fivefold, said Russell. Continuing this trend in the future is not feasible for the environment, she said: “We really do have to change our diet.” Scotland has little arable land, which is why Russell examined invasive plants on marginal land. Gorse is native to Britain, but spreads rapidly and encroaches onto otherwise valuable land. “When you make a protein isolate from gorse, 57% of the total leaf protein can be recovered at up to 95% purity,” she said. “We’re using about 4.5 to 6kg of CO2 to produce [a kilogram of] isolate, compared to an average for meat of 102kg of CO2.” Fifteen Scottish farmers also planted hemp this year for the first time, Russell said. “They’re really concerned about the climate and want to do their best. They really are optimistic about the commercial viability of the crop and its climate credentials.” Russell, who leads the Scottish government’s strategic research programme on food systems and supply, added: “These alternative plant proteins are very healthy, high protein, high in fibre, and high in micronutrients.” Prof Robin May, the chief scientific adviser at the FSA said: “There is a huge potential for novel proteins to have massive benefits in terms of environmental benefit, nutritional benefit, and access of a wider population [to good food]. Our priority is to do everything possible to help businesses get those novel, innovative products safely onto the shelves as swiftly as possible.” May said that while many people were reluctant to try new products, such as lab-grown meat, a quarter said they would change their minds if they were confident it was safe and well regulated. “That’s where we play a key role,” said May. Lab-grown meat went on sale for the first time in December 2020 in Singapore. Proponents say they are produced in clean facilities and do not carry the risk of bacterial contamination of meat from livestock. In the FSA poll, 90% of people said they had heard of plant-based alternatives and 78% said they had heard of lab grown meat. Neil Shah, at the Edison Group investment research firm, which published a report on lab-grown meat on Monday, said: “The cultivated meat industry is booming as a result of increased appetite for ethical and environmentally friendly alternatives to conventional meat. The sector has already begun attracting significant investor interest as it offers the chance to enter an industry which could disrupt the global meat market over the coming decades.” A 2019 report by consultancy AT Kearney predicted that most of the meat people eat in 2040 will not come from slaughtered animals. • This article was amended on 11 January 2022. Text was added to clarify that gorse is a native species to Britain, but is considered invasive due to its ability to spread rapidly onto otherwise valuable land.Venezuela’s opposition has claimed a rare and highly symbolic victory over Nicolás Maduro’s regime after defeating the government candidate for the governorship of Hugo Chávez’s home state of Barinas. Maduro had hoped his former foreign minister Jorge Arreaza would win control of the region, which is considered the cradle of Chávez’s “Bolivarian revolution”, in Sunday’s election. The south-western state, where Venezuela’s late president was born and raised, has been governed almost exclusively by relatives of Chávez – his father and two brothers – since he was first elected in 1998. However, Arreaza, who is Chávez’s former son-in-law and the father of his grandson, admitted on Sunday night that his bid had failed despite the Socialist party’s “heroic militancy”. Electoral authorities said the little-known victor, Sergio Garrido, had secured 55.4% of votes compared with Arreaza’s 41.3%. “The triumph is for Barinas and all of Venezuela,” Garrido told Reuters. Jubilant supporters streamed through the state capital on motorbikes and gathered at the politician’s campaign headquarters to perform Venezuela’s national anthem, a song that celebrates “the brave people who shook off the yoke”. “Beautiful Barinas – it ends where it began,” tweeted Juan Guaidó, the leader of the failed US-backed campaign to topple Maduro. Henrique Capriles, another key opposition leader, also painted the result as a harbinger of wider change and urged opponents of Maduro, who took power after Chávez’s death in 2013, to unite ahead of presidential elections in 2024. “Only the unity of the people and the solidarity of its leaders guarantee the greatness of nations,” tweeted Capriles, quoting Andrés Bello, the Venezuelan philosopher who taught Simón Bolívar, the independence hero from whom Chávez sought inspiration. Phil Gunson, a Caracas-based analyst for Crisis Group, called the result a massive blow for Maduro’s unpopular administration. “This is not just any state. This is the rural heartland of Chavismo where Chávez himself was born and where his family ruled for over two decades. So, symbolically this is enormously important,” Gunson said. Sunday’s ballot was a re-run of a vote first held last November as part of a nationwide round of gubernatorial and mayoral elections designed to help Maduro regain international legitimacy. In that contest – the first that Venezuela’s mainstream opposition had joined since 2017 – Maduro’s candidates prevailed, winning 19 of 23 governorships. The opposition won three. However, the Barinas election descended into farce after Venezuela’s pro-government supreme court disqualified the politician seemingly poised to defeat the official candidate – Chávez’s brother, Argenis – and ordered another election on 9 January. Argenis Chávez withdrew from the re-run and was replaced by Arreaza, a party heavyweight, as Maduro’s administration battled to ensure victory. “Not only did the government blatantly overturn a legitimate result in November but they then poured everything into Barinas,” Gunson said. “They made sure there was petrol at the filling stations. They were handing out fridges and cookers and cement and doing all the things that they haven’t done in the last 22 years – and they absolutely, totally failed.” Like much of Venezuela, Barinas has been brought to its knees by a crippling economic collapse that has driven an estimated 6 million citizens to flee abroad. The agricultural region has also seen growing opposition to Chavismo, the political movement it helped spawn, although some affection for the late comandante, if not Maduro, remains. During a 2018 visit to Sabaneta, the town where Chávez was born in 1954, the Guardian found a charred statue of him that had been torched by anti-government protesters. One local composer-turned-dissident performed a song denouncing Chávez’s “malignant legacy”. “From here in Barinas, I want to ask my Venezuela for forgiveness. Because … it was here that the disaster began, it was here that the comandante who destroyed my nation was born,” it said.Fears are growing among experts, politicians, and former generals about the rise of rightwing extremism in the US military and the potential threat it could pose to American democracy. Even as the US Department of Defense issues new policies to root out extremism in its ranks, some experts caution that the safeguards don’t go far enough, leaving the next election vulnerable to attack as well as fears about a broader violent “insurgency” by rightwing radicals. “We’re behind the ball on what we know about domestic terrorists in the United States,” Paul Eaton, a retired US army major general and senior adviser to the non-profit VoteVets, said. Eaton and two other retired army generals recently wrote an op-ed in the Washington Post last month warning of the threat of a coup in the 2024 election. The generals warned that it could succeed with the aid of rogue military elements. They contemplated the possibility of a breakdown of the chain of command, along partisan lines, in the aftermath of a contested election with “rogue units organizing among themselves to support the ‘rightful’ commander in chief”. Eaton said in an interview that the American military and law enforcement have a history of underestimating the threat from the far right. “It’s the Timothy McVeigh problem: what did we know about McVeigh and what were we doing about it?” said Eaton. The 1995 Oklahoma City bombing killed 168 people and injured over 650 when one morning ex-army soldiers Timothy McVeigh and co-conspirator Terry Nichols parked a rental truck filled with homemade explosives outside a federal building and detonated it. It remains the deadliest act of domestic terrorism in US history. The two men harbored anti-government and racist beliefs. “The McVeighs of the world are still there, we had about 4,500 of them crawling all over the nation’s Capitol [during the 6 January attack],” said Eaton, who added that the increased power of the internet and rise of social media had boosted the threat massively since McVeigh’s attack. “The infection of extremism into our state and local police and our armed forces is a very serious concern that needs to be monitored,” said Eaton. Eaton added: “There’s a recruiting effort going on locally, they’re going to school boards, like missionaries sent to the islands to convert people. The Proud Boys and Oath Keepers are definitely recruiting.” In many ways the aftermath of the attack on the Capitol in Washington DC laid bare the vulnerability of US service members to extremism. The 727 defendants charged in the 6 January Capitol riot include 81 with ties to the military, while five were active-duty service members. A 35-year-old woman, air force veteran Ashli Babbitt, was fatally shot while attempting to break the doors into the House chamber. The appeal of extremism among active duty and veterans is a longstanding issue with a track record of violent incidents. Last year army private Ethan Phelan Melzer confessed to prosecutors in the southern district of New York to plotting an attack on fellow soldiers in his unit. The federal indictment states that Melzer confessed to sharing sensitive information about his soon-to-deploy unit with members of a neo-Nazi group in order to facilitate an attack that would “result in the deaths of as many of his fellow service members as possible”. In 2018 marine lance corporal Vasillios Pistolis was imprisoned after assaulting people at the 2017 Charlottesville “Unite The Right” rally. Pistolis was discovered to belong the neo-Nazi group Atomwaffen after bragging about violence in chats with other Atomwaffen members, which were eventually leaked. From 1990 to July 2021 there have been at least 354 people with military backgrounds that have committed criminal acts motivated by “political, economic, social, or religious goals” according to data collected by the National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism at the University of Maryland. The data suggest the problem is growing in the US as from 1990-2010 there was an average of six cases a year, but over the last decade “that number has more than tripled to nearly 21 subjects per year”. The generals’ public call for elections safeguards in the military comes as the Pentagon issued new guidelines aimed at rooting out extremism in its ranks. The defense chief, Lloyd Austin, ordered a 60-day “stand down” early last year to come up with rules to stomp out extremism among the military’s various branches. The new rules adopted by the Pentagon last month specify that service members are prohibited from engaging in extremist activities and could face disciplinary action for even “liking” extremist content on social media. The new guidance specifies that commanders must not be “indifferent” and hold service members who participate in extremist activity accountable. The Pentagon defines extremism as advocacy for violence to achieve goals that are “political, religious, discriminatory, or ideological in nature”. It includes efforts to overthrow the government and advocating widespread unlawful discrimination “based on race, color, national origin, religion, sex (including pregnancy), gender identity, or sexual orientation”. But the Pentagon’s effort towards stomping out extremism in the military may not go far enough. An Associated Press investigation found the new guidelines fail to account for racism among the ranks, membership in groups such as the KKK, and longstanding racial disparities in military justice. The new guidelines don’t prohibit membership in extremist groups like the KKK as long as they are not “actively participating”. The new rules attempt to police acts rather than associations or beliefs. Some former military figures say it’s absurd to allow service members to also be members of violent extremist groups. “Seriously? You want to be in a foxhole with a guy who’s a member of the KKK? Is that really what we want to do here?” said Eaton. “The idea of service members having to be in close proximity to card-carrying members of the Proud Boys, as long as they don’t ‘march’, that just doesn’t get it.” he added. Some experts also criticize the approach as ignoring the very real threat of white supremacists. “It reflects the institutional bias that permeates all of our government, that even calling out white supremacy is politically fraught,” said Mike German, a former FBI special agent and current fellow at the Brennan Center for Justice. German is concerned the classification has the potential for unintended consequences. “It opens the door to a strange political ‘both sides-ism’,” he said. “The consequence is that somebody expressing anti-racism can be seen as an extremist under that description.” Experts see the far right and other extremists as actively trying to recruit members of the military, including foreign agents seeking to promote disruption within the US. “We’re in the early stages of an insurgency in the Untied States,” said Kristofer Goldsmith, an Iraq war veteran and researcher. In a 200-page report published by Vietnam Veterans of America, Goldsmith found that between 2017 and 2019 foreign entities, such as Russian hackers, “coordinated online targeting of American service members, veterans, and their families” in an effort to disrupt American democracy. “We found 10 different ways foreign entities were targeting veterans online,” said Goldsmith, including through ads, fake veteran accounts that sent friend request to other veterans in order to penetrate the “relatively small community of veteran advocates, and found large social media pages run by foreign admins that spread disinformation tailored to veterans in a effort to influence the election”. Goldsmith sees anti-democratic, white supremacist and fascist movements targeting veterans for the same reason as foreign adversaries. “Veterans are an economically efficient target for campaigns, because if you get one, they often bring their immediate social circle with them,” said Goldsmith. Goldsmith warns that the coming election is vulnerable to a rising insurgency. “We saw a violent insurrection, we did not experience a peaceful transfer of power. It was an attempted coup. Every failed coup is just practice for the next one,” said Goldsmith.In films and literature they are usually depicted as hulking, foot-stomping, snorting beasts but a new study has claimed that the medieval warhorse was typically a much slighter, daintier animal. A team of archaeologists and historians searching for the truth about the steeds that carried knights into battle has concluded that most were probably only the size of a modern-day pony. The researchers examined the bones of about 2,000 horses dating from the fourth to 17th centuries found at castles, a medieval horse cemetery and other archaeological sites in England, as well as combing historical records and fictional stories of chivalry. “It turns out that things are not quite as they have usually been portrayed,” said Prof Alan Outram, of the University of Exeter’s archaeology department. “In popular culture, warhorses are often depicted as the size of a shire horse. It really wasn’t like that. Most medieval horses are surprisingly small. There are very few that are the sort of size portrayed in film or even in exhibitions.” Outram said the vast majority of medieval horses, including ones believed to have been used in war, were less than 14.2 hands (4ft 10in) high, the maximum height of a modern pony. One of the biggest they found was a horse from the Norman period, the remains of which were discovered in the grounds of Trowbridge castle in Wiltshire, but it was only 15 hands – the size of a small modern light riding horse. Outram said that size clearly wasn’t the be-all and end-all for medieval warriors. He said that there might well have been some particularly large warhorses but armies would also have needed smaller horses for tasks such as harrying a retreating enemy, carrying out long-range raids and transporting equipment. The research team was keen to spell out they did not mean to imply that medieval horse breeders did not put huge amounts of time, effort and money into their work. “In the 13th and 14th century especially the royal stud was an amazing network,” said Outram. “They were spending much more money on horses than people.” There is still much work to do. The remains of very few, if any, horses have been found on battlefields so working out which animal was a warhorse rather than, say, a farm horse, is difficult. They are also hampered by the fact that most fallen warhorses were hauled off to the knacker’s yard rather than afforded an organised burial. The next steps include analysing findings at a site in Westminster, more study of horse armour and examining the DNA of bones to find out more about one of history’s most iconic creatures.French theatre is gearing up to pay tribute to one of its founding fathers: Molière, the 17th-century playwright whose biting comedies still form many French schoolchildren’s introduction to drama. On 15 January, 400 years after his baptism (the exact date of his birth is unknown), the venerable Comédie-Française company will open this anniversary year with the play that came perilously close to sinking Molière’s career: Tartuffe. While the first version of the play got the approval of Louis XIV himself in 1664, its satire of Catholic zealots drew the ire of the Catholic church. At the time, accusations of impiety could send a playwright to the stake, and Tartuffe was swiftly forbidden. Yet Molière persisted, switching gears and rewriting the play to suggest that his target wasn’t religion or true believers – but rather the hypocrisy of those who feign virtue. (The word “tartuffe” came to describe such characters in life, too.) It worked. By 1669, a new, longer version of the play – in five rather than three acts – was allowed and met with acclaim, and researchers now see Molière’s political and social acumen as a key factor in his rise to classic status, even before his death. “Molière was brilliant at this: he had this sense of opportunity, a gift for improvisation,” says Georges Forestier, a Molière specialist and professor emeritus at Sorbonne Université in Paris. And this month, thanks to Forestier and his colleague Isabelle Grellet, the Comédie-Française’s audience will be able to experience the original Tartuffe again – or at least a text as close to it as possible. While the 1664 play didn’t survive, the duo used a method that Forestier calls “theatrical genetics” to recreate it. It relies on sources the era’s playwrights drew heavily on, such as commedia dell’arte scenarios and existing short stories, to piece together a play’s original plot. The result is a tighter, more streamlined Tartuffe, focused on the eponymous antihero – a religious beggar who is welcomed into a well-to-do family – and his hosts, Orgon and his wife Elmire. Some characters, such as the young beau Valère, have disappeared entirely along with the second and fifth acts, identified as later additions. The prominent Belgian director Ivo van Hove will direct what is set to be a curious event – a “new” Molière play at the House of Molière, as the Comédie-Française has long been known. The opening night will be relayed live in cinemas in seven countries, and marks the start of a yearlong celebration for the French company, which was born of the fusion of Molière’s troupe and another, in 1680: its entire 2022 lineup will be dedicated to Molière. Van Hove originally considered tackling Tartuffe years ago, after staging Molière’s The Misanthrope and The Miser in other countries, but he was discouraged by the standard five-act version. “It’s so artificially made up, due to the pressure from the church,” he says between rehearsals. “I never liked it, and I didn’t know how to solve it.” Forestier and Grellet’s three-act version convinced him. “It’s what he intended it to be,” Van Hove says of this old-new Tartuffe, presented under its original title (Tartuffe or the Hypocrite, changed in 1669 to The Impostor). The director has added a prologue and epilogue to set the scene, and sees the play as a “social drama”. “This Tartuffe is invited into their home, and then the whole family, every individual, starts to change,” he says. Forestier stresses, however, that while Van Hove sees Tartuffe’s relationship with Elmire, the lady of the house, as a love story, the text doesn’t necessarily support this idea. Ever the pragmatist, Molière knew when to back down – and when to take risks, too. As Tartuffe and the ensuing controversy demonstrate, he was the first comic playwright in France to leave stock comedy characters behind and tap into zeitgeisty themes, including the education of women, freedom within marriage, fanaticism and fashion. And while conservatives disapproved, he found an eager audience in Louis XIV and his court. “When his career takes off, the king is in his 20s,” says Marine Souchier, a postdoctoral researcher who studied the playwright’s career trajectory. “Molière speaks to a pretty young crowd at court and among the bourgeoisie, and is rather progressive for this era.” And Molière, who was also known for his innovative acting, wasn’t averse to stoking controversy in order to generate interest. When his 1662 play The School for Wives came in for relatively mild criticism from some quarters, he seized the opportunity to publicise his work with the help of a friend, Donneau de Visé, who purposefully stoked the flames in articles. Then Molière himself said he would respond – and did do with a new play, The Critique of the School for Wives, in which he ridiculed his detractors. “He kept the buzz going,” Forestier says with a chuckle. According to Souchier, it was an entirely conscious career move – and it paid off: “Thanks to this strategy and his logic of constant innovation, he achieved a level of success that was really unusual at the time, and it cemented the legend after his death.” When Tartuffe returned to the stage in 1669, Molière even anticipated that there was money to be made out of what had become a cause célèbre. “The box-office takings were huge,” Souchier said. “We surmise that Molière’s company set higher prices because they knew it would be sold out.” Four centuries later, expect Van Hove’s Tartuffe, and the many more Molière productions scheduled this year, to pack playhouses again. Tartuffe or the Hypocrite is at the Comédie-Française, Paris, 15 January-24 April and screened by Pathé Live in selected European cinemas on 15 January.In a bare and violent patch of land in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 75,000 people are living in what one UN field officer described as “hellish conditions”. Food and water are scarce. Even the flimsiest shelters are in short supply and sanitation is nonexistent. Girls have been raped by militiamen while attempting to find food in fields around the site. Ibrahim Cisse of Unicef says people here are in effect being held hostage. Rhoe – a remote camp of internally displaced people (IDP) approximately 45km northeast of Bunia, the capital of DRC’s Ituri province – is “a tragedy waiting to happen”, according to those who have visited. Ituri province is home to what is possibly Africa’s largest unexplored gold reserve, and in diplomatic circles has been called “the bloodiest corner of DRC”. But even by Ituri standards Rhoe camp is grim, and the significance of the UN’s appeal for urgent support here should not be underestimated. For many in Rhoe it will be not the first or even second time they have become refugees in their own land. The three DRC warlords convicted at the international criminal court (ICC) for their part in the ongoing violence – Thomas Lubanga, Germain Katanga and Bosco Ntaganda, the subjects, respectively, of the ICC’s first ever conviction, in March 2012, first case in which crimes of sexual violence including rape and sexual slavery were charged (although he was acquitted) and the longest sentence ever issued – began their killing careers here. In 2003, the EU deployed its first autonomous military intervention in Ituri. It was an attempt to shield a population not being protected by government or international peacekeepers. Now Ituri is burning again. A militia group known as the Cooperative for the Development of Congo, or Codeco, which distinguishes itself by its copious use of machetes and flamethrowers against civilians, is terrorising the population. According to UN briefings seen by the Guardian, the situation started to deteriorate on 12 November when Codeco began ramping up attacks on villages and within camps, placing pressure on already struggling relief operations. In one attack, in Tsuya, 1,296 houses were destroyed by Codeco militia. No one knows how many died. At around the same time, Codeco men armed with ageing AK-47s attacked the villages of Buki, Ngazba, Kpaluba, Tata and Litsinga; opening fire at random and torching houses. In Reta, in the furrows of Djugu territory, not far from the Drodro camp, a two-month-old baby girl was killed during a Codeco attack. Unicef says militiamen also destroyed three hospitals and two schools in the area, and have made any kind of humanitarian assistance impossible. Those who survived the assaults fled to camps at Tché and Drodro. On 21 November, Tché was attacked; 950 shelters were destroyed. Codeco also attacked Drodro, killing at least 35 and destroying 14 of the 18 housing blocks that sheltered IDPs. Over the last eight weeks militiamen have attacked at least four IDP camps in Ituri. These accounts shed light not only on the violence unfolding in Ituri but also reveal that at least 35,000 children, almost half of Rhoe’s population, are at risk of death through starvation or disease. What will happen to people without any food, including the 19 breastfeeding women who gave birth in the camp in December? Built to shelter 6,000 households, Rhoe was already a humanitarian tinderbox, hopelessly over capacity. Aid agencies can reach the camp only by helicopter. In December, Unicef counted over 14,000 households in the camp, making up a total of 75,000 people; there is one toilet for every 1,300 people and sewage flows openly. Three cases of measles have been identified. People are dying of respiratory illnesses, diarrhoea and malaria. There is no equipment to hold funerals. There is also only one clinic, run by Doctors Without Borders, with an adjacent twometre sq delivery room for women in labour. These conditions are alongside impunity-fuelled violence, starvation and displacement that has festered since 1996, leaving the government unable to keep its citizens safe, secure or fed. More than 27 million are facing starvation. Approximately 5.5 million people, including 3.2 million children and 1.2 million women, have now been displaced from their homes because of violence. In May 2021 DRC’s president, Felix Tshisekedi, declared a state of emergency in Ituri and neighbouring North Kivu. Yet Tshisekedi has appointed Floribert Ndjabu as his evoy for the region, a man who served 15 years in preventive detention on suspicion of the murders of nine UN peacekeepers in 2005. Last August, he employed another former rebel leader, Tommy Tambwe, three months before Tambwe’s militia gang M23 allegedly attacked Bukavu. Tshisekedi has promoted many figures the UN has labeled “red generals,” some of whom are under UN and EU sanctions for human rights violations, including Gen Gabriel Amisi, Gen Muhindo Akili Mundos, Fall Sikabwe Asinda, Thierry Ilunga Kibambi and Egide Ngoy. How can you protect civilians from violence if the very men who caused it are in power? Unicef says it needs $356m (£260m) to hold back hunger and disease in Ituri, including Ebola, measles, meningitis and cholera. But there has been no indication from London, Washington or Brussels that any programme will be funded. Everyone of course understands that money will only address the symptoms and not the fundamental problem. It is largely a question of political will: whether or not to send-in UN lawyers – not troops – to end the impunity still fuelling the ongoing violence, starvation and displacement.For people who were already in poverty before the pandemic, the past 18 months have hit particularly hard. Many have had to deal with a drastic reduction in income as a result of loss of employment, and those on benefits now face the combined blow of a £20 cut to universal credit, inflation at its highest rate for 10 years and a major hike in fuel prices. It is, says Matt Copeland, head of policy affairs at National Energy Action, a “toxic cocktail”. Indeed, a study by the Legatum Institute found that 700,000 people had already been plunged into poverty in 2020. Many people who relied on casual work were suddenly unemployed and ineligible for furlough schemes during this period, exacerbating the problem. Between 1 April 2020 and 31 March 2021, the Trussell Trust’s network of food banks distributed 2.5m emergency food parcels – an increase of a third on the previous year and a 128% increase on the same period five years ago, as tens of thousands found themselves using a food bank for the first time. “If somebody is unable to afford food, the likelihood is that they are already struggling to afford heating and their core utilities, as well as other things, including their accommodation costs and personal hygiene items,” says Emma Revie, chief executive of the Trussell Trust. Even before the rise in fuel prices, she adds, 95% of people in need of assistance from food banks were already experiencing destitution. But as the cost of natural gas soars, there are fears that far more households will be thrown into fuel poverty. This term can be defined a number of ways, but one definition is a household that spends more than 10% of net income on energy bills. By this measure, 2.5m households were already in fuel poverty in 2021, and a study by York University predicts the figure will rise to nearly 3.5m this year. Those households will be faced with what Simon Francis, coordinator of the End Fuel Poverty Coalition, describes as the “terrible choice” between turning on the heating or paying for food. “Certain groups are more likely to fall through the safety net than others,” says Revie. Disabled people, she says, are significantly overrepresented at food banks. But families with multiple children are badly affected too, due to the combined costs of cooking regularly for more people and keeping the house warm. Those on the frontline are already observing this play out. Between mid-October and mid-November, the Citizens Advice Bureau (CAB) says it saw a 10% increase over the previous month in people seeking referrals for food banks and for extra charitable support, including for toiletries and other essentials. Kayley Hignell, head of policy for Families, Welfare and Work at CAB, says that since the cut to universal credit, advisers have seen an increase in people needing crisis support. “That means food bank referrals so families can put a meal on the table and fuel vouchers so they can have the heating on,” she says. Others are in extremely desperate situations due to the overlapping effects of illness and poverty. Hignell cites as an example a cancer patient referred to CAB who is only able to afford to heat one room in their house because money is so tight following the universal credit cut. “They’re struggling to afford healthy food and are worried about rising bills this winter,” she says. But the rise in natural gas prices doesn’t just mean higher bills. Twenty-eight energy suppliers went out of business in 2021, with potentially devastating repercussions for those behind on their bills. When user debt from those suppliers is transferred to an administrator, different rules can apply, says Copeland: “While an energy supplier has to have detailed conversations with you to make sure you’re able to pay, and that you’re on a reasonable debt repayment plan, you could just be visited by the administrator and asked for the money, and debt collection agencies can get involved very quickly.” Further, says Copeland, if a household uses a prepayment meter, and their supplier goes out of business, the infrastructure allowing them to top up their meter may stop working – leaving them with no energy. Households on low incomes are entitled to apply for the government’s Warm Home Discount Scheme, a one-off £140 discount to electricity bills for households on low incomes. If the discount has been agreed with the supplier, but not yet paid, however, and the supplier goes bust, there is no guarantee it will be transferred to the new supplier, says Copeland. Only limited help is available. The £500m Household Support Fund and the Cold Weather Payment of £25 for each seven-day period of very cold weather were introduced to help poorer households. They will make a difference, says Copeland, but not enough. Food banks in the Trussell Trust network also help by signposting users to specialist welfare advisers who make sure they are receiving their full entitlement. But, says Revie, even the full entitlements available can often not be enough in practice. “We’re seeing people at food banks who have their maximum entitlement or who have secured everything they can and are still not able to afford those essentials,” she says. Revie is deeply concerned about what the next year may have in store for those on the brink of destitution. “Emergency food parcels are a sticking plaster,” she says. “We know [demand] is driven by people not having enough money. A substantial rise in energy prices for households who are already struggling will have a catastrophic impact – I think we can’t really overstate it.”Jenny, 41, Hampshire In 2019, I had mental health issues and couldn’t work. My flat was repossessed and I ended up in emergency temporary accommodation and claiming universal credit for the first time. I was living on £291 a month. I never thought I would walk through the doors of a food bank, because there is a stigma involved. It took a lot for me to do it – I had no choice because I had no food. But I was greeted by a lovely woman. She could see I was nervous, so she sat me down with a cup of coffee and a slice of cake while we talked about what I needed. That experience changed everything for me because I realised it was OK to ask for help. I’d love the government to reverse the decision on the universal credit cut. They increased it when people who had previously been working on higher salaries realised that universal credit wasn’t enough money. To take it away in the beginning of winter is, I think, a disgusting decision to make. Martin, 55, Newcastle I can’t work because of my mental health issues and disabilities – I am visually impaired and because I have type 2 diabetes, I need to eat regularly. I’m on what they call legacy benefits. In the pandemic, people on universal credit received £80 a month extra, but we didn’t get anything at all. Food is going up in price, but your benefits do not go up to match it. I only receive £370 a fortnight. So that’s why you need the food banks – because you cannot buy a healthy diet. I really am grateful, but you shouldn’t have to rely on food banks in the 21st century. At the end of the day, the Trussell Trust is a charity and they’re doing the government’s job. Amie, 41, Lincolnshire My husband left us in 2017, and at the same time I lost my job as a teacher. The jobcentre gave me food bank vouchers to tide us over and I used them for three or four months. The food bank staff were super supportive, making me cups of tea and gathering all the things we could possibly need. I felt instantly valued. The kids were so happy, they were like: “Oh what have we got this week?” I found employment through the jobcentre so I felt a lot more steady after that. I tried to get involved in what different places are doing in terms of eradicating the need for food banks, so I set up a food co-op to share food between people. We’re saving food from landfill and we’re also feeding our families. Yuyan, 34, Wandsworth I had experienced domestic violence in Spain. I was fired just before the first lockdown and was left with a child to take care of and a flat to pay for, so in September 2020 I came to London. Due to Covid they were not issuing national insurance numbers. Because I had run out of money to rent a room and it was difficult to find a job, I was on the verge of being homeless. The food bank made such a difference – it was the only support I had all year. I received food parcels for four months. Thanks to the food bank I also had all the information about doing my paperwork, where to make appointments. I’ve always felt like they were a phone call away for any situation. If there were more centres to give that valuable information to people, and have people as dedicated as they are in Wandsworth food bank, a lot of people would get out of this situation like I did. Sally, 53, Welwyn Garden City I haven’t worked in a paid job for about nine years. I suffer from depression and anxiety, which is why I’m on ESA (employment and support allowance). I’m also a carer for my adult disabled daughter. I had to go to the food bank because I just did not have enough to live on. I used it about three times. I tried to hold out from going because of embarrassment. But the food banks in this area are run by very nice, caring people – you’re made to feel very welcome. The Department for Work and Pensions called me up out of the blue and told me I hadn’t been paid enough all that time and I did get a substantial amount as a back payment. It’s not uncommon – I’ve heard of it happening a lot. It would be ideal if they calculated things correctly in the first place. Jade, 34, Wandsworth I’ve been unemployed for the past couple of years – before that I’d been employed all my life. After my dad’s death I fell off the rails a bit due to depression and anxiety. I’m on universal credit and I’ve been using the food bank for the past three months. If I didn’t have it I’m not sure what I’d do for food right now. Because of my mental health condition, asking for help is difficult, so the food bank provides me with a safe space to be able to talk and to find help, especially with Citizens Advice, which helped me get my studio flat. I spend two hours there every week. It doesn’t take two hours to pick up my food parcel, but there are so many kind, caring people that dedicate their time to speak to people who don’t often have conversation or can feel lost and lonely. Steve, 43, Fulham I had a back injury at work, and had to move to a desk job. I coped with the pain with alcohol and ended up with alcohol dependency and had to go into rehab. When I came out I was on the basic level of ESA, just above the benefit cap, and my accommodation was a studio flat, so my housing benefit wasn’t even covering the rent. The food bank was a lifeline. There’s no way that I would have survived without it. And just having that support to get me back on my feet was really important. The benefits system needs to be reformed so that it supports the people who really need it. When we’re told that everybody is a scrounger, it’s really disheartening. Having reforms so that people get the benefits they need will change things so much. Some names have been changed.On 17 March 2020, the chancellor Rishi Sunak, made a speech about the government’s intention to help support UK citizens facing the oncoming economic threat of the coronavirus pandemic. “We will support jobs, we will support incomes, we will support businesses and we will help you protect your loved ones,” he said. “We will do whatever it takes.” And yet, if the data on the number of people falling into destitution since then are anything to go by, then these commitments have fallen far short. As per the definition provided by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation (JRF), destitution means “going without the essentials we all need to eat, stay warm and dry, and keep clean”. For a country as wealthy as the UK, you might expect this number would be very low. But according to the JRF’s Destitution in the UK 2020 report, more than a million households were destitute in the UK at some point in 2019, a figure representing 2.4 million people. Among them were 550,000 children. On this basis, the JRF calculates that the number of households experiencing destitution in the UK had increased by 35% since 2017, and the number of people experiencing destitution had increased by 54%. On the face of it, these figures are shocking, but the data was gathered before the Covid-19 outbreak. What is even more concerning is what the report portends for the pandemic’s impact on those perilously close to destitution. Working alongside the Trussell Trust, a charity committed to ending poverty and hunger, which runs food banks and is therefore in many ways on the frontline of the issue, academics from Heriot-Watt University estimate that destitution levels in the UK will approximately double as a result of the pandemic and the associated economic lockdowns, even taking into account the mitigating effects of relevant policy measures (such as the enhancement of various welfare protections). Almost two years into the pandemic and the Trussell Trust’s chief executive, Emma Revie, says the report was right to sound the alarm. “During the Covid-19 lockdown in spring 2020, food banks in the Trussell Trust network experienced an unprecedented growth in the need for food parcels,” she says. “People referred to food banks in the Trussell Trust network are a very deprived group: almost everyone meets the definition of being destitute. In early 2020, three-quarters were severely food insecure, and one in five were homeless. The majority experienced two or more types of deprivation.” Interestingly though, the Trussell Trust’s 2021 State of Hunger report [pdf] observed that the demographic of those visiting food banks had shifted during the pandemic: “During Covid-19, the profile of people referred to food banks changed slightly: in a survey conducted during the summer of 2020 there were relatively more private renters, people born outside of the UK/Europe, people aged between 25 and 44, and couples with children than before the pandemic.” It goes on to say that the proportion who were furloughed was relatively small at 4% of all people referred to food banks, suggesting that the furlough scheme for those who were able to receive it managed to hold many families out of destitution. The reasons behind soaring destitution in the UK are manifold. “Within our research, we looked at the number of people who met that criterion of meeting destitution,” says Revie, who attributes at least some of this growth to failures within the social security system. “We know it’s about access to income. The average household income for somebody coming to a food bank after they’ve covered their accommodation costs is just £57 a week – significantly below the average household income of somebody sitting on the poverty line.” Taking this all into account, says Revie, 95% of people coming to food banks in the Trussell Trust’s network are experiencing destitution. Those likelier to be more vulnerable to destitution, according to the JRF, include young adults, single mothers and those living in the north-east of England. But there are other factors too, such as the five-week wait between applying for universal credit (UC) and receiving it. The Trussell Trust is actively campaigning to end this as it forces people into debt: as people still have to pay bills during this period, the government offers an advance on that first payment, which has to be repaid from subsequent UC payments, therefore leaving people owing money back to the government, locking them into hardship from the outset. Shockingly, almost half (47%) of people surveyed at food banks owed money to the DWP. Job insecurity is obviously a key factor in pushing people into applying for UC in the first place and has been exacerbated dramatically by the pandemic-enforced lockdowns. According to the Office for National Statistics, the rate of redundancies recorded since the beginning of the pandemic exceeds the highest rate reached during the 2008 to 2009 financial crisis. And though the economy may have started to rebound since the midst of the pandemic, for anyone who has fallen into destitution the long-lasting impacts aren’t easy to bounce back from simply by getting a job. So what can you do if you find yourself falling into destitution? Revie says to come to a food bank in the Trussell Trust network if you can, where you can access essential items and speak to staff who are trained in helping people to navigate the benefits system. “First of all, you’d be very warmly welcomed,” she says. “We’d sit and have a cup of tea and ensure that you had enough food for yourself and your family and anyone living in your household.” Beyond that, says Revie, they would also be looking to try to get you specialist support and advice to see if you are getting everything in terms of the benefits you’re entitled to. “We signpost on to a wide, wide array of partner organisations to help with housing or benefits challenges, or for people struggling with their mental health,” she says. “Anything we can do, to walk a little bit on that journey with you, and see if we can provide any support so that if you’ve had to come to a food bank once – which for us, is just indicative of the system having failed – that you won’t have to come back in the future.”Stories of the disintegrating relationship between the police and young black people are endless, but an artist behind an unlikely new project hopes he can help break down barriers. Kay Rufai was enlisted by West Midlands police last year to be their artist in residence – thought to be a first for a police force. He has spent several months taking photographs and film of officers and young, mostly black people who have had dealings with the police. The images were then presented to police in order to spark a conversation and “challenge their preconceptions”. “I wanted to use visual media because it’s a powerful tool to really engage with themes of stereotyping and biases,” said Rufai. “In the last few years there has definitely been a spike in violence that’s affecting young people, especially young black boys. A lot of the political and societal narrative around this is that these young people are gang members and we need to overpolice these communities and increase jail times. But there was nothing in the conversation about preventive measures … At the same time, I wanted to present a human side of the police, not just PC 65609. That’s not who you are – that’s a script.” The project, called Barriers to Bridges, is being funded by the Coventry City of Culture Trust and the West Midlands police and crime commissioner’s office, and will be publicly displayed in February. Rufai, who has previous experience of working with young people, including for his SMILE-ing Boys project, said that nothing like this had been done in the UK before. “I’ve never seen young people from marginalised communities and a big structural bureaucratic system like a police force brought together like this. It could really help make a lot of the changes that we’re hoping to see.” Local youth services, including Coventry Youth Offending Service, Positive Youth Foundation and Creative Optimistic Visions, helped to facilitate his time with young people. Some of the most evocative images taken for the police included those of David, who is captured getting drumsticks out of his jogging bottoms. “We see him dipping his hand in his pocket, pulling something out, and then at the point where he pulls out the drumsticks, the audience is like, ‘Oh, wow, I actually thought something different … I thought maybe he was trying to pull out a weapon’.” There was also one girl who last year experienced an armed raid at her house last year. “The police kicked their door in looking for weapons,” said Rufai said. “Her photographs and story had a significant effect. I think the fact that she was a girl was surprising.” Rufai is a police abolitionist, making him part of a movement that advocates replacing policing with other public safety systems. He has also been profiled and mistakenly stopped by the police many times in his life. But he said he was heartened by the discussions and debates he had with officers, some of whom were surprisingly vulnerable. “There’s a particular officer who I took a walk with in an area where a young person, around 13 years old, was killed in a violent way a couple of years ago. RIP was written on one of the shutters of the shops. The officer spoke about how he was a really good kid who loved playing football. The officer provided police support within the kid’s school, but then because of a shift in his role he wasn’t able to go into the neighbourhood as much. He sometimes wonders whether he could have averted the kid’s death. He was so visibly emotional, he was actually in tears. He has sleepless nights over this boy’s death.” The chief constable of West Midlands police, Sir David Thompson, was a huge champion of the residency, said Rufai. “He recognises the necessity for reform. But obviously he occupies a very senior position. The officers who were the biggest challenge to engage with were some of those who were down on the ground.” So the artist went on ride-alongs and asked officers questions to challenge their “binary idea of good guys and bad guy” and help them “understand the racial and social contexts before approaching a young person”. West Midlands police said the residency offered them a chance to do things differently. “It’s a really innovative way to explore the lived experiences of young people in Coventry, to not only give them a voice but also a platform for it to be heard. We also hoped it would give people insight into policing and humanise the uniform, to foster a better understanding of each other through honest dialogue and strive towards building empathy. It’s so important that we’re able to keep young people safe and reduce youth violence, so why not try a different approach?”There is so far only one lesson in the “acquittal” of the tennis player Novak Djokovic on a charge of seeking to enter Australia unvaccinated. It is that something is badly wrong with that country’s border controls. The judge found that the tennis star had met all reasonable requirements for admission, as was conceded by the Canberra government. He had two separate permits for exemption from vaccination, one from the Australian tennis authorities and one from the state of Victoria. His visa was cancelled at the gate after he had landed, without time to reach his lawyer. He was detained in a notorious hostel used to house asylum seekers. The procedure was bizarre. Whether Australia’s cabinet decides to overrule the judge and restore the visa ban has yet to be seen. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, might argue that reinstating the ban will set an example to all vaccination dodgers to beware, even if they have jumped through the correct bureaucratic hoops and met the rules. Alternatively Djokovic may choose to wash Australia out of his system rather than face an unpleasant reception from tennis fans at next week’s Australian Open. They have suffered extreme lockdowns for want of the vaccinations that Djokovic opposes. However, this particular fiasco has little to do with the fact that Djokovic has refused the Covid vaccine. Equally it should be irrelevant that Morrison – and others – have so clearly wanted Djokovic’s high-profile scalp for the pro-vaccination cause. By handling Djokovic’s case so badly, the Australian authorities have turned this into a test for the cause of natural justice and the championing of human rights. The judge asked not whether vaccination is a good idea, but what the tennis player should have done that he failed to do. There was no answer, leaving the judge “agitated” by the tennis player’s “manifestly unjust” treatment, as if he were a plague carrier requiring instant incarceration. At a time when authoritarian governments everywhere are riding roughshod over the rule of law, the Djokovic decision is an admittedly modest victory for its champions. Around the world, including in Australia, rules governing immigration are under extreme strain. British border officials are gearing up to turn back dinghies in the Channel. Syrians are sent back and forth across the eastern Mediterranean. Refugees are dying off the coast of Libya. Latin Americans are making their way through Mexico and hitting Donald Trump’s “wall”. Dictatorships and democracies alike face internal and external pressures that are bringing anarchy to their borders. Ever more nations on every continent are seeing these borders weaken and break. How they respond will have a dramatic effect on international relations as well as human rights. For every Djokovic at the gate there will be hundreds of thousands whose cases go unheard. Therein lies his relevance. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistLiz Vick doesn’t rest easily in her apartment. She is one of 270 households in the Lamba Court complex in Salford and has recently contributed £3,000 to the cost of a temporary fire alarm system to avoid the need for night watch patrols to give early warnings of fires. “I don’t sleep well,” the 32-year-old account manager said. “Fire alarms go off through the night. I can’t tell you the feeling when a fire alarm goes off and you know you are in a flammable flat and you have 15 minutes to get out before the building burns down.” Engineers found serious faults with the cavity barriers inside the walls that are supposed to stop the spread of fire. Many were missing. She said others were stuffed with plastic bubble wrap, a solution apparently improvised by builders. A survey found “a poor quality of workmanship resulting in discontinuous, inadequately secured and missing cavity barriers in the areas required by the building regulations at the time of build”. The block also has wooden balconies, and the flats are essentially worthless because mortgage companies are unlikely to lend to prospective buyers. Fixing the problems could cost anywhere between £60,000 and £115,000 for each apartment. “The figures have been hideous,” she said. Her future may rest on how far promises made by Michael Gove to legislate to protect leaseholders like her from the cost of fixing all fire-safety defects are met. The government initially indicated that it would chase developers and material manufacturers for the costs of cladding defects and it is understood to believe these remain the priority. “I have had meetings with advisers about bankruptcy, which I never thought in my life I would have to do,” Vick said. “I am very much expecting to end the year as a bankrupt.” She faces the prospect of moving back in with family or friends. “[The announcement] is just cladding, yet again,” she said, after Gove’s plans first emerged. “I can’t say I am surprised. This isn’t the first time the government has made this fuss. The announcement comes, and you find out it’s just cladding and you are heartbroken. This doesn’t help in any way unless they open it up to other fire defects. It is completely useless to us if it’s just cladding. Lots of other [affected] people don’t have cladding either and cavity barriers are one of the biggest issues.” She bought the flat in 2018 after making careful checks about the fire safety of the cladding, but there was no way she could know about the internal problems. “I can’t get on with my life,” she said. “I can’t start a family with my fiance. I am now on medication for anxiety and depression and I am due to start therapy. You are constantly in survival mode.” She has postponed marriage plans “because there is no possibility we can afford a wedding”. She said the leaseholders had contacted the developer of the block, Bellway, several times. A leaseholder from Lamba actually went to the developer’s annual general meeting before Christmas to confront them and deliver a letter signed by leaseholders asking for help with “ruinous costs”. She said they were awaiting a response from Bellway’s chief executive, Jason Honeyman. The freeholder had refused to pay for any remediation and had stopped communication with leaseholders, she said. A spokesperson for Bellway said the firm’s external fire consultants are currently looking into this matter in more detail and it will respond in full once this is complete.Boris Johnson will not face a new investigation by the parliamentary standards commissioner, Kathryn Stone, over the refurbishment of the Downing Street flat, No 10 has confirmed. The prime minister had been accused of failing to be transparent about the financing of the project, the cost of which was initially met by the Tory donor David Brownlow. Asked about reports that Stone would not pursue the matter further, however, Johnson’s official spokesperson said: “It’s not for me to speak for or on behalf of her, but she has confirmed that they won’t be looking at the flat.” It is understood that a letter from Stone was received by Johnson last week saying that she was not minded to pursue a fresh inquiry. The letter has not yet been published. The prime minister was criticised last week by his independent ethics adviser, Christopher Geidt, over his failure to hand over WhatsApp exchanges with Lord Brownlow, when a previous investigation into the refurbishment by Lord Geidt was carried out. Johnson issued a “humble and sincere apology” for failing initially to give Geidt the key messages. Geidt is pressing for more powers in order to cement his independence from Downing Street. Stone, who oversees the code of conduct for MPs, had made clear she would decide whether to take a fresh look at the issue once the Electoral Commission had reported on it. The commission fined the Conservative party £17,800 for failing to disclose payments from Brownlow’s company of £67,801.72, which it said should have been registered as political donations. Johnson later repaid the money himself. In the WhatsApp messages, published by Geidt last week, Johnson complained that the flat, for which he receives £30,000 a year to maintain it, was “a bit of a tip”. Johnson told Geidt that the missing WhatsApp messages had only belatedly come to light because he had changed his phone. Their existence was revealed by the Electoral Commission report into the funding of the refurbishment. The WhatsApp exchange sparked fresh questions about “cash for access”, with Johnson and Brownlow discussing “Great Exhibition 2.0,” a plan favoured by the peer, alongside the funding of the designer revamp of the flat. Brownlow was later given the opportunity to discuss the idea with the then culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, at the Royal Albert Hall. Johnson’s botched attempt to overhaul the system for policing MPs’ conduct over the case of the disgraced Tory former MP Owen Paterson was seen by some at Westminster as an attempt to prevent Stone prying further into the prime minister’s own affairs. She can recommend a suspension from parliament, as she did in Paterson’s case.That’s it for the blog for now. They’ll be more on the Guardian’s Djokovic page. Here’s a video clip from the Djokovic family press conference: The president of the Serb parliament, Ivica Dacic, said he expected Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, to revoke Djokovic’s visa on Tuesday, Milivoje Pantovic reports. “Obviously the Australian authorities will decide to deport Djokovic, who will then not be able to enter Australia for the next three years,” said Dacic, a former Serbian prime minister whose Socialist Party is part of the ruling coalition. Dacic said the incident would leave “a lasting mark on relations between Serbia and Australia. “Every state has the discretionary right to refuse or allow entry to any person, but it never happens to prominent people such as Djokovic,” he said. “That is something you rarely see. In general, [Australia’s] behaviour has been shameful and disgraceful.” Djokovic continues to polarise opinion. He has become the poster-boy for those opposed to Covid restrictions, like Nigel Farage and the right-wing actor Laurence Fox founder of the Reclaim party. Others question whether he should be allowed to compete and want to see him held to account for appearing in public without a mask after getting a positive Covid test. Djokovic’s participation in the tournament rests with immigration minister, Alex Hawke, who in 2020 threatened to deport backpackers who breach Covid rules. Hawke is expected to make a decision on Tuesday. Earlier his office issued this statement: Following today’s Federal Circuit ... determination on a procedural ground, it remains within immigration minister Hawke’s discretion to consider cancelling Mr Djokovic’s visa under his personal power of cancellation within section 133C(3) of the Migration Act. The minister is currently considering the matter and the process remains ongoing. One of the things I missed in the press conference is that Djokovic’s mother alleged that he has been subjected to torture. According a BBC translation of the press conference from Belgrade, she said: He was subjected to torture, to harassment and we will hear even more about what he had to go through. And of course, he fought against that system and against the government because he thought he had the right to be there with a with a visa that he got. She gave no more details. Here’s a roundup of the aftermath of court a decision to allow Djokovic to stay in Australia to compete in the Australian Open. Djokovic’s thanked his supporters for standing by him after his successful appeal against the cancellation of his visa by the Australian authorities. “I’m pleased and grateful that the judge overturned my visa cancellation. Despite all that has happened, I want to stay and try to compete @AustralianOpen,” Djokovic tweeted. Djokovic’s family hailed the verdict as victory for the freedom to chose. His father, Srdan, said it was “Huge win for Novak, his family and the free world.” His mother, Dijana, said: “This is his biggest win in his career, it is bigger than any Grand Slam.” She also criticised the treatment of her son in a “so-called hotel” in Melbourne. The family also thanked the judge in the case, Anthony Kelly, and praised his neutrality. They also thanked Serbia president and prime minster for supporting Djokovic. The family refused to answer questions about why Djokovic was photographed in public last month without a mask after testing positive Covid. When a question on the issue was raised the drew the press conference to an abrupt end. The Australian government’s counsel has warned the immigration minister could still decide to use a personal power to cancel Djokovic’s visa anew. Alex Hawke, one of the closest political allies of prime minister Scott Morrison, has a momentous political decision to make: let Djokovic stay and play for a record 21st grand slam singles title; or deport him, which comes with a hefty three-year ban from re-entering Australia. Police in Melbourne used pepper spray against a rowdy crowd of Djokovic’s supporters after one man jumped on a car outside the offices of the lawyers representing the tennis star. At least one man was arrested. Boris Johnson responded to a question about Djokovic by urging people to get vaccinated. He said: “I think it’s important for the Australian authorities to make their own dispositions. All I would say about about Novak Djokovic, against whom I’ve play tennis by the way – he’s pretty good, is I believe in vaccination.” When the family is asked questions about what Djokovic was doing the day after he tested positive for Covid, they stopped the press conference. Djordje said: “This press conference is adjourned thank you for attention.” Djokovic was pictured in public last month without a mask after testing positive. The Djokovic family have been answering questions in English. His brother, Djordje said: We’re grateful for the justice system. We love Australia. I admire Judge Kelly and the way led the whole court process because I think it was very detailed. It was very thorough and it was very neutral. Novak has been called many names. He is only fighting for the liberty of choice. He confirmed that Novak won’t be answering questions as his father suggested earlier. Djokovic himself has not taken part so far in the press conference as promised. But he has been tweeting: Novak’s father Srdan says: Over the past few days, it’s been very, very difficult for everyone in the world who is free thinking. But he is mentally extremely, extremely strong. They took away all his rights his rights, as a human being. He refused to revoke his visa. They gave him no right to prepare his defence for several hours, and they took away his phone. Fortunately they gave him back his phone. He contacted his legal team who mounted a fantastic defence, that they could not match. This is a huge win for Novak, his family and the free world. He respected everything that was asked of him. He only wanted to go there to play tennis and that right he wanted to take away from them. Justice and the rule of law have prevailed. The judge who presided over the case has shown that not for second was Novak the guilty party. The judge was fantastic, he simply respected the facts. He took the only decision that was possible which was to release Novak. Uncle Goran, says: I’d like to thank our President and our prime minister for their efforts to persuade Australian authorities to have better treatment of Novack to treat him better. Novak’s mum Dijana, says: We’re here to celebrate the victory of our son Novak. He always fought for justice. He’s done nothing wrong.” He went there to win that tournament. This situation has been extremely difficult. There has been a spectrum of emotions: sadness, fear, disappointment. There were moments when he didn’t have his mobile with him. we had no idea what was happening. I want to thank everyone in the world who who stood up and supported him in Melbourne in front of that, so-called hotel. This is his biggest win in his career, it is bigger than any Grand Slam. Djordje adds: “Our family are very pleased that justice and truth, have prevailed.” Novak’s brother, Djordje, opens the family press conference. He says: “We need to send love to Nole, and to help him to overcome this very difficult situation as a winner at the end.” He adds: “We want to thank the justice system of Australia we would like to thank what Judge Kerry wrote in this case. He did it neutrally paying attention to detail.” Here’s a transcript of Djokovic’s interview with the Australian Border Force released by the Federal Circuit Court in Melbourne. LibDem Treasury spokeswoman, Christine Jardine, has written an opinion piece in the Scotsman on the Djokovic row. Kishor Napier-Raman, a politics reporter for Crikey, points out that Djokovic’s lawyers take a tough line on vaccinations for entry into its offices. Boris Johnson has responded to a question about Djokovic by urging people to get vaccinated. Asked if Djokovic should be allowed to compete at Wimbledon if he has not been vaccinated, the prime minister said: I think it’s important for the Australian authorities to make their own dispositions. All I would say about about Novak Djokovic, against whom I’ve play tennis by the way – he’s pretty good, is I believe in vaccination. And I think it’s a wonderful thing to do. Here’s a picture of Johnson playing tennis with Djokovic during the London Olympics in 2008. Here’s more footage Djokovic supporters surrounding a car leaving his lawyers’ office. It is unclear if Djokovic was in the car. Craig Kelly, leader of the rightwing United Australia Party who has been criticised for spreading falsehoods over Covid, has called for Djokovic to be allowed to stay. The BBC’s tennis correspondent, Russell Fuller, has this on the timing of Djokovic’s positive PCR test: The Conservative MP, Andrew Bridgen, another UK supporter of Australia’s points-based immigration system, has this: The former UK politician Nigel Farage, who is in Belgrade with the Djokovic family, tweeted his satisfaction after judge Anthony Kelly quashed the Australian government’s decision to cancel the player’s visa, describing it as “a huge win for @DjokerNole this morning”. The former Ukip and Brexit Party leader has also told GB News that if - as may yet happen - immigration minister Alex Hawke intervenes and withdraws Djokovic’s visa after all, there would be little difference between Australia and a banana republic. “The family can’t believe what’s going on,” Farage said. “I mean, is Australia a country that is based on the rule of law, or is it a country where government’s can exercise arbitrary power? I mean frankly, if that judgement this morning is overruled, then what is the difference between Australia and a banana republic?” Under Australian immigration rules, the minister can use separate powers to cancel the world number 1’s visa if he is sure that grounds exists to do so; that the visa-holder “does not satisfy the minister that the ground does not exist”; and that it would be in the public interest to cancel the visa. This may seem draconian. Both before and after the Brexit referndum, however, as many are pointing out on social media, Farage has consistently praised Australia’s strict immigration system, arguing that a capacity to introduce something similar was one of the main advantages for the UK of leaving the EU: Briatin’s former world tennis Number 1, Andy Murray, also saw the irony, retweeting Farage’s Belgrade video with Dokovic’s family and asking him to “please record the awkward moment when you tell them you’ve spent most of your career campaigning to have people from Eastern Europe deported.” Jubilant Serbian Australians have taken their celebrations away from the detention hotel their beloved Novak Djokovic had been held in for days, leaving behind deflated refugees and their supporters on Monday. Since December 2020 refugee advocates have stood outside the former hotel every day, trying desperately to bring awareness to the plight of the 30-plus men stuck indefinitely inside. When the world’s No 1 male tennis player unexpectedly joined refugees and asylum seekers inside, it brought a new group of protesters and an international media spotlight. Read the full story here: Novak Djokovic will give a press conference at 13.00 GMT, his father has told the BBC. Srdan Djokovic said his son with take part in a planned family press conference via a video link. The family had been due to address the media around now but the event has been put back to 1300 GMT (midnight in Australia), Djokovic senior told the BBC. Michael Miller, the Sydney bureau chief for The Washington Post, has more on the use of pepper spray by Victoria police against Djokovic supporters. I’m now handing over to my colleague, Matthew Weaver, who will keep you updated with the latest developments. Guardian Australia understands the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, will not make a call on whether to re-cancel Novak Djokovic’s visa tonight Australian time. A spokesman for Hawke said: “Following today’s Federal Circuit ... determination on a procedural ground, it remains within immigration minister Hawke’s discretion to consider cancelling Mr Djokovic’s visa under his personal power of cancellation within section 133C(3) of the Migration Act. The minister is currently considering the matter and the process remains ongoing.” Earlier this evening other outlets speculated that Hawke would need to make such a decision within four hours. The four hour window is only relevant if the government had decided to re-detain Djokovic for questioning, which has not occurred. There is no time limit on Hawke’s power to cancel the visa – it can be done whenever he reaches the requisite satisfaction that there is a ground to do so and it is in the public interest. The latest reports from Australian media suggest there won’t be a decision from the government on Monday evening. The minister for immigration, Alex Hawke, is thought to have had a four-hour window after Djokovic was released from detention which has now elapsed. Djokovic’s visa can still be cancelled, but the decision will likely be made on Tuesday at the earliest. More from our reporters on the ground in Melbourne: More from on the ground in Melbourne. Our reporter Tumaini Carayol is currently on Collins Street, where Djokovic is believed to be in discussions with his lawyers at their office. One of Djokovic’s great rivals on the tennis court, Rafael Nadal, has given his reaction on Spanish radio, calling the ongoing situation “a circus”. “Whether or not I agree with Djokovic on some things, justice has spoken and has said he has the right to participate in the Australian Open and I think it is the fairest decision to do so. I wish him the best of luck,” Nadal told Onda Cero on Monday, in quotes reported by Reuters. “On a personal level, I’d much rather he didn’t play,” Nadal joked, adding “everything is much better when the best can be playing.” The draw for the men’s singles is set to take place this Thursday, whether or not Djokovic is included. Nadal also reiterated his support for vaccination against Covid-19, having been critical of Djokovic’s stance last week. “The most important institutions in the world say that the vaccine is the way to stop this pandemic and the disaster that we have been living for the last 20 months.” Cait Kelly is our reporter on the scene in Melbourne, where some fans have gathered outside the offices of Novak Djokovic’s lawyers: Reports that Djokovic had been arrested quickly spread on social media – but The Age and Sydney Morning Herald say that Djokovic has not been arrested, according to their sources. Here is a summary of the current situation: Novak Djokovic won his appeal against the cancellation of his visa on Monday, and was immediately released from detention The immigration minister, Alex Hawke, may still cancel Djokovic’s visa with updates expected on Monday evening Supporters of Djokovic have gathered outside an office in Melbourne where Djokovic is believed to be talking to his lawyers Djokovic’s father and brother claim the tennis star has been arrested, but these claims are disputed and unverified I will now hand you over to my colleague, Niall McVeigh, who will take you through the coverage for the next few hours as we wait for a decision from Australian immigration minister, Alex Hawke, on whether to cancel Djokovic’s visa again. There’s a lot of speculation about whether Djokovic will be detained and have his visa cancelled again. We haven’t been able to verify the varying reports about Djokovic’s status appearing on social media and elsewhere yet. Djokovic’s brother has told Serbian press “they want to capture and lock up Novak again”, and he is currently with his lawyers considering options. We are trying to get answers out of the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, and Australian Border Force, and will bring them to you as we get them. In other news, Australian tennis star Nick Kyrgios is in huge doubt for the Australian Open after contracting Covid-19 just a week out from the season-opening major. AAP reports Kyrgios pulled out of the Sydney Tennis Classic on Monday just hours before his match against Italian firebrand Fabio Fognini. The 26-year-old withdrew from the Melbourne Summer Set last week with a mystery illness that sparked his asthma. The world No 114 was cleared of Covid-19 at the time, but on Monday confirmed he had contracted the virus. “I just want to be open and transparent with everyone, the reason I have had to pull out of Sydney is because I tested positive for Covid,” Kyrgios posted on his Instagram story. In the interview, Djokovic confirmed he tested positive for Covid-19 on 16 December, and then negative on 22 December. This is the key point of the transcript – where the interviewer advises Djokovic at 5am he could have more time to speak to people about the intent to cancel: INTERVIEWER: So the interview is being recommenced at 5.20am. Okay – I have already served you with the notice of intention to consider cancellation and at the moment you need – what have you have advised me is that you need rest and up to 8/8.30. And that’s when you would be able to speak to your solicitor again. DJOKOVIC: Yes. INTERVIEWER: And get some more information. DJOKOVIC: Yes. INTERVIEWER: So that’s absolutely fine, because I have spoken to my supervisors and they’re more than happy to ... DJOKOVIC: Okay great. INTERVIEWER: ... for you to have rest. So any more questions? DJOKOVIC: No more questions for now. INTERVIEWER: So what’s going to happen is, because I’m going to be finishing my shift, so this case is going to be handed over to another team. Another case officer is going to come out, and speak to you. They’ll introduce themselves ... DJOKOVIC: Okay. But then that deal, in the words of Judge Anthony Kelly, was “reneged”. Interviewer 2 comes in at 6.07am, and tells Djokovic if he doesn’t respond in that interview then “a decision might be made based on the information that’s at hand now”. The interviewer informs Djokovic he’ll be taken to a hotel by government contractor Serco, and then asks if he has anything else he wants to add: DJOKOVIC: Well as I said before ... I’m surprised that there is insufficient information on the very reason why I was granted the medical exemption by Victorian state independent medical panel which confirmed that I have fulfilled the criteria to enter Australia ... which is not on the paper which you read to me and that is if you had encountered or had a positive Covid PCR test in the previous six months, and you can provide the negative PCR test and the sufficient amount of antibodies, then you are granted access and that’s exactly what happened in the whole process. So we provided – I provided medical documentation, on 16 November [sic], I was positive on PCR, PCR test positive COVID-19, 22nd I was negative. I sent the blood analysis for my antibodies and had a sufficient amount and I was granted the access to Australia and I received the documentation that supported my medical exemption and the travel declaration coming from the federal government. INTERVIEWER: Okay. Is there anything else you would like to add? DJOKOVIC: No. When the interview resumed at 7.38am, Djokovic was informed his visa had been cancelled. The court has also released more documents relating to the case, which can be found here. It includes the transcript of Djokovic’s interview with border force last week. In the interview, Djokovic confirmed he has had Covid-19 twice, and is not vaccinated. INTERVIEWER: Thank you. So when I ask you what were your reasons for travelling to Australia today? DJOKOVIC: I’m a professional tennis player and the main reason for me coming to Australia is participating in the Australian Open in Melbourne, Victoria. INTERVIEWER: Thank you. Now question regarding your vaccination, are you vaccinated ... DJOKOVIC: I am not vaccinated. INTERVIEWER: ... for Covid-19? Not vaccinated? DJOKOVIC: I am not vaccinated. INTERVIEWER: Thank you. Have you ever had Covid? DJOKOVIC: Yes. INTERVIEWER: So when did you? DJOKOVIC: I had Covid twice, I had Covid in June 2020 and I had Covid recently in – I was tested positive – PCR – 16th of December 2021. Djokovic isn’t the only player or tennis official caught up under this. The federal government cancelled the visas of Czech player Renata Voráčová, as well as another unnamed official. They had all already entered Australia by the time their visas were cancelled. Voráčová has been housed in the same hotel Djokovic has been in, while the official voluntarily agreed to leave Australia. Three days ago the Czech embassy issued a “please explain” to the federal government over Voráčová’s detention. We will have to wait and see what their response will be today. The overturning of Djokovic’s visa cancellation was on grounds we don’t know exist for the other cases. Of course it is all riding on whether the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, decides to cancel Djokovic’s visa once again. Australian politicians are reacting to the government agreeing to un-cancel the visa. While Novak’s fans were celebrating his release from detention, the government’s lawyer dropped the fact that the immigration minister will consider using a separate power to cancel his visa. Under that power, in section 133C(3) of the Migration Act, Alex Hawke would have to be satisfied: That a ground exists to cancel the visa – in this case the purported threat to public health because he is unvaccinated; The visa-holder “does not satisfy the minister that the ground does not exist”; and That it would be in the public interest to cancel the visa. That decision is not subject to the rules of natural justice. Yes, Australian immigration law really is this harsh. Interesting throwback that judge Anthony Kelly made at the end there, albeit not directly referring to prime minister Scott Morrison. Last week on Novak Djokovic’s visa being cancelled, Morrison said “rules are rules” and everyone had to follow them. At the end, in ordering to overturn the decision, Kelly said: We all play by the same rules. The reason why this minister for home affairs in this proceeding has agreed that the delegate’s decision should be set aside is for the reasons set out in the notation. Stated in other terms: those rules were not observed. To summarise: The Australian government has agreed to revoke the decision to cancel Novak Djokovic’s visa last week, meaning the visa he came to Australia on stands, and he will be released from detention and get his passport and other personal effects back. The reason for this is the government acknowledged it didn’t give Djokovic enough time after notifying him of the intent to cancel his visa to speak to others and respond fully. Notwithstanding that, the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, can now personally intervene and decide to cancel his visa anyway on entirely new grounds. Which the government flagged in court may be something that happens. If that happens, it could end up back in court because Djokovic would face being banned from Australia for three years if the minister decides to cancel the visa. The hearing has ended now. That’s all for now. Government counsel Christopher Tran says the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, will consider whether to exercise a personal power of cancelling the visa. That means that once the decision is revoked, Hawke could re-cancel it, as was flagged earlier in the day. Kelly notes that if the minister makes a decision to remove, then Djokovic cannot return for three years, and it could be appealed. He expects to be “fully informed in advance” if he is required for future proceedings. “In a view, the stakes have risen rather than receded,” he said. Judge Anthony Kelly reads out a minute agreed to by both the government and Djokovic, where he quashes the decision to cancel Novak Djokovic’s visa, orders government to pay costs, and for Djokovic to be released from detention in 30 minutes with his passport and personal effects released to him. The minute notes Djokovic was allowed until 8.30am when he was originally detained to response to the notification to cancel his visa, but the decision was made at 7.42am. It found if he had had more time he could have consulted more widely and responded further than he was able to. This is why it was so delayed: they were coming to an agreement. And the court is back temporarily. Djokovic’s lawyers confirm that he is there in the room with them. The court has provided an update that the hearing is still temporarily adjourned, and they do intend to come back at some point today. But we do not know when that will be, exactly. We are still waiting on the court to resume. Apologies, this live blog has been like a Samuel Beckett play for much of the day. A protester at the Park Hotel. Make of it what you will. The hearing is back under way. Christopher Tran, counsel for the federal government, flags that the injunction keeping Novak Djokovic in Australia is due to expire at 4pm, and he is minded to extend it to 4.30pm at least. Judge Anthony Kelly extends it to 8pm. That means it’ll be hopefully finalised today. And we’ve temporarily adjourned again. There are now about 14,000 people watching the YouTube livestream as we wait for the hearing to recommence. A white van has left the Park Hotel after Novak Djokovic was allowed to move to another, unknown address, so he can watch the court proceedings remotely. Guardian Australia cannot verify if the tennis star was inside the van, which had its windows blackened out and left the centre at around 3pm. There were extra police on the scene and a large crowd of media taking photos of it as it left. On Monday afternoon, Federal Circuit Court Judge Anthony Kelly ordered that the Australian Border Force must allow Djokovic out of the Carlton immigration centre so he can watch the hearing from another location. He will come back to the hotel tonight if his appeal is not finalised. The order reads: The respondent, by her servants or agents, including the Australian Border Force, take all steps and do all things as may be necessary to bring the applicant to premises as specified by the applicant’s solicitors on Monday, 10 January 2022 (and each day thereafter, including upon the delivery of judgment), to permit him to remain there until the conclusion of each hearing and to secure his safe return to detention upon the conclusion of each hearing. My bad, the case is now resuming at 3.45pm. So it’s another 20 minutes. We are still waiting for the court to resume. In the meantime you can read Paul Karp’s wrap of the first half of the day below. Nigel Farage is expressing a lot of sympathy towards Djokovic’s plight, but Andy Murray has a response. The rest of today’s hearing will now be streamed on YouTube from 3.15pm AEST. Novak Djokovic is allowed out of the Park Hotel, where he has been held since his visa was cancelled, for the duration of his court case. Most of that will be spent with his lawyers watching the stream. And the court has been adjourned until 3.15pm AEST, which is an hour and 15 minutes away for those of you in different time zones. Tran is outlining how he will respond on behalf of the government to Djokovic’s arguments after the lunch break. First he says he will go through how a response was given from Djokovic after the notice to cancel his visa. Then he will explain how procedural fairness was not denied because the decision on when to commence the interview is dealt with in statutory code. He will then go to the argument about unreasonableness. He says much of the oral submission will be about the process the delegate followed in making the decision to cancel Djokovic’s visa. Tran has otherwise just been going through case law he will be referring to, including this amusing bit: I think it will be useful for your honour to consider two cases - both of them are going to be losses of mine, so I’ll be revisiting happy memories. Tran argues that Judge Anthony Kelly cannot find that Border Force officials pressured Djokovic during the interview process. Kelly responds that he would be “most reluctant on the available evidence” to suggest an actual intention to pressure, but it doesn’t “kill the point” that Djokovic felt pressured. He says over a period of about eight hours, delegates were “darting in and out” of the interview room, which was being recorded, so Djokovic did feel pressured. Djokovic’s lawyers have finished their oral submissions, and have proposed orders including Djokovic’s release from detention if they are successful. We are now onto Christopher Tran, the counsel for the federal government, who will speak for about half an hour before we go to a break. We are now going through the transcript of the interview between Djokovic and Border Force officers. The visa was cancelled at 7.29am, and Djokovic was informed at 7.42am. He had been asking for until 8.30am to respond to the cancellation notice, and needed to speak to people. The government made the decision on the basis of what he had provided up to that point. The government suggests “a response” made from Djokovic counts as responding to the notice to cancel the visa, while Djokovic’s counsel argues that reading would change it from someone having a right to a response, to the delegate for the minister having discretion over how much or little of a response from someone counts in responding to the notice. In submissions, the government has argued that to allow such extensions of time would amount to filibustering. The federal circuit court has published an order that shows yesterday Judge Anthony Kelly agreed to allow Novak Djokovic to view the hearing away from the Park Hotel, where he is being held in detention. It said that the home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, must help “bring the applicant to premises as specified by the applicant’s solicitors on Monday, 10 January 2022 ... to permit him to remain there until the conclusion of each hearing and to secure his safe return to detention upon the conclusion of each hearing”. The order does not state where Djokovic is viewing today’s hearing from. Now we are onto Djokovic’s counsel going through why there should have been discretion against the cancelling of his visa. Wood says Djokovic was calling on the delegate to the minister not to cancel his visa, based on all the advice he was provided from Tennis Australia and the federal government prior to arriving in Australia that he was eligible for exemption. “Nowhere does the delegate in the reasons that are given engage with that at all,” Wood says. All that is mentioned is that if the cancellation is made, then Djokovic won’t be able to come back to Australia for three years. Wood says the delegate for the minister making the decision to cancel Djokovic’s visa has not provided evidence that previous infection from Covid-19 is not a valid reason for medical exemption from being vaccinated against Covid-19 prior to entering Australia. And in that case, the only evidence that can be relied upon is the Atagi guidelines, which did say vaccination can be deferred for up to six months from infection as a valid reason for a medical exemption. Wood says Djokovic isn’t trying to argue he is fully vaccinated against Covid-19, and that’s not sought as part of this case. Djokovic’s counsel, Nicholas Wood, is now going through the process medical practitioners go through to register someone on the Australian Immunisation Register for people who register as not being able to get vaccinated against Covid-19 on medical grounds. Under “temporary vaccine exemption”, it allows people to tick a box for “acute major medical illness”, and then the guidelines refer to the Atagi advice document on major medical illnesses that mention having a PCR-confirmed Covid-19 infection in the past six months. “This is the critical Atagi document ... it is an eminently clear expression by Atagi ... that a valid reason for a temporary exemption for an acute major medical condition ... [includes a] PCR confirmed infection,” Wood says. He says this advice is unremarkable; someone who has recently had Covid-19 has some level of natural immunity from having had Covid-19. He said vaccination “is not advisable” and would have limited utility for someone who has recently had Covid-19, combined with the risk of an adverse effect. Those are his words. And I am back in. It appears they had a bit of an adjournment but should be back underway shortly. And we are still trying to get back into the livestream. Apologies. I regret to inform you the feed has died again. The full quote from Kelly there: In the waking hours of Thursday morning, at 4am a person is instructed to and complies with instruction to turn off his phone, is effectively incommunicado for the entire or vast majority of the period from midnight to 7:42am from when the cancellation is effected. [Djokovic] is putting to the delegate...’if you would let me have enough time so when Tennis Australia is awake, when my agent is awake and I’m able to communicate with them by telephone we can effectively take up the opportunity embodied in this invitation to provide you anything further you might want’. Wood says the Department of Home Affairs, before [Djokovic] left, said Djokovic met the requirements for quarantine-free travel. “He’s made the declaration, provided the evidence even though it was not required, and then he received [notice] from the Department of Home Affairs ... saying the application has been assessed and meets the required for quarantine-free travel.” Wood says any reasonable person would have considered he ticked every box. He says Djokovic, in the transcript of the interview with Border Force at the border, said that he was confused, he had done everything right, and if he hasn’t then he would like time to contact lawyers for advice. Judge Kelly then replies that the transcript shows, rather than being denied time to speak to lawyers in the morning before his visa was cancelled, it was then “reneged” upon by the government. We are now going through Djokovic’s travel declaration before he arrived in Australia. It was filled out by his agent. His counsel Nicholas Wood notes in the request for declaration of vaccination, Djokovic has claimed he cannot be vaccinated on medical grounds. When prompted to provide proof, Djokovic uploaded the medical exemption document from the CMO at Tennis Australia. Kelly says a “matter that has really preoccupied me” is the status attached to the Tennis Australia document, and questions why it was not accepted by the delegate making the decision on the visa: Here, a professor and an eminently qualified physician have produced and provided to the applicant a medical exemption. Further to that, that medical exemption and the basis on which it was given was separately given by a further independent expert specialist panel established by the Victorian state government and that document was in the hands of the delegate. The point I am agitated about is ‘what more could this man have done?’ And we are back. Judge Kelly has noted that in his interview Djokovic said words to the effect of “if you let me talk to people I will try and get what you want”. Nicholas Wood replied that he was “doing his level best to provide everything” he could and “did indeed provide that evidence from medical practitioners, before he boarded the aircraft”. Wood again argues it is “manifestly incorrect” that the biosecurity determination requires both a declaration of an exemption and evidence of the exemption - only the former is required, Djokovic’s team argues. Any conclusion that Djokovic breached the determination is “clearly erroneous”, Wood says. Mr Djokovic did provide evidence both before boarding and upon arriving of the matter. The court has temporarily adjourned. I think dealing with more technical issues. Justice Anthony Kelly notes the requirement to provide evidence would have been required by the parliament - either by regulation or legislation - if that was intended, and he notes that there are 30 penalty units under the Biosecurity Act for contravention - i.e. misleading on declarations, which would act as a deterrent. 30 penalty units is about $5,500. Incidentally, Kelly also tells Djokovic’s counsel they won’t need to ask for more time for oral submissions until about 1.45pm AEST. Which is about three hours after they have been talking. We’d need to hear from the government counsel after that. The oral submissions from both parties was originally scheduled to go to 3pm. Wood says under the requirements on the visa application, Djokovic made a declaration of the medical exemption from vaccination as he was required to, and was not required to provide the evidence for that medical exemption. He said it was patently false to suggest the medical evidence was required. But he notes that Djokovic ultimately did provide that evidence. Djokovic’s counsel, Nicholas Wood, has accused the Australian government’s delegate of an “utter paucity of evidence” in the section of the notice in which they were required to explain why grounds to cancel the visa exist. Wood said the description that “all and only” earlier evidence set out above was the basis for the decision means that ANY problem in the earlier evidence can invalidate the ultimate decision. Judge Anthony Kelly has noted that the ONLY ground the delegate relied on when deciding to cancel Djokovic’s visa is that: ”the presence of its holder in Australia is or may be, or would or might be, a risk to: (i) the health, safety or good order of the Australian community or a segment of the Australian community”. Nicholas Wood argued this was “more than a typo” in the decision, but a “confusing blend of two grounds”, including a separate ground that the applicant had not been immigration cleared. He argued that the “only expression of satisfaction” of the test was a mash-up of two grounds so there “wasn’t the requisite state of satisfaction to enliven the power” and the decision was invalid. Kelly doubts that - he notes that all the grounds in section 116(1) are “disjunctive”; the delegate decides on one ground, or another, or another, not some combination of them. Djokovic’s lawyers are arguing to the court that on the first ground of the cancellation of his visa, the notice of the intention to cancel his visa was “defective”, in part because it was relied on a “mash-up” of grounds required to cancel the visa. The Federal Circuit Court has begun hearing Novak Djokovic’s case seeking his Australian visa to be reinstated. After a 45-minute delay in which the live stream was not operative, I’m now getting both audio and video of the hearing. Judge Anthony Kelly is quizzing Djokovic’s legal team about the notices given to him about the intention to cancel his visa, and asking them to go through the timeline of Djokovic’s interview with Border Force. Djokovic’s team is arguing the notices were pre-printed. Kelly said: It’s absurd to think the delegate arrived at 4am and gave to the applicant a copy of part C before there’d been any interview. Djokovic’s lawyers replied that he received a notice of intention to cancel his visa at 3:55am. Judge Kelly warned him not to refer to this as a “Noic” because he “hates acronyms”. I have a live stream up and running now. Updates coming soon. A spokesperson for the court says the hearing is going ahead, but the live stream is still down: I am now advised the hearing has started. The court is working to rectify the situation. Apologies. Still waiting on the live broadcast. I received a service error a short time ago. I am hoping this means they are fixing it. My colleague Cait Kelly on the ground outside the Park Hotel where Novak Djokovic is being held, along with over 30 asylum seekers who have been there for much longer. They are working on it. And we are struggling to get the live feed to work. Standby. The hearing will be getting underway in about five minutes. I am eagerly refreshing the live feed and hoping it holds out. At the moment, the 34-year-old tennis number one is being held at a quarantine hotel called Park Hotel in Melbourne’s north. In that hotel are over 30 asylum seekers who were transferred to Australia from our offshore detention system for medical treatment a few years ago. The men have been held in Australia’s immigration detention system for around nine years. Protesters in support of the asylum seekers have been holding vigils outside of the hotel in the past few days hoping to bring attention to the plight of the asylum seekers, given the massive global focus on Djokovic. The ABC showed footage earlier this morning of some of the protesters being arrested by police, but it is unclear what for. My colleague Cait Kelly is on the ground outside the hotel, so we will hopefully have some updates soon. You can find the submissions for the various parties online here. Here’s a summary of what Novak Djokovic is claiming in court about why he believes the government made an error in cancelling his visa: The Institute of Public Health in Serbia recorded Djokovic was Covid-19 positive on 16 December, and this positive test result formed the basis of the medical exemption he received from Tennis Australia and the Victorian government on 30 December. Djokovic argues he relies on the advice of the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisations, which said vaccination can be deferred for up to six months due to a Covid-19 infection. He argues, therefore, it is illogical that the government now argues that recent Covid-19 infection is not a grounds for medical exemption from vaccination. He is also arguing he was denied procedural fairness in not being given more time between given the notice of the intent to cancel his visa at 4am on 6 January, and when it was cancelled at 7.42am. He wanted to wait until he could speak to his lawyers at 8am. The government has argued: That granting such a wait would amount to a procedural filibuster given Djokovic had given a response about his application during the interviews in the morning. The Atagi advice on vaccination exemption needs to be read with a December guide on vaccination put out by Atagi which states that people are able to be vaccinated against Covid-19 after recovering from acute major medical illness from Covid-19, and says “the evidence is that the applicant has recovered”. If the court grants Djokovic a win, the government could once again cancel his visa and detain him. Good morning from Melbourne, and welcome to our live blog of tennis number one Novak Djokovic’s appeal in court against the cancellation of his Australian visa ahead of the Australian Open. I’m Josh Taylor and I will be bringing you all the updates from the court live stream. The hearing will kick off at 10am AEST in Melbourne, which is 11pm GMT or 6pm EST. You can read our most recent stories on the submissions to the court from Djokovic’s lawyers and the federal government while you are waiting, but I will be going through those in more detail in a minute. If you want to watch the live stream yourself, you will be able to view it here, but a reminder that recording, photography or broadcasting of the hearing is not permitted. Late on Sunday the court issued a new link, meaning it will be view-only for the public, thereby avoiding the mess of every participant being able to use their camera and microphone, which would have made the hearing a disaster.Heartbreak for Zimbabwe: Norman Mapeza and his men would almost certainly have bitten your hand off for a point ahead of the game and thoroughly deserved after more than holding their own against the group favourites after a shaky opening 20 minutes. The concession of a penalty in the final seconds of the fourth and final minute of added time was a total gut-punch but they still have Group B games to come against Guinea and Malawi (who play later this afternoon) in which to turn things around. Peep! Peep! Peeeeeeeep! It’s all over in Bafoussam, where Senegal have won all three points with an extremely late smash-and-grab. It looked a harsh (but probably fair) penalty, with Kelvin Madzongwe touching the ball with a raised arm as he dived in to block a shot. Did he handle it? Yes. Was it intentional? Absolutely not. Should it have been a penalty in that case? Like most other people, I no longer have a clue. Senegal score at the death! The penalty stands and Sadio Mane makes no mistake. That is heartbreaking for Zimbabwe, who don’t deserve to lose this game. Oh no!!! Kelvin Madzongue handles the ball while diving in to block a shot with just seconds of added to go. Referee Mario Escobar points to the spot but we’re going to have a VAR consultation. 90+4 min: Just seconds remain and Zimnbabwe boot the ball out for a throw-in. 90+2 min: Senegal win a throw-in deep in Zimbabwe territory. An attempted cross is blocked by Gerald Tagwara and the ball goes out for a goal-kick to the underdogs. 90 min: We’re into the final minute and a rueful Sadio Mane picks himself from the ground after going down under a challenge from Gerald Takwara a few yards outside the Zimbabwe penalty area. He was expecting a free-kick but didn’t get one from a referee who has been very impressive today. Up with nonsense, play-acting and time-wasting Senor Escobar refuses to put. 87 min: The stretcher-bearers are on again, this time to fetch Zimbabwe skipper Knowledge Musona from the field. He’s replaced by Never Tigere. I don’t think any of the players for whom the men with the stretcher have been summoned have been seriously hurt - I think they keep getting called on by the referee in a bid to avoid time-wasting by assorted Zimbabwe players. 87 min: Correction, it was Teenage Adebe who got the weak touch on Musona’s drilled free-kick. 83 min: Free-kick for Zimbabwe, on the byline, halfway between the corner flag and the Senegal goal. Musona drills a low ball into the penalty area, it takes a deflection off his unwitting team-mate Wadi and rolls into the arms of Seny Dieng, who got down quickly. 83 min: Zimbabwe win a corner and Musona’s inswinger is headed clear. 82 min: Into the final 10 minutes we go continuing a second half that has been largely played at walking pace, only very occasionally sparking into life. On the sideline, Aliou Cisse is clapping enthusiastically trying to gee up Senegal players who have under-performed in this Group B opener. 80 min: I don’t think Idrissa and Papa Gueye are related but am happy to stand corrected if it turns out they are. 78 min: Senegal substitution: Papa Gueye replaces Boulaye Dia. 76 min: Senegal break upfield on a lightning fast counter-attack but Zimbabwe goalkeeepr Petro Mhari does well to get down and cut out the low cross from Boulaye Dia to Sadio Mane at the far post. 74 min: Zimbabwe win a free-kick near one of the corner flag. From that comes a corner, although I thought the ball arced wide from Musona’s delivery before curling back on to the pitch and being put out for a corner. Nothing comes of the second set-piece. 70 min: There’s another break in play as Kundai Benyu is stretchered off with some manner of knock or other that doesn’t look too serious. He’s replaced by Thabani Kamusoko. Our referee seemed to think Benyu was time-wasting and told the player he’d stopped his watch before ordering the stretcher-bearers on to carry him from the field. 68 min: Sadio Mane goes to ground under another clumsy challenge from Onismor Bhasera. The resultant free-kick is floated into the Zimbabwe penalty area, where Abdou Diallo heads high and wide at the far post. 65 min: Senegal substitution: Habib Diallo on for Keita Balde. We have two Diallo’s - Habib and Abdou – on the pitch now but I can confirm they are not related. 64 min: A weighted through ball from Sadio Mane is chased down the inside left by Blade, who crosses straight into the arms of Petros Mhari as he attempts to square the ball. 62 min: There’s a break in play as stretcher-bearers are summoned to ferry Zimbabwe midfielder Kundai Benyu from the pitch. He gets to his feet, walks off the pitch and quickly returns. 60 min: A long ball over the top from Zimbabwe’s Takudzwa Chinwemwe lands just inside the penalty area, making life easy for Seengal goalkeeper Seny Dieng but decidedly more difficult for Knowledge Musona, who was chasing it in vain. 57 min: Very little is happening and both teams already look as if they’d happily settle for a draw in this Group B opener. Zimbabwe would take one, without doubt but I expected Senegal to have more about them. I suppose in some sort of mitigation for the players, it is 30 degrees celsius in Bafoussam this afternoon. 55 min: Onismore Bhasera goes to take a throw-in deep in Senegal territory, picking up a water bottle on the touchline and taking several long swigs from it on his way to do so. 52 min: Bouna Sarr goesd down injured after shipping a kick on the right shin from Zimbabwe’s Onismore Bhasera. He should have got a free-kick for that but didn’t. He picks himself from the ground looking slightly wounded in every sense of the word. 51 min: The game is being played at a very pedestrian pace in the early stages of this second half. There’s little or no urgency from either side. 49 min: Abdou Diallo is penalised halfway inside the Senegal half for bundling over Tino Kadewere. Nothing comes of the free-kick. 47 min: Senegal win their first corner of the second half. With the goalkeeper stranded in no-mans land after coming for the ball, Papa Abou Cisse misses with a free header into an open goal. 46 min: Play resumes with one change in personnel in the Zimbabwe ranks. Lyon winger-striker Tino Kadewere is on for Prince Dube. Peep! Without playing so much as a second of added time, the referee draws the first half to a close. After a poor start in which they were completely dominated, Zimbabwe have grown into the game, look increasingly confident and have had the better chances in the past 15 minutes. It’s an absorbing encounter but lacking a little in urgency and goalmouth action. That could change in the second half. 44 min: Zimbabwe left wing-back Bruce Kanga tries his luck with a wild shot from outside the Senegal penalty area. His low diagonal drive fizzes well wide of the far upright. 43 min: Papa Abou Cisse stretches to head a long diagonal ball from Zimbabwe into the Senegal penalty area clear. 41 min: Here’s a Football Weekly podcast some of us made earlier. If you’re new to the Guardian, you can listen on the website or download for free on all the usual podcast platforms. 36 min: A poor first touch from Idrissa Gueye as the ball drops to his feet about seven yards from the Zimbabwe goal allows Petros Mhari to dash off his line and smother the ball at the PSG midfielder’s feet. 35 min: No longer as dominant as they were in the opening 25 minutes, Senegal still look superior. There are no high blocks or gegenpressing from either side, for anyone who might be wondering. Zimbabwe win themselves another corner after Balde has a snap-shot blocked 33 min: Keita Balde was booked for protesting over-zealously in the aftermath of conceding that free-kick. I can’t say I blame him for feeling aggrieved but the referee wasn’t having any of his lip. 32 min: From directly in front of goal, a couple of yards outside the Senegal penalty area, Knowledge Musona tries to chip the ball into the top corner. High and wide. 30 min: Now Zimbabwe win their first corner of the game after getting in behind the Senegal defence and forcing Abdou Diallo into action. They go on to win a free-kick just outside the Senegal penalty area for handball, when a piledriver from Kundai Benyu smashes into Keita Balde from close range. That seems harsh. 29 min: Senegal win a corner after Teenage Hadebe leaps to head a cross wide of his own goal. Nothing comes from the set-piece. 26 min: Elsewhere in Group B, Guinea take on Malawi in a game scheduled to take place an hour or so after this one ends. It will be refereed by Salima Mukansanga, who will become the first woman to take charge of a game at the finals of Afcon. 23 min: Sadio Mane latches on to a hacked clearance out by the left touchline, then does brilliantly to keep it in play and gallop down the pitch. He takes the ball around a defender, cuts inside and sends a weak low shot straight into the chest of the onrushing Petros Mari. It was a decent save but Mane should have done better. It would have been a wonderful individual goal. 20 min: Bouna Sarr latches on to a neat reverse pass from Sadio Mane in the Zimbabwe penalty area and sends a low diagonal effort rolling wide of the far post. He should have scored! 19 min: Zimbabwe finally get a shot on goal but Knowledge Musona’s effort from 25 yards out is wayward. 18 min: Senegal’s Ibrahima Mbaye unleashes a shot from distance but fails to hit the target. 17 min: Senegal goalkeeper Seny Dieng, who plays for QPR and starts in place of Chelsea’s Edouard Mendy, has yet to touch the ball in this game. With the wide camera angle, his goal has yet to hove into view. 15 min: Cheikhou Kouyate handles the ball in midfield but play continues as the referee deems it accidental. We’ve had no possession percentage stats thus far but I’d hazard an educated guess that Senegal must be in the mid-seventies to low eighties. 13 min: Zimbabwe continue to sit deep, inviting Senegal on to them. One suspects they won’t hold out for long as Senegal, even without several key players, look a class above them. 10 min: Senegal winger Keita Balde scoops the ball over the bar from eight yards out after it had bounced kindly for him. He puts his head in his hands, ruing a dreadful miss. For me, Clive, he simply has to hit the target from there and at least make the goalkeeper work. 8 min: No more chances of any kind as both sides try to feel their way into the game. Senegal are definitely in the ascendency, with Zimbabwe struggling to get the ball out of their own half for any length of time. 6 min: Zimbabwe have lined up in a 5-3-2, while Senegal have opted for a 4-3-3. Sadio Mane seems to be playing in the centre of the front three, as opposed to his more usual spot on the left of a three for Liverpool. 5 min: Zimbabwe keeper Mhari launches a kick-out down the pitch, which looks like it might be synthetic. The pitch, that is. Not the kick-out. THe ball’s returned his way and Zimbabwe win a throw-in deep inside their own half. 3 min: Senegal continue to dominate possession in these very early stages in a stadium with uncovered, largely empty stands and an athletics track surrounding the pitch. 1 min: Oof! Senegal take the first shot in anger and it’s a good one, Bouna Sarr’s fizzer from just outside the Zimbabwe penalty area bouncing on its way the wrong side of the right upright with Zimbabwe goalkeeper Petros Mhari looking beaten. 1 min: Zimbabwe get the ball rolling, the referee, Mario Escobar, having had to interrupt their pre-match huddle to get proceedings under way on time. They wear yellow shirts with red, black and orange splashes on the front, with yellow shorts and socks. The players of Senegal wear white shirts, shorts and socks with green trim. The flags of both countries are brought out. They’re followed moments later by the match officials and players of both teams. The stadium looks almost empty but there is one pocket of enthusiastic Senegal fans visible, colourfully dressed with many of them blowing vuvuzelas. It’s time for the national anthems, with Senegal’s played first. Next up, it’s that of Zimbabwe and kick-off is just a couple of minutes away. Zimbabwe may be missing their Marvelous ... but they do have a Teenage (Hadebe), Prince (Dube) and Knowledge (Musona) in their starting XI. What splendid names. They also have an Onismor (Bhasera) among their three centre-backs and our Irish readers may already have twigged that he sounds very like an island off the coast of Galway. Senegal: Seny Dieng, Mbaye, Cisse, Abdou Diallo, Toure, Bouna Sarr, Kouyate, Idrissa Gueye, Dia, Mane, Balde. Subs: Habib Diallo, Lopy, Name, N’Diaye, Pape Gueye, Badara Faty. Zimbabwe: Mhari, Takwara, Hadebe, Bhasera, Chimwemwe, Wadi, Madzongwe, Benyu, Kangwa, Dube, Musona. Subs: Murwira, Mudimu, Moyo, Kadewere, Tigere, Kamusoko, Mahachi, Muskwe, Muduwa, Shumba, Mapisa. Norman Mapeza speaks: “We cannot celebrate that some of their players were affected by Covid-19 because many people have lost their lives, I wish all the affected players well,” said the Zimbabwe coach when asked if the outbreak in the Senegal camp increased his side’s chances of getting a result. Following Zimbabwe’s most recent warm-up game, a scoreless draw with Sudan, Mapeza was asked about the surprise retirement from international football of Khama Billiat last month. “Look, we all respect Khama’s decision but lets not take anything away from these boys,” he said. “If we keep on talking about the players who are not here, I don’t think we will be doing justice for these boys.” Aliou Cisse speaks: “It’s a difficult and complicated situation,” said the Senegal coach and former Portsmouth and Birmingham City defender of the Covid outbreak in his squad. “We are going to be competitive and those there are going to play for those who are absent. We are still going into the game against Zimbabwe full of confidence.” Early team news: Senegal will be without Edouard Mendy after the Chelsea goalkeeper tested positive for Covid-19 since linking up with the squad. Napoli central defender Kalidou and Alanyaspor striker Famara Diedhiou are also out with the virus which has also sidelined Pape Sarr, Nampalys Mendy and Mame Thiam. The upshot is that Senegal coach Aliou Cisse has just 17 players available for this opening game. While Zimbabwe have a clean bill of health in terms of Covid, they are without Marvelous Nakamba for this tournament. The Aston Villa midfielder is expected to be out for at least another two months after undergoing successful knee surgery three weeks ago. Winger Khama Billiat is also absent, having shocked the nation by announcing his retirement for reasons that remain shrouded in mystery last month. The 20,000-capacity Kouekong Stadium in the suburbs of Bafoussam, a city in the west highlands of Cameroon, is the setting for today’s Group B opener. Currently rated the 20th best side in the world Fifa, Senegal are favourites to beat a Zimbabwe team ranked 101 places below them in the footballing pecking order as they attempt to go one better than their defeat at the hands of Algeria in the final of this competition three years ago. However, the Lions of Teranga may not have it all their own way as they go about trying to win the Africa Cup of Nations for the first time, as injuries and an outbreak of Covid in the camp has left them without several key players. Zimbabwe’s ambitions are less lofty and they come into the tournamenet hoping to avoid a third consecutive group stage exit. “I am more that happy,” said their coach, Norman Mapeza ahead of today’s game. “We are ready. We just have to go there with maximum concentration and a positive mind. It’s all about mental strength and that is what I have been telling the guys. Any result is achievable in football.” Kick-off in Bafoussam is at 1pm (GMT) but stay tuned in the meantime for team news and build-up.Every now and then, a football match comes along that defies explanation. “Was Roma-Juve a comeback or a collapse?” asked the front-page of Monday’s Corriere dello Sport, but those options seemed too narrow. This game was a melodrama, a saga, a whole HBO series worth of narratives crammed into 90 minutes, complete with celebrity cameos and premature farewells to your favourite characters. Juventus won 4-3, and that was improbable enough. The Bianconeri had been the lowest-scoring team in the top half of the table, with 28 goals to show for their first 20 matches. Roma had conceded only eight all season at the Stadio Olimpico. They did so three times in seven second-half minutes on Sunday, throwing away a 3-1 lead after already having surrendered a 1-0 advantage at the start. The last goal was scored by Mattia De Sciglio, a 29-year-old full-back who had found the net just once before in his professional career – and that half a decade before. That was not the final plot twist in a game that featured a red card, a penalty, game-changing substitutions, crucial VAR interventions and an injury that could spell longer-term disaster for Juventus but also Italy’s World Cup qualifying bid. All this with Francesco Totti making a rare appearance in the stands. Perhaps, though, we ought to start at the beginning. Before kick-off we knew that this could be a defining game in both teams’ seasons. Roma, seventh in the table, had a chance to pull level with fifth-placed Juventus. But the Bianconeri needed a win to stay within touching distance of Atalanta ahead of them. Expectations were low for Roma after a disappointing performance against a depleted Milan on Thursday. They had lost 3-1 to opponents missing their first-choice central midfield pairing as well as three-quarters of a starting defence. But José Mourinho changed up his tactics, swapping away from the three-man defence he used at San Siro to mirror Juventus in a 4-2-3-1. He named Ainsley Maitland-Niles as his right-back, just two days after the player arrived on loan from Arsenal. Bryan Cristante was drafted into midfield and academy graduate Felix Afena-Gyan given a start on the left wing. Individually, those players did not all sparkle. Juventus’s first goal arrived when Federico Chiesa forced Maitland-Niles on to his heels with a powerful run down the left, before serving Paulo Dybala in the middle. Cristante should have been tracking the Argentinian but was caught ball-watching. Dybala had all the time he needed to pick out the bottom corner. Roma’s change in shape, however, was effective. Juventus’s manager, Massimiliano Allegri, was serving a suspension but his sideline surrogate, Marco Landucci, confessed that the switch caught them off guard. Cristante and Jordan Veretout held the middle of the pitch, starving their Juventus counterparts Manuel Locatelli and Rodrigo Bentancur of early possession. Roma won five corners in the game’s opening 11 minutes and took the lead from the last of those with a Tammy Abraham header. They could have had a penalty, and a chance to go 2-0 up, when Lorenzo Pellegrini’s shot rebounded from Matthijs De Ligt’s boot on to his outstretched arm. Instead, Juventus equalised through Dybala. But Roma stayed on top. They retook the lead on a deflected shot from Henrikh Mkhitaryan. Then Pellegrini, Roma’s captain, scored a magnificent free-kick to make it 3-1. The TV cameras tracked to his predecessor Totti. Here was your story: a passing-of-the-baton moment, the rise of a new Roma team made possible by the emergence of another homegrown captain. A Juventus comeback seemed implausible. Chiesa had exited the game before half-time with what immediately looked like a serious knee injury and has now been confirmed as a cruciate ligament tear – a hammer blow for club and country. Landucci sent on Álvaro Morata for Moise Kean in the 63rd minute. The Spaniard scarcely saw the ball for the next seven, but then, out of nowhere, conjured a game-changing assist, driving toward the touchline on the right, dragging the ball away from Roger Ibañez’s sliding challenge and floating a cross for Locatelli to head home. Just like that, the game was transformed. Dejan Kulusevski fired Juventus level, driving his shot into the ground and up into the roof of the net after Morata’s initial attempt was blocked. The goal was initially disallowed but VAR confirmed that there was no offside. Then Morata combined with Weston McKennie down the left, before the American chipped the ball over for De Sciglio to run inside. Chris Smalling got his head on the ball but could not intercept it. The full-back finished at the near post. Delirium. And a new story: Juventus rescued by Morata, the forward whose future had been in doubt amid reports of interest from Atletico Madrid. Only, this game still was not done. Roma won a penalty in the 81st minute, De Ligt handling the ball inside the area a second time. The Dutchman, already booked, was shown a red card. The cameras went back to Totti as Pellegrini stepped up, but this time we would not see either man celebrate. A weak spot-kick was saved by Wojciech Szczęsny – the Juventus goalkeeper who turned his career around during three seasons right here at Roma. When the full-time whistle finally went, half of the people inside the Olimpico looked to be in a daze. Juventus celebrated, but even Landucci joked that he hoped Allegri “comes back soon because I just lost five or six years of my life.” To throw away such an important game from such a commanding position could only be a hammer blow to Roma. Defeat left them nine points adrift of the Champions League places, and there are more damning statistics to be found. This is the first time since 1988-89 that the Giallorossi have been beaten at home by Juventus, Milan and Inter in the same season. A crestfallen Mourinho sought to portray the defeat afterwards as further evidence of the limitations of the squad he had inherited. “My heart hurts because I am not used to this profile of team,” he was quoted as saying in La Repubblica. “I am here to give the lads a way to improve. But I want the team to follow me in going above their limits, not that they should take me to their level.” Right now the question might be whether they have moved forward at all. Roma are eight points worse off than they were at the corresponding point last season, despite considerable summer investment. The Portugal midfielder Sérgio Oliveira is set to join on loan and it is possible that the club may do more business before the end of this month. There is no new signing, though, who can restore the opportunity they threw away to beat Juventus this weekend.Since Omicron first emerged in late November, teams of scientists in the UK and beyond have been racing to understand it. The results so far suggest that this new variant is producing a very different epidemic – which may mean that our approach to it needs to change too. Omicron immediately caused concern in the scientific community because it had 50 mutations compared with the original virus, many of which were known to produce significant changes in other variants. These were focused on the spike protein, which sits on the virus particle and acts as the key to allow it to enter human cells. With fellow scientists at the MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research (CVR), I worked on a study that suggests such a vast shift in the structure of the spike is very likely to affect the protection we get from vaccines. We (and others) found that two doses of the AstraZeneca, Pfizer and Moderna vaccines were significantly less effective against Omicron than other variants. This might in part explain why it is more transmissible than some other variants, given all our licensed vaccines to date are based on raising immunity to the spike protein of the earliest variant of the virus that emerged in Wuhan in December 2019. However, the response to three vaccines was markedly improved. Therefore, the UK’s strategy of ramping up the booster rollout after Omicron’s discovery was a good one, and will have had a huge impact on the number of severe cases presenting to hospitals in the coming weeks. Unfortunately this will not be enough to prevent the NHS coming under severe pressure as hospitalisations and deaths are still not fully decoupled from the large numbers of cases we are seeing in the UK. There is also the added pressure of staff shortages as a result of isolation following infection or exposure to infection. Meanwhile, people who are older or have underlying health conditions remain at a higher risk of severe illness. Those changes to the spike protein don’t just affect Omicron’s response to vaccines. One unexpected finding in our study and another study from Imperial College London was that Omicron has fundamentally changed the way it enters cells in the human body. Early reports are also suggesting that Omicron may cause a slightly less severe illness, which may be related to this change in the life cycle of the virus. We found that while previous variants enter human cells by fusing with the cell membrane, which may cause severe disease by allowing cell-to-cell transmission of the virus, Omicron is instead enveloped by the cell membrane inside a capsule which is then injected inside the cell. It has to escape from this capsule with the help of different proteins in the cell called cathepsins before it can divide and then infect other cells. These findings have now been confirmed by researchers from Imperial College London, who also went on to show that Omicron may preferentially infect cells in the nose and is less likely to infect lung cells. Further research will help us understand if we should upgrade our measures to prevent respiratory transmission of the virus as a result. The best way to optimise our immunity against this new variant would most likely be vaccines aimed at Omicron (and other variants that have not yet evolved). These would need to be tested in clinical trials and may be reserved for those most at risk given the expense and speed required to roll them out. Importantly, the finding that three doses of vaccine is far superior to two doses has bought us time. The emergence of new variants, which will probably continue, means that Covid requires us to be nimble in our research and response to the virus – whatever form it takes in future. Emma Thomson is a professor in infectious diseases at the MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus ResearchThe Labour leader, Keir Starmer, has said MPs should not receive a pay rise in April, given the severe cost of living squeeze facing the public in the coming months. MPs’ basic pay was frozen at £81,932 last year by the Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority (Ipsa), the watchdog that sets parliamentary salaries, but it is yet to make a recommendation for 2022-23. Starmer told broadcasters: “I think that MPs do not need a pay rise and we should all be saying that we don’t need that pay rise and it shouldn’t go ahead. “The mechanism is independent but I think it’s for me, as leader of the opposition, to say that I do not think we should have that pay rise.” Earlier, the prime minister’s official spokesman said Boris Johnson would expect Ipsa to show “restraint”, when setting pay for this year. “We would expect restraint on this, given current circumstances,” he said. The cost of living has shot up the political agenda in recent weeks, with domestic energy prices set to rise sharply, and the national insurance increase due to take effect in April. Economy-wide inflation hit 5.1% in November. Jacob Rees-Mogg, a cabinet minister, has called privately for the tax increase to be reversed, given the tough economic backdrop – but the proceeds are already earmarked to fund the extensive NHS backlog and tackle the crisis in social care. Johnson met the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, on Sunday to discuss possible measures for alleviating the squeeze on households – though the government has also continued to point to the existing measures in place, including the warm homes discount scheme. Johnson suggested at prime minister’s questions last week that the warm homes discount amounted to £140 a week for eligible households. It is in fact £140 a year. Ipsa was set up in the wake of the MPs’ expenses scandal, to remove political influence from decisions about pay and expenses for elected representatives. It usually recommends that MPs’ pay increases in line with an official measure of public sector pay growth known as KAC9; but it decided that was unrepresentative because of the distortions created by the Covid pandemic, and held pay fixed for 2021-22. After a consultation last year, Ipsa then announced that for the financial years beginning 2022, 2023 and 2024 it would continue to set the rate itself, because the after-effects of the pandemic meant official data would continue to be a “less reliable guide than usual to the underlying rate of wage growth”. Annual public sector pay growth in the three months to October was 2.7%, according to the Office for National Statistics.For nearly two years, a small army of lawyers has been trying to decide who to blame for Grenfell Tower’s dangerous cladding. At the outset of the latest phase of the public inquiry into the disaster, lead counsel warned the organisations involved against indulging in “a merry-go-round of buck-passing”. Some chance. After hundreds of hours of hearings where architects have blamed builders, builders have blamed manufacturers and manufacturers have blamed regulators, a conclusion about why 72 people died after their homes were wrapped in plastic that burned like petrol is still months away. Michael Gove now faces a similar problem as he seeks to pin responsibility for similar failures on not just one, but thousands of apartment buildings across England. It is a quagmire that has defeated several cabinet predecessors in charge of housing, to the anguish of hundreds of thousands of people whose homes have been rendered worthless. “We want to try and cut through that,” the secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities declared on Monday morning. Gove’s plan – to give developers until March to come up with a plan to foot the £4bn bill to fix cladding on medium-rise blocks – rests on giving the housebuilders very little room for manoeuvre and stopping them from pointing the finger elsewhere, at least in the first place. His team understand that the problem requires an urgent fix, not least with the fifth anniversary of the Grenfell fire looming in June and backbench MPs facing considerable pressure from constituents whose lives are in turmoil. They also recognise it doesn’t solve everyone’s building safety problems. But they have decided to start here. Gove will threaten to strip builders of valuable government contracts and access to subsidies such as the help-to-buy programme unless they promise to do two things: “Fund and undertake all necessary remediation of buildings over 11 metres that you have played a role in developing” and “make financial contributions this year and in subsequent years to a dedicated fund to cover the full outstanding cost to remediate unsafe cladding on 11-to 18-metre buildings”. The punishments for inaction could include a new law requiring them to pay, restricted access to government funding and public contracts, the pursuit of companies through the courts and even using planning powers to make their operations difficult. Gove has one more “blunt but heavy instrument” in his armoury: a tax hike. The government has already consulted on a new 4% tax on profits of residential property developers to raise £200m a year to help fund remediation works. This could be increased and the Treasury has given Gove permission to “use a high level threat of tax … as a means of gaining voluntary contributions from [developers]”. Some observers believe this will be a sufficiently tight vice to trigger action. They calculate housebuilders cannot afford to wreck their relationship with the government and will pay up and consider pursuing materials manufacturers and others with threats of legal action of their own. Stewart Baseley, the executive chairman of the Home Builders Federation, hinted at what may be to come when he accepted that leaseholders should not have to pay for remediation, but said builders should not cover the costs alone. The implication was: what about the companies like Kingspan and Arconic that made combustible cladding materials? What about the subcontractors who may have assembled them wrongly? If Gove doesn’t manage to quickly reach the £4bn target from the developers (and remember, previous appeals for developers to do the right thing failed), his department’s own coffers could be raided. That is an unappealing prospect given Gove’s responsibility for Downing Street’s flagship levelling up policy and the urgent need to keep investing in social housing. “Leaseholders shouldn’t pay, the polluter should pay and we want to work with everyone involved to get to a constructive solution,” Gove said on Monday. Whether that happens may come down to who blinks first.Nigel Farage, the former leader of the UK’s Brexit party, has drawn criticism on social media from Wimbledon champion Andy Murray and others after attacking Australia’s treatment of Novak Djokovic and visiting the player’s family in Belgrade. Farage, who has long praised Australia’s strict immigration policies and demanded the British government “take back control” of the country’s borders, on Monday tweeted his satisfaction after a judge ruled a government decision last week to revoke the tennis star’s visa was “unreasonable”. The decision was “a huge win for @DjokerNole this morning”, Farage said, when Djokovic was released from immigration detention after winning his challenge to remain in the country and pursue his attempt at a record 21st grand slam title. Farage also told GB News that if – as he is entitled to do – the country’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, decided to intervene and withdraw Djokovic’s visa once more on different grounds, Australia would resemble a banana republic. “I mean, is Australia a country based on the rule of law, or is it a country where governments can exercise arbitrary power?” Farage said. “If that judgment this morning is overruled, what’s the difference between Australia and a banana republic?” He said Australian authorities had used “really nasty tactics” against Djokovic, and called judge Anthony Kelly’s decision “the first really big victory” against “the big state, which has grown so much over the past two years of the pandemic”. Britain’s former world tennis No 1, Andy Murray, was one of many critics, retweeting a video of Farage with Djokovic’s family in the player’s trophy room and telling him: “Please record the awkward moment when you tell them you’ve spent most of your career campaigning to have people from eastern Europe deported.” Farage replied: “Dear Andy, you clearly don’t understand politics or the Brexit campaign but are filled with prejudice. Concentrate on the tennis and, a word of advice, crack a smile every now and again.” Murray responded with an emoji of a fish hooked on a line, seemingly implying he thought the former politician had swallowed the bait. Djokovic, a long-time vocal opponent of mandatory vaccination, told border officials he was unvaccinated and had had Covid-19 twice, with the more recent positive test dated 16 December, according to a transcript of his interview with customs officials. Kelly said it appeared Djokovic had received medical exemption from Covid-19 vaccination on the basis of that infection, and ruled the player was not given enough time to consult advisers so he could respond fully to the cancellation decision. Farage said he “believed firmly in freedom of choice” and if Djokovic had decided not to be vaccinated, that should be up to him. Australia’s immigration rules allow Hawke to use separate, personal powers to cancel the player’s visa as long as the minister is satisfied “a ground exists” to do so; that Djokovic can’t dissuade him of this; and that it would be “in the public interest”. Mary Crock, an immigration law professor, has said the country’s Migration Act gives immigration ministers “god-like powers” to cancel visas. “Everything that has gone before can be disregarded,” she said. “It is set up precisely for this situation.” Both before and since the Brexit referendum, however, Farage has consistently sung the praises of Australia’s tough immigration system, arguing that being able to emulate it was one of the main advantages for the UK of leaving the EU. “An Australian-style points system can be used to increase or decrease immigration numbers,” he tweeted in June 2019. “Does Boris Johnson want to reduce the numbers? I don’t think so.” In October 2015, he said: “If you want to take back control of your borders so that we can have an Australian-style immigration system, you have to vote to LeaveEU.” The following year, he tweeted that it was “clear now that for our national security as as for social cohesion we must leave EU and have Australian-style immigration system”. Andrew Bridgen, a prominent Conservative Eurosceptic and long-term supporter of tougher UK immigration laws, tweeted his support for Farage’s view, saying the Australian government had “got itself into a real mess” over the Djokovic affair and “overruling the judge and deporting him now would … make it worse”. The actor, activist and vocal Covid lockdown sceptic Laurence Fox also tweeted his backing for Djokovic, describing the player as “an inspiration” and adding: “You have shown that if one person stands, however powerful, that many can stand alongside them. Thank you. Now please go and win!” Asked if Djokovic should be allowed to compete at Wimbledon if he has not been vaccinated, the British prime minister, Boris Johnson, said it was “important for the Australian authorities to make their own dispositions” adding: “I believe in vaccination.”After a humiliating 23-5 drubbing by the Irish at last year’s Cheltenham Festival, the good news for British jumps racing following the weekend’s action is that the first race of the 2022 Festival, the Supreme Novice Hurdle on 15 March, is looking like a banker for the home team. Constitution Hill was deeply impressive as he quickened clear on the bridle to win the Tolworth Hurdle at Sandown on Saturday and is now a worthy 9-4 favourite; his biggest rival may well be Jonbon (3-1), a stable companion at the Nicky Henderson yard. The bad news, however, is that the rest of the meeting threatens to be a case of what the late Yogi Berra described as “deja vu all over again”. There are 19 non-handicap races at the Festival and Irish-trained runners currently head the market in 17. Henderson’s Shishkin, in the Queen Mother Champion Chase, is the only other ante-post favourite stabled in Britain. The nine handicaps are much more open, and British yards will account for the majority of the runners – but they had two-thirds of the handicap runners last time around, and Ireland still went home with seven wins from nine. It was against this distinctly unpromising backdrop that Ruth Quinn, the British Horseracing Authority’s director of international racing and racing development, released details last week of what the BHA plans to do to “ensure [Irish] raiding parties in future years face even stiffer opposition”. Quinn chaired the BHA’s Quality Jump Racing Review Group, which was formed in May in the aftermath of the thrashing at Cheltenham, and a Grand National at Aintree in which 10 of the first 11 home were trained in Ireland. The group came up with five aims and two recommendations, none of which will make any difference this season but might, they hope, start to restore a little parity from 2023. The aims include seeing “Britain’s best horses more regularly running against each other outside of the Festival”, to “encourage more of the sport’s highest-investing owners to have their horses trained in Britain”, and to “neutralise prize money as a consideration for owners when decisions are taken about whether a horse is trained in Britain or Ireland”. To this end, the recommendations are that Britain should “incentivise greater competition between the sport’s leading horses in all divisions by implementing significant change to the jump pattern and listed programme”, and “deliver a significant prize-money increase” for jumping, with increased minimum levels to encourage owners to run their horses outside the major Festivals. These are sensible ambitions, and suggest British racing is waking up to the possibility that these things are not “always cyclical” and bound to turn around soon enough, as has often been claimed in the past. The nub of the issue, though, as the Review Group seems to appreciate, is the regularity with which Ireland has outperformed its representation at Cheltenham for the best part of a decade. This suggests that while Britain has many more jumping horses – with 33,000 starts over jumps in 2021 compared to just under 20,000 in Ireland – a significant and consistent majority of the very best of them are on the other side of the Irish Sea. Even a “significant” boost to the prize money on offer in Britain may do little to address this imbalance, because Ireland’s allure for the super-rich owners who increasingly dominate the winter game is about more than just the money on offer. The rewards for top-class jumps horses are certainly attractive, and consciously directed towards Graded races rather than handicaps, but that reflects a top-down appreciation of racing and breeding’s significance to the Irish economy as a whole, and its rural economy in particular. Racing in Ireland gets its funding directly from the government, as a slice of a levy on all betting turnover, including money gambled on the much larger British programme. The rate doubled from 1% to 2% in 2019, following lobbying by the horse and greyhound racing industries. Covid has had an impact on funding in Ireland as it did on prize money in the UK last year, but the fundamentals of the Irish model are sound, and consistent success for Irish horses in Britain and elsewhere boosts betting turnover and, as a result, the tax take as well. It is a virtuous circle that the UK industry is never likely to match and while last year’s Festival set a very high bar, the latest odds suggest either 19 or 20 winners as Ireland’s most likely return, with 23 or more on offer at just 12-1. Astonishing as it would have seemed just a decade ago, that might not be the worst price of the week.Formal talks are under way between US and Russian officials in Geneva over the fate of Ukraine, amid low expectations and high tensions driven by fears that the Kremlin will order an invasion. The Russian deputy foreign minister, Sergei Ryabkov, and his delegation arrived under Swiss police escort at the US diplomatic mission in Geneva for face-to-face talks with Wendy Sherman, the US deputy secretary of state, and her team. The talks adjourned for lunch and then began an afternoon session. The two senior diplomats made only brief eye contact when they posed for photographs beforehand. “The talks promise to be long and substantial,” the Russian diplomatic mission in Geneva tweeted, with a picture of the two lead negotiators standing in front of their national flags. Sherman said “the US will listen to Russia’s concerns and share our own” in an earlier tweet from Geneva. Sherman and Ryabkov held a working dinner in Geneva on Sunday evening with the top military officials in their delegations before Monday’s formal negotiations to discuss Moscow’s demands. Those demands were set out last month in two draft treaties, one with the US and one with Nato. Much of their content is unacceptable to Washington and the alliance, most importantly a pledge that Ukraine will never be a Nato member. Ryabkov described the conversation at dinner as “difficult but businesslike”. Sherman “stressed the United States’ commitment to the international principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity, and the freedom of sovereign nations to choose their own alliances”, according to a state department account of the dinner. It said she told the Russians that the US would however “welcome genuine progress through diplomacy”. Russia has 100,000 troops positioned near Ukraine and a similar number are primed to be mobilised at short notice, according to the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, who said on Sunday that the week’s diplomacy was a moment of truth for the Russian president. “There are two paths before us,” he told CNN. “There’s a path of dialogue and diplomacy to try to resolve some of these differences and avoid a confrontation. The other path is confrontation and massive consequences for Russia if it renews its aggression on Ukraine. We’re about to test the proposition about which path President Putin’s prepared to take.” The Biden administration insists that sovereign states’ right to apply for Nato membership is not negotiable. Nor are US troop deployments in Europe, administration officials have stressed. They said, however, that Washington would discuss other security guarantees, such as mutual limits on missile deployments and military exercises on the continent. That would fall far short of the comprehensive changes Moscow is demanding. Few if any diplomatic observers expect a quick deal to resolve the crisis this week, and the opposite – a complete breakdown – is possible. It should quickly become apparent whether Russia is interested in negotiating over its proposals or whether they were designed to be rejected, creating a pretext for a war that Putin has already decided on. “We’re about to test the proposition of which path President Putin wants to take this week,” Blinken, told the ABC News programme This Week. “And the question really now is whether President Putin will take the path of diplomacy and dialogue or seek confrontation.” “Lower your expectations and then lower them some more,” said Melinda Haring, the deputy director of the Eurasia Center at the Atlantic Council. “Watch Moscow’s demands in the meetings. If Russia insists that Nato cannot expand ever again, we will know that Moscow is preparing for war in Ukraine, since this is a red line for the west.” Sherman and Ryabkov lead teams of senior diplomats and defence officials. Sherman was accompanied to the Sunday night dinner in Geneva by Lt Gen James Mingus, the joint staff director of operations, Ryabkov by Russia’s deputy defence, Col Gen Aleksandr Fomin. France’s European affairs minister, Clément Beaune, complained on Sunday that the EU was being excluded from the talks, an omission that he said played into Putin’s hands by dividing the west. “Europeans shouldn’t be absent from the negotiation table,” he told the CNEWS TV network. The state department account of the Sunday night dinner said the US would talk about certain bilateral issues with Russia in Geneva, “but will not discuss European security without our European allies and partners”. France and other European states will be represented at the two other rounds of talks over the course of the week. The negotiating teams will move to Brussels on Wednesday for a session of the Nato-Russia Council, in which all 30 alliance members will take part. It will be the first such meeting since 2019 of the council, which was established in 2002 to defuse tensions and build consensus. The next day there will be a meeting in Vienna of the permanent council of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), chaired by Poland. Representatives will be on a more junior, ambassadorial level than the Nato session the previous day. It will, however, be imbued with particular significance because it will include non-Nato European states such as Finland and Sweden, who are contemplating their future in light of Russia’s pressure on Ukraine. Finnish leaders in particular have hinted heavily in the past few days that they might look anew at Nato membership. “We believe that after bilateral talks with the United States and then the Nato format, in this wider forum, some developments are possible,” said Nikodem Rachoń, the spokesperson for the Polish embassy in Washington. The OSCE talks are the only negotiations in which Ukraine will take part, though its president, Volodymyr Zelensky, announced a parallel bilateral diplomatic initiative directly with Moscow last month. Washington says the US-Russia meeting in Geneva would primarily be an opportunity to present positions rather than resolve them. “I don’t think we’re going to see any breakthroughs next week. We’re going to listen to their concerns; they’ll listen to our concerns, and we’ll see if there are grounds for progress,” Blinken said. “But to make actual progress, it’s very hard to see that happening when there’s an ongoing escalation, when Russia has a gun to the head of Ukraine, with 100,000 troops near its borders, [and] the possibility of doubling that in very short order. So, if we’re seeing de-escalation, if we’re seeing a reduction in tensions, that is the kind of environment in which we could make real progress.” In Geneva, Sherman will also list the costs to Russia if it goes ahead with military action in Ukraine, including sweeping financial sanctions, possibly cutting it off from the international electronic payments system Swift, and limits on its citizens’ ability to buy western technology. According to the New York Times, the chairman of the US joint chiefs of staff, Gen Mark Milley, has also warned his Russian counterpart, Gen Valery Gerasimov, that an invasion would face a long insurgency, backed by advanced US weaponry. US officials have refused to comment on reports that Stinger anti-aircraft missiles were being sent to Ukraine in anticipation of such a guerrilla war. “This week’s diplomacy is critical. From a certain moment it was clear that the west would not say an outright no to Moscow’s proposal because too much was at stake. The question was, how far Washington and Europeans are ready to go with the talks,” said Andrey Baklitskiy, a senior research fellow at the Moscow State Institute of International Relations. Russia’s rushed military intervention in Kazakhstan has thrown another wildcard on to the table, but Baklitskiy does not expect it to have any impact on the Ukraine crisis. “There is no direct link between Ukraine and Kazakhstan. Even the people handling the issue in Russia are different, except for the very top,” he said. Others say it is too early to tell whether the uprising and the response will unnerve or embolden the Kremlin. “To what extent are the Russians worried about Kazakhstan or believe they can manage it? I don’t think we have a feel for that yet,” one European diplomat said. If there is wriggle room at all in this week’s negotiations, it could come in one of a handful of categories. The Biden administration and Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, have ruled out bowing to Russian demands to preclude Ukraine’s membership of the alliance, but some analysts say that leaves open the possibility of a compromise, in which the theoretical possibility of membership is asserted at the same time as a clear statement that there would be many obstacles to overcome and so it would not happen in the near future. That may be palatable in Washington and Nato capitals, but it may well not be enough for Putin. “Frankly, I’d be surprised if it was,” the European diplomat said. “Given their demands, I think they prefer to have the issue not addressed at all. Otherwise it shows they haven’t got their demand about Ukraine not joining Nato written down.” US officials have repeatedly denied reports that Washington would negotiate on troop deployments in Europe but said they were willing to discuss reciprocal limits on missile deployments and military exercises. “Russia has said it feels threatened by the prospect of offensive missile systems being placed in Ukraine. As President Biden told President Putin, the United States has no intention of doing that. So, this is one area where we may be able to reach an understanding if Russia is willing to make a reciprocal commitment,” the senior US administration official said. Blinken said the US was also open to talking about limits on missiles previously banned by the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces treaty, from which the Trump administration withdrew in 2019 following longstanding US complaints of Russian violations. “There may be grounds for renewing that,” Blinken said, adding that there could also be limits on war games. “There are agreements on the deployment of conventional forces in Europe, things like the scope and scale of exercises that if adhered to reciprocally – that is, Russia makes good on its commitments, which it’s repeatedly violated – then there are grounds for reducing tensions, creating greater transparency, creating greater confidence,” he said. “All of which would address concerns that Russia purports to have.” Missiles and war games are both areas where Russia has called for limits, albeit only on the US and Nato’s activities. It is an open question whether Putin would be satisfied with deals in these areas without some radical change in Ukraine’s status. “Putin could go back and say we’ve been assured that there’s no imminent admission of Ukraine to Nato and we have assurances there will be no strike weapons – combat aircraft, missiles – or US bases in Ukraine,” said Rajan Menon, a political scientist at the City University of New York. “But will Russians insist that this be put in writing? That’s the sticky part.” The most severe limiting factor in the negotiations could turn out to be the political constraints on the main parties. “If you look at the polarisation here, it suggests that we have no bandwidth on the US side to actually do anything, sue for peace, let alone come up with a treaty or series of treaties,” said Fiona Hill, a former senior director for European and Russian affairs on the US national security council. “Putin has his own time frame of elections in 2024, and he wants to have something to show because his own popularity is lagging somewhat.” The deployment of so many troops and the Kremlin’s rhetoric have set high Russian expectations of what would constitute a satisfactory outcome from the week’s diplomacy. Officials in Moscow have insisted that nothing short of “legally formulated guarantees of security” would be enough to pull back the troops from the Ukrainian border. “Putin has put himself in a position where he has to come back with something, without looking really weak,” Menon said. “Given the political realities now, am I confident that a deal is going to happen? No, not at all. I think it’s going to be very, very dicey.”Name: Albion. Age: Ancient. Appearance: Nook-shotten isle. Come again? You know, nook-shotten: all breaking out in corners and angles. And this is an island we’re talking about? Yup: “climate foggy, raw and dull, on whom, as in despite, the sun looks pale, killing their fruit with frowns.” Is that from Tripadvisor? Actually it’s from Henry V, but it’s a one-star review either way. Remind me never to go there on holiday. It may be too late, for Albion is Britain. Since when? Since at least the sixth century BC, when it was referred to as such in the voyages of the Carthaginian explorer Himilco the Navigator. Well I’ll be. This romantic alternative appellation has been employed by writers for centuries, and is permanently associated with the adjective “perfidious” thanks to Britain’s longstanding international reputation for diplomatic underhandedness. I just thought it was a football name. It’s that too, and there lies the issue – in an attempt to trademark this ancient name for our glorious, treacherous island. Which team? West Brom or Brighton &amp; Hove? Both. I see the problem. Brighton applied for the trademark more than a year ago, prompting West Brom to seek the same protection. They have now both successfully secured 10-year trademarks for the names “The Albion” and “Albion” with respect to merchandise including shirts, mugs and pencil sharpeners. How are writers and historians taking the news? Not well. Author Peter Ackroyd said: “Albion is one of the most ancient names for Britain and cannot be owned.” I’m no legal expert, but he appears to be wrong there. Indeed. Perfidious Albion 1, Classicists 0. Is this the first time a common name for somewhere has been legally claimed by a football side? No. Chelsea FC managed to trademark “Chelsea”, although Liverpool FC failed in a similar bid in 2019. This Albion trademark sounds like a particular setback for poets, folk singers and misty-eyed myth-makers everywhere. Not to mention the likes of Albion Rovers, Burton Albion, Witton Albion and Ossett Albion. Oh yeah. I hadn’t really thought about/heard of them. Brighton and West Brom both claim the purpose of their trademarks is to curb the sale of unofficial merchandise, and it will not be used against other similarly named teams. What about Shakespeare? Is he in the clear? He’s beyond the reach of the law, at any rate. Do say: “All things begin and end in Albion’s ancient Druid rocky shore.” Don’t say: “That’s lovely, but will it fit on a pencil sharpener?”I hadn’t even reached Ithaca, the tiny university town in upstate New York – my home for the next six years, as I studied for a PhD – when the confusion over my Blackness and British accent began. I was ill-prepared for Matt, the skinny white American in a cap sitting beside me on the plane. “But you don’t seem like you’re from London,” he said (I’m from Hackney, and very proud). Matt had never been to the UK, let alone London. This response emerges from the US’s own unique history of race and class. The British accent remains for some the epitome of white privilege, reviving memories of high-born English settlers and exuding an air of aristocracy. Blackness signifies the opposite. The property of those settlers. The lowest of the low. Slaves. And so I was violating the US’s time-worn prejudices. Matt was trying to put me back in my place. As for Ithaca, its charming Queen Anne homes bear Black Lives Matter signs on their manicured lawns; and, come election night, it is a rare patch of Democrat blue in a sea of red. But, with reports of Confederate flags and Donald and Melania posters in bedroom windows, I think twice when crossing the road at night and hurry when I see a police car: a reflex that is as much response to the state violence that killed George Floyd as the realities of growing up Black in London. My mistaken identity, however, is more than simply a matter of Black and white. Late one evening, I found myself in the company of west African students and, as we ate jollof rice, one stood up to announce they had found me out: that my accent was fake. The group crowded round as my doubter sat me down and put me through a painstaking interrogation. Humoured, I went along with it. I carefully repeated several words, first in my supposedly “fake” British accent and then in my apparently “real” American one. She asked me to sing, listening out for a revealing twang in a croaky rendition of Stevie Wonder’s Lately. On another occasion, a student said she heard in my accent the British imperial soldier in his khaki uniform and pith helmet that colonised her corner of Africa. I found this especially curious because it appeared as though I was being held partly culpable for Britain’s imperial atrocities. Rather, the British accent as voiced by a Black person reveals empire’s underbelly. My own betrays the kidnapping of my African forebears, their trafficking to the Caribbean, a brave resistance against colonialism and my parents’ eventual migration (as British citizens) to the UK as part of the Windrush generation. The cadence of the Black Londoner contains the sounds, forged over centuries, of the colonial consequence the Sri Lankan scholar-activist Ambalavaner Sivanandan spoke of when he said: “We are here because you were there.” However, the days when my Caribbean and American cousins could dismiss me as “English man”, an oddity with no identifiable culture, are thankfully coming to an end. Just as my generation grew up on Black American music – Biggie Smalls, 2Pac and Lauryn Hill – so a younger one has been raised on Black British artists like Skepta, KSI, Giggs, Ella Mai and Khaled Siddiq. Drake has done a lot to introduce UK artists to US audiences, while the TV series Top Boy, featuring Asher D (Ashley Walters), played its part. The direction of cultural exchange has not always been one-way traffic: Paul Gilroy notes a Black Atlantic of diasporic cultural flows that has existed for time immemorial. It’s still remarkable to me though that UK drill music – reformulated from the Chicago-born genre on a Brixton council estate – has found a cult following at my US Ivy League university. There’s also no shortage of Americans willing to embarrass themselves with stabs at “yes bruv” and “wagwan”. It’s music to my ears when I meet up with other Londoners (I’ve counted four so far) and we lay on an accent so thick some poor kid from Nebraska doesn’t know what language we speak. As UK Black culture continues to alter perceptions of race and class, for some Americans, it seems, Britain is starting to look and sound a lot more like Daniel Kaluuya than it does the Queen. Amandla Thomas-Johnson is a freelance journalist, PhD student and author of Becoming Kwame TureTo be a Chicago Bulls fan over the past two decades is to somewhat know the true pain of injuring a strong knee or a healthy hand. It takes time to adjust to the idea that the body could be anything less than perfect. And when the mind eventually catches up, alas, it’s beyond frustrating. The Bulls I grew up rooting for were so able. They were led by the shrewdest coach, the finest sidekick and the best player who ever lived. They beat back the Bad Boy Pistons, outran the Showtime Lakers and abused the New York Knicks while distinguishing themselves as the preeminent sports dynasty. As the Last Dance docuseries explicitly showed, the Bulls were a cultural force – one that not only put my overlooked hometown on the map, but made basketball the global game it is today. But after the 1998 NBA championship, their sixth title in eight seasons, the Bulls’ decline came swiftly. Jerry Krause, the reviled general manager, blew up the team, and over the next five years this once-enviable franchise became one of the league’s worst. Some fight returned in the mid-aughts when hero marksman John Paxson took over as GM and more hope of a return to glory with it when Paxson selected future league MVP Derrick Rose with the top pick in the 2008 draft. But those teams were never as good as LeBron James’s Cavs and Heat teams. And then after 2017, the Bulls weren’t good at all. This season, however, feels different. Familiar. Tingly. It began with modest expectations, and then four victories on the trot – albeit against teams that, like Chicago, missed the postseason a year ago. But then the Bulls’ streak extended to seven in 10 games. After a 10-point drubbing of Dallas for win No 8, Mavericks guard Tim Hardaway Jr finally called it. “All I can say is, the Bulls are back, man,” he asserted after the game. The declaration, while flattering, was also a bit delusional. That the players on the other side of this compliment recognized as much was oddly steadying. “Eleven games into the season I don’t think you can say anybody’s back,” retorted Bulls guard Alex Caruso, “especially for the prestige of the Bulls. They won three championships in a row twice. Being back, that’s a big statement.” But now almost halfway through the season it’s hard not to be carried away by the sight of the Bulls perched atop the Eastern Conference standings after nearly surpassing their win total from last year. What’s more, some of these victories have come at the expense of the Super Nets and the defending champion Milwaukee Bucks. Until a Sunday night loss to Dallas, Chicago were riding a nine-game winning streak– their longest in a decade. Two of those victories would come courtesy of consecutive DeMar DeRozan buzzer-beaters. He hit the second one on New Year’s Day versus Washington, a game that proved to be quite the character study. Here was a Bulls team playing its third game in four on the road, with key players out with injuries or Covid scares, facing a Wizards team that was as hot as they’ve been all season. It was a classic Pack It In game, and it looked as if the Bulls would do just that as Bradley Beal and Kyle Kuzma shot Washington out to a double-digit lead. Chicago never fell too far behind, though. Not with Zach LaVine sinking in buckets from deep, Nikola Vučević controlling the boards and Coby White (filling in for Caruso and starting point guard Lonzo Ball) setting the tempo at both ends. Come the fourth quarter, it was DeRozan’s time to shine. And watching him puncture the Wizards defense with his devastating mid-range game, it was hard not to be reminded of another clutch Bulls shooting guard. After Kuzma knocked down a three-ball to put the Wizards up 119-117 with three second left, the capacity crowd at Capital One Arena crowd was delirious. But there was no panic on the Chicago bench; this was déjà vu, after all. The Bulls coaching staff, missing head man Billy Donovan to the Covid protocol, could’ve angled for overtime. But stunningly and to their immense credit they schemed for the win. They drew up a three-point play for DeRozan, and he sunk it over two defenders in front of his own bench on the way to becoming the first player in history to drill game-winning buzzer-beaters on consecutive days. For as surprising as this Bulls season has unfolded, to say that success has snuck up on them wouldn’t exactly be fair. The first encouraging move came in April 2020 when the organization jettisoned the braindead trust of Paxson and Gar Forman and handed over basketball ops to Artuas Karnisovas, the towering bygone Lithuanian hooper who built Denver into a title threat. Five months later Karnisovas unloaded tarrying interim Jim Boylen for Donovan, a repeat NCAA title winner at Florida who kept Oklahoma City in contention after Kevin Durant bolted to the Bay. A year later the Bulls traded for Vučević, one of the league’s most talented bigs. And while the swap didn’t happen in time for the Bulls to realize a playoff run, still, that was the moment we knew they were serious. Over the summer the Bulls “won” the offseason with their additions of Ball, Caruso and Ayo Dosunmu – a clever rookie guard who’s already paying dividends. But the pièce de résistance has been DeRozan, a 32-year-old former All-Star and Toronto Raptors stalwart whose midrange game was thought to be too retro for today’s three-and-D NBA. Not only has that game and his much-improved three-point stroke proven an ideal complement to LaVine’s slash-and-splash attack, it’s marked DeRozan (originally bound for the Lakers in the offseason) as an early MVP candidate, if not the alpha closer the team had been needing to take things personally. After clinching another win against Orlando despite an uncharacteristically poor free-throw shooting night, DeRozan returned to the United Center floor after the game to heave 250 more shots from the charity stripe. “I was mad,” he explained to ESPN’s NBA Today. “I hate missing free throws. I hate it with a passion. I wasn’t going to feel comfortable leaving the arena until I got some extra shots up.” Bonded and determined, it seems there’s nothing these Next Gen Bulls can’t do or be. “To me, the ceiling is the finals,” former NBA tough guy Matt Barnes said on NBA Today. On his podcast ex-sharpshooter JJ Redick compared this year’s Bulls to last year’s Suns. Just to be clear: no Bulls fan is ready to go all the way here just yet. There’s still so much to figure out – whether the Bulls can bang with the Sixers’ Joel Embiid (who was undeniable in their early November matchups), if they can shoot with the Suns or the Warriors – who just got Klay Thompson back. And then of course no team becomes an NBA champion without having their heart broken first. In Chicago, a once-noble title town, sports now leave locals colder than a lake-effect gale. Apart from the WNBA championship-winning Sky, it’s a bleak landscape. The Cubs have reverted to being losers, minus the lovable part. The White Sox have disappointed. The Bears are a dumpster fire, and the NHL’s Blackhawks remains an off-ice embarrassment. But the Bulls have brought that old, warm prideful feeling back. At this point I imagine many Bulls fans are like me: more than content to root for a team that is talented and trying hard while debating whether to risk seeing them live during the pandemic. And, well, all things being Covid, maybe this feeling is no fluke. Maybe this squad is finally strong enough to inspire turn thoughts from The Last Dance to, now – The Next Chance. “The goal is the championship,” DeRozan told NBA Today. “We’re not gonna cut ourselves short.”England’s Environment Agency has told its staff to “shut down” and ignore reports of low-impact pollution events because it does not have enough money to investigate them, according to a leaked internal report. The ruling on so-called category 3 and 4 incidents means that events such as farm pollution or hazardous dumps by business may not be properly investigated. The decision has infuriated river groups and NGOs. An Environment Agency briefing to staff, issued in November and seen by the Guardian and the Ends Report, says there is leadership support for “no response to unfunded low- and no-impact environmental incidents”, also known as category 3 and 4 incidents. The leaked document also hints at the agency’s frustration at ministers and the money set aside for its work. It says the EA’s leadership team has “made it clear to government that you get the environment you pay for”. Exceptions to the rule will be pollution incidents caused by a regulated site or a water company, says the briefing, although it does not explain how it will determine the source or seriousness of an incident if it is not attended or investigated. Ignoring the huge number of pollution reports that come in each year will have benefits, says the agency’s briefing, including “reduced overall effort spent on the incidents that present the lowest risk to the environment”, increased effort on “charge-funded regulation”, more space to prioritise higher-risk incidents, “increased consistency of response and service for customers”, and reduced disruption to officers in and out of hours. In an Environment Agency presentation, also seen by the Guardian, on what is known internally as the incident triage project, the agency states that it currently responds to more than 70,000 incidents each year, and the number continues to increase. However, data from the agency’s National Incident Recording System shows that while 116,000 potential incidents were reported to the agency in 2021, just 8,000 were attended, and that this number had fallen from 12,000 in 2016, when 74,000 potential incidents were reported. “We cannot keep trying to do what we are not funded to do; we do not have the money or resources,” states the presentation deck. “We are in an unsustainable position. Our incident responders feel under growing pressure, and this is affecting staff resilience and wellbeing.” Should staff hear of a category 3 or 4 incident that does not relate to a water company or a regulated site, they are told: “Do not substantiate report, call site or add any details. Shut down report.” Template reply letters have been created for agency staff in anticipation of complaints. One Environment Agency officer, who did not wish to be named because staff have been warned against speaking to the media, said: “A lot of category 2 incidents start off as 3s until they are attended” and that an example of a category 3 could be a “2km spill of oil or sewage in a river”. A second officer, who also wished to remain anonymous, said it would be “impossible” to ascertain what level of incident had taken place without visiting it. The EA’s response to pollution had been dwindling for some time, they added, and “unless there were dead fish floating everywhere”, an incident would not be attended by the agency. The agency’s customer service commitment says the regulator had its budget for responding to environmental incidents cut last year and that as well as slashing responses, it will no longer provide feedback on any action taken to tackle pollution events. It follows many years of grant-in-aid cuts for the agency. However, the government gave the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) and its agencies an additional £4.3bn in the latest spending review in October 2021. An overview of the Environment Agency’s settlement is due this year. Mark Lloyd, the chief executive of the Rivers Trust, called the move an “appalling scandal”. “Category 1 and 2 pollution incidents obviously have a very serious impact on the environment, but they are the tip of the iceberg. The vast majority of incidents are in lower categories, and they are what cause the death of rivers by a thousand cuts,” he said. Lloyd said the agency needed the “resources and political backing to take robust action in all cases of pollution if our rivers are not to continue suffering endemic pollution and an ongoing decline in quality … It is absolutely essential that there should be a credible threat of enforcement for all pollution incidents if we are to restore our rivers to good health for the next generation.” Ignoring pollution incidents risks people giving up on reporting them in the first place, according to Fish Legal’s head of practice, Penny Gane. “Many of our members gave up reporting pollution incidents some time ago because they didn’t feel that the agency was interested,” she said. Any further drop in reports “will paint a much rosier picture than the reality of our deteriorating rivers and it will be much harder for the agency to build a case for more funding”. Gane is also concerned about the way in which the reduction in responses will be managed. “Without attending an incident, how can they possibly know whether it is being caused by a regulated site or a water company? In practice, they’re talking about agricultural pollution, which the Environment Agency has identified as the main threat to water quality and reason for water-body failures in England.” The rivers campaigner Feargal Sharkey sees the move as a more cynical one. “The obscenity is that the Environment Agency has reduced its own staff to nothing more than political pawns in a cheap game of Whitehall politics. It’s unwarranted, it’s unjust, it’s incompetent,” he said. An Environment Agency spokesperson said: “We focus our incident response effort on those pollution incidents which pose the greatest risk to the environment. “Our incident triage project is looking at how we can best use our resources and maximise benefits for the environment. While we continue to attend the most serious incidents, we concentrate our efforts on our regulatory activities which prevent incidents from happening in the first place. Intelligence from incident reporting helps us to plan and prioritise our work to protect the environment.” A Defra spokesperson said: “The government recognises the importance of protecting the nation’s natural environment and we are investing accordingly. “Defra and its agencies received an additional £4.3bn in the latest spending review in October 2022 so we can do more to tackle climate change and protect our environment for future generations. The Environment Agency plays a hugely significant role in this area and will always seek to hold those responsible for environmental harm to account.”The cut-price chain Wilko is to close up to 15 stores over the coming year with the potential loss of more than 300 jobs. The company, which currently operates 414 outlets across the UK employing 16,000 people, said it was reviewing leases that were coming to an end and would exit stores where favourable terms could not be agreed. Stores affected include Bournemouth, Grantham, Rotherham, Llanelli, Sutton Coldfield and Cleethorpes. Jerome Saint-Marc, the chief executive, said: “There’s no denying the way people shop with us and where they want to shop with us is changing. As a business, we’re evolving, and this includes working with landlords for more favourable terms, as well as looking at locations and store formats.” Saint-Marc said staff affected by store closures would be offered jobs in nearby outlets. The group is planning to open at least one new store in the year ahead, in Blackpool, while the Shrewsbury store will relocate. Roger Jenkins, a national officer for the GMB union, said: “These closures are devastating for Wilko workers and the communities who use them. “It’s yet another nail in the high street’s coffin and GMB calls on councils and landlords to review commercial leases and offer lower rents.” The potential closures come after a tough few years for high street retailers, after a string of high street lockdowns that have accelerated the shift to online shopping. Once busy city centres have also been knocked by the move to working from home and general anxiety about socialising during the pandemic. Sales at Wilco sank 10.5% in the year to January 2021 to £1.28bn, while pretax profits fell almost 13% to £5.5m, according to accounts filed at Companies House. In the first year of the pandemic, the company said sales at its high street outlets had suffered from a 40% fall in visitor numbers after the March 2020 lockdown. The stores facing potential closures, and when Shipley, West Yorkshire February Bournemouth, Dorset February Stockton, Durham February The Fort, Birmingham February Scunthorpe, Lincolnshire March Narborough Road, Leicester April Grantham, Lincolnshire May Redditch, Worcestershire May Rotherham, South Yorkshire June Skegness, Lincolnshire June Sutton Coldfield, West Midlands June Edmonton Green, north London July Llanelli, Dyfed August Merthyr Tydfil, Mid Glamorgan September Cleethorpes, Lincolnshire OctoberThe maker of hit video games including the Grand Theft Auto franchise is to acquire Zynga, best known for its FarmVille and Harry Potter titles, in a $12.7bn (£9.4bn) deal that will create a global console and mobile gaming giant. US-listed Take-Two Interactive said the cash and shares deal will create one of the largest publicly traded interactive entertainment companies in the world. “We are thrilled to announce our transformative transaction with Zynga, which significantly diversifies our business and establishes our leadership position in mobile, the fastest growing segment of the interactive entertainment industry,” said Strauss Zelnick, chair and chief executive of Take-Two, who added that the deal would result in $100m in cost savings in the first two years after its completion. With hits including FarmVille, Zynga was once the most successful developer on Facebook, and subsequently pivoted to mobile gaming to cash in on the boom in smartphone ownership. Despite the entertainment boom during a period of successive Covid lockdowns, Zynga’s share price fell by more than a third last year. It surged by almost 50% when news of the Take-Two deal was announced on Monday. “We are incredibly excited to have found a partner in Take-Two that shares our commitment to investing in our players, amplifying our creative culture and generating more value for stockholders,” said Frank Gibeau, chief executive of Zynga. “With this transformative transaction we begin a new journey which will allow us to create even better games, reach larger audiences and achieve significant growth as a leader in the next era of gaming.” Take-Two, which reported $6.1bn in net bookings in the year to the end of September, said it expects mobile gaming to account for at least half of its net bookings in its next financial year, up from 12% in the current year. The deal is the latest consolidation in the gaming sector in recent years. Take-Two was outbid by rival Electronic Arts in the £1bn takeover of British video games maker Codemasters in 2020. That same year, Microsoft bought the parent of Bethesda, the company behind games including the Fallout and Elder Scrolls franchises, for $7.5bn. In March last year, Epic, the maker of global hit Fortnite, acquired UK-based Mediatonic, the creator of the smash hit Fall Guys. In July, China’s Tencent acquired UK-listed games developer Sumo Group in a deal valuing the business at more than £900m.Aged care providers warned the federal government in November last year that widespread rapid antigen testing was needed to protect vulnerable people in care, as the sector says tests are in short supply and face crucial delivery delays. The sector is also concerned that amid the worsening Omicron outbreak, tests for preventive measures are “virtually impossible” to find, with the kits being prioritised for outbreaks that often arrive too late. Government data shows there are Covid outbreaks in at least 495 aged care homes nationally, with 1,400 residents currently infected, and almost 2,000 staff who have tested positive. Many aged care residents are being subjected to confinement orders to minimise movement and infection rates in homes, but there are concerns this has resulted in people being confined to their rooms for weeks on end. Paul Sadler, chief executive of the peak body Aged &amp; Community Services Australia, which represents the not-for-profit and charitable providers, said the organisation had written to the federal government in November, calling for rapid tests to be used as “an additional weapon in our arsenal against this particular disease”. “We felt that it was important that it was rolled out more widely across the aged care sector … both as a preventive mechanism, but also obviously when cases were actually identified in an aged care home as well,” Sadler said. “Clearly from our point of view, we could see there was a need for rapid antigen tests. We could see that they added some additional efficacy in our efforts to keep Covid out.” He said that he believed the number of cases in aged care homes was being under-reported, and that providers were “running real risks” without the assistance of a testing regime. “Rapid antigen tests, practically speaking, are not available, or if they’re turning up, they’re turning up five or six days after an order is placed,” he said. “The commonwealth itself is asking people to advise five days in advance – if you don’t know you’ve had an outbreak, to wait five days or more once you’ve already had an outbreak obviously has got some significant challenges for everybody concerned.” Tim Hicks, general manager of Policy, Advocacy &amp; Advisory for Leading Age Care Services Australia (Lasa) said that providers wanted to be able to run surveillance screening, which would amount to about 200,000 tests nationally a day. He said that Lasa had been calling on government support to do this since the Delta outbreak in Sydney last year. “The reality is that for most providers, there isn’t enough rapid antigen tests to have that sort of precautionary strategy where you give everyone a test every 72 hours,” Hicks said. “That lack of testing not only contributes to the increased risk exposure, it contributes to the challenges with workforce availability because people are worried to come into work because they’re not sure whether they’ll get infected and then bring it home.” “Testing is one of the fundamental parts of the risk control measures that we can put in place both in aged care and in the community. “With the lack of access to tests we face all sorts of problems. There is increased risk of infections, there’s people having to isolate not being available to work who might otherwise be able to come in [and] there’s difficulty in clearing outbreaks,” Hicks said. Sadler said that while he did not believe it was possible to prevent Omicron from entering the aged care sector entirely, adequate testing would help control infections and assist staff and visitors manage risk. “What we can do if we have the rapid antigen tests available is, we believe, make a significant impact in reducing the spread within the aged care homes and keeping people safe,” he said. Sadler said some of the federal stockpile had been held up as a result of supply chain problems, with transport routes being disrupted by the growing number of infections. He criticised the prime minister, Scott Morrison, for claiming last week that the commonwealth had secured the testing supplies it needed to fulfil its responsibilities in aged care. “They [rapid tests] may be sitting somewhere waiting to go on the back of a truck and be delivered. But I go back to that word ‘fulfilled’; I don’t quite see how having them in the country but not in the aged care homes where they are needed warrants the description as having fulfilled what the commonwealth needed to do.” Hicks also said it had been up to the commonwealth to ensure adequate supplies, and there was no doubt that the government could have planned better to manage a potential collapse in the PCR testing regime. “Aged care providers like everyone, I think, were surprised by how quickly the PCR testing systems collapsed, and then that burden has moved to rapid antigen testing, but we didn’t have the stocks.” “It’s clear that we don’t have enough tests in aged care to perform the sort of precautionary testing that we should be doing to keep people as safe as they can be, and to the extent that it is the commonwealth’s responsibility to procure those tests on behalf of the sector, it’s clear that hasn’t been achieved.” According to a Department of Health update to the sector on 7 January, residential aged care providers with a Covid outbreak or exposure can request rapid antigen tests from the national stockpile. “Due to the extremely high demand for RAT kits, we are prioritising immediate distribution to residential aged care facilities with Covid-19 outbreaks or exposure.”Leading Australian academics have criticised the federal government for “political and shortsighted” research funding decisions, amid accusations of interference in awarding grants. Research on climate activism and China were among six projects – all in the humanities – recommended for funding by the Australian Research Council but vetoed last month by the acting education minister, Stuart Robert. The decision, announced on Christmas Eve, angered many in the research community, and has been condemned by hundreds of writers, academics and intellectuals in two open letters. A petition with nearly 1,500 signatories, including those of high-profile authors JM Coetzee, Michelle de Kretser, Alexis Wright and Amanda Lohrey, has called for Robert “to reinstate the defunded projects and commit to legislating the complete independence of the ARC from government interference and censorship”. “That two-thirds of the six censored grants should be in literary studies demonstrates a dismissive attitude to the value of the imagination and creativity,” it said. “The actions of the government reveal that it is committed to defunding Australia’s literary culture by overriding academic autonomy and determining what kinds of knowledge can and cannot be pursued. This is especially ironic given its recent campaign to defend freedom of speech on Australia’s campuses.” The petition continued: “All political parties should refrain from treating literary studies or the humanities more generally as pawns to be used for political purposes. Literature lasts longer than governments, longer than parties, longer than electoral cycles.” In a separate open letter, published on Tuesday, eminent academics have called for the ARC to be “allowed to return to its core mission of funding fundamental curiosity-driven research without political interference”. The letter, addressed to Robert and Sue Thomas, the outgoing chief executive of the Australian Research Council, has been signed by more than 60 current and past Australian laureate fellows. Laureate fellowships are awarded by the ARC to the most respected professors in their fields, with only 17 granted yearly. Among the letter’s signatories is Prof Brian Schmidt, the Nobel prize-winning astrophysicist and Australian National University vice-chancellor. The letter’s signatories said they were “very concerned” about the way in which applications for the 2022 round of discovery projects grant funding had been handled. After months of delays, successful discovery projects were announced on Christmas Eve, with 587 projects approved for funding out of 3,096 applications. After being recommended through rigorous ARC processes, six projects were subsequently rejected by Robert on the basis that they did “not demonstrate value for taxpayers’ money nor contribute to the national interest”. A spokesperson for Robert said the minister had approved “98.98%” of the 593 discovery projects the ARC recommended, but had not accepted the following six: Playing conditions: how climate shaped the Elizabethan theatre National forgetting and local remembering: memory politics in modern China China stories under Xi Jinping: popular narratives Finding friendship in early English literature Cultural production of religion by science fiction and fantasy novels New possibilities: student climate action and democratic renewal Prof Lynette Russell, a historian at Monash University and current ARC laureate fellow, described the minister’s veto as “a significant constraint against academic freedom”. The letter said: “Whether it be the test of ‘national interest’ or an excessive focus on a sector like manufacturing, research funding in Australia is becoming political and shortsighted.” “The best return comes from letting researchers focus on curiosity-driven research. This has given us mRNA vaccines, the laser, and many other inventions that have lifted the quality of our lives.” The academics strongly recommend that in future the minister “accepts and approves funding for all ARC grant applications that pass through the tried, tested and rigorous peer review process”. ARC funding applications undergo an intensive review process which is led by a college of experts. “After really thorough debate by highly skilled, extraordinarily competent people, the decision is made whether or not to recommend for funding,” Russell said. “Our title is rather telling: we are a college of experts, and I think it’s fair to say the minister is not,” she said. The letter also criticised the timing of the funding decision, with the announcement on Christmas Eve “giving an appearance that the date was chosen to avoid close scrutiny”. The announcement, which is usually made in October or November, came only eight days before 2022 funding was due to commence on 1 January. Laureate fellow Prof Toby Walsh told Guardian Australia the timing was a “kick in the teeth” particularly for academics whose jobs in 2022 depended on their grants applications being successful. “That uncertainty in a very uncertain year doesn’t really help the university sector,” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Days before the Christmas funding announcement, shadow education minister Tanya Plibersek had referred the ARC to the Australian National Audit Office to investigate an “unacceptable delay in announcing 2022 grant funding round outcomes”. In September, Greens senator Mehreen Faruqi also wrote to the auditor general requesting an audit into the ARC’s funding application processes. The council was roundly criticised in August for a rule banning applicants from citing preprint materials in grant proposals. The rule was later scrapped and affected applicants had an appeal upheld.Labor has preselected a human rights lawyer with deep roots in the party to run against Liberal moderate Trent Zimmerman in North Sydney, in what promises to become a fascinating three corner race for the federal seat. On Tuesday, Labor will announce that Catherine Renshaw, a professor of law at the University of Western Sydney specialising in human rights, will run for the lower north shore seat. The seat is currently held by Zimmerman, one of the Liberal party’s leading moderates, by a margin of 9.3%, making it one of the Liberals’ safest. Labor has never held North Sydney, but it was represented by independent Ted Mack in the 1990s for six years and a community endorsed independent, Kylea Tink, is running this year. The presence of a third strong candidate in the seat is likely to make for a lively contest where local community forums will play an important role. Renshaw went to school in North Sydney and lives in Northbridge. She joined the Labor party 25 years ago and is married to John Renshaw, whose father, Jack Renshaw, was a Labor premier of New South Wales. Renshaw said she was motivated to run because of the lack of action on important issues – climate change, the Covid response and education. The party is buoyed by its strong showing in the local government elections in North Sydney council and Lane Cove council, which have a large crossover with the federal seat. Renshaw believed she had “a real shot,” and that people wanted to see a genuine contest. “As an academic I have studied and worked in countries where accountability and the rule of law do not exist – like Myanmar – and I do not take for granted what we are lucky enough to have here in Australia,” she said. “North Sydney is a community that values justice and that values truth, and there are people here proud to stand up for those ideals. I want to use this election to show the Liberal party that there is a growing home for progressive values in our electorate.” Meanwhile the sitting MP, Zimmerman, is facing preselection challenges from the Liberal party’s right and centre right factions. Barrister Hamish Stitt is backed by the right faction, while Jessica Collins has backing from the centre right. Insiders say the challenges are unlikely to be successful, but indicate the factional manoeuvring within the NSW Liberal party. Factional plays have held up NSW Liberal nominations for nine months, leaving a raft of key seats without candidates. Local Labor strategists argue that North Sydney is a blue ribbon Liberal seat because Labor has failed to make it a contest in the past and the seat is home to many progressive voters. The fact that Labor is putting up a fight is also likely to help Tink, though she needs to come at least second on primary votes to stand any chance of winning the seat. Labor has not yet decided on preferences, but is almost certain to preference Tink ahead of the Liberals. Labor adopted a similar strategy in Wentworth in the 2018 byelection and in the 2019 general election, running high profile local Tim Murray as its candidate. Murray ran a strong campaign on a low budget, often making his mark at local debates. Although Murray lost primary votes to the independent, Kerryn Phelps, his preferences helped her win in 2018. Phelps failed to be re-elected in 2019 when the Liberals’ Dave Sharma won by a narrow margin, but Murray’s preferences again flowed strongly to Phelps. Murray is expected to be Labor’s candidate for Wentworth again in 2022. This time Sharma is facing a challenge from a community-backed independent, Allegra Spender. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning On the lower north shore, Labor has had something of a resurgence, at least at the local government level. Lane Cove council elected a Labor mayor, Andrew Zbik for the first time ever on Monday night, and Labor’s representation on council has gone from one councillor in 2012 to three in 2021. Labor also secured two councillors in North Sydney while the conservative representation fell. On Monday, Zoe Baker, an independent, was elected mayor with Labor and independent support.When the world feels out of control, as it does at the moment, I find myself doing basic household chores to help me relax, like putting on a load of laundry. The gentle hum of the washing machine and the promise of fresh T-shirts, underwear and towels feels like a small but tangible victory. Unfortunately, this is not a particularly environmentally friendly way to relax. Washing machines and dryers use large amounts of energy and water, which is compounded by how frequently most of us wash our clothes (too often). Fortunately, there are alternatives to machine washing that will still keep clothes looking (and smelling) good. And since some of these techniques save on time and energy bills, the small sense of victory remains. Prevention is better than cure “Thinking in terms of prevention is a good strategy,” says Kate Fletcher, professor at the Centre for Sustainable Fashion, London College of Fashion. A few small, thoughtful changes can help reduce your washing load. Fletcher advises always wearing an apron while cooking; tucking trouser legs into socks to keep hems free from mud when you’re out walking; and wearing a singlet or undershirt beneath shirts and blouses so you only need to wash the bottom layer, not the outer garment. Being thoughtful about which fibres you buy and wear can also help, Fletcher says. “Wool is the preferred fibre for handling stains and smells,” for instance, because “it has a complex scaly structure which affords the fibre a natural stain repellency”. By contrast, synthetic fibres are known for holding on to smells, including body odour, especially if fabric softeners are used. Fletcher says you should avoid using fabric softener and wearing synthetic fibre garments “if you are interested in washing less”. Stop stains on the spot Pretreating and preventing stains from setting can help reduce laundry, says Fletcher. “For areas with a lot of staining, it is advisable to soak or spot-clean the specific stain. This helps prevent rewashing if a garment doesn’t come clean.” Orsola de Castro, founder of activist group Fashion Revolution, has an essential tip for preventing stains, even on the go. “I don’t go anywhere without a sponge,” she says. “Because you can get rid of a stain instantaneously almost in every case – even if it’s oil – if you’ve got a good sponge with you. “If you act fast you can spot-clean using only your sponge and a bit of warm water, without detergent.” She also recommends pressing a dry sponge hard on to a wet stain because it “will absorb most of the stain’s moisture, thereby containing it.” Brushing can help too. Fletcher recommends using “a clothes brush to shift dirt like mud”. You don’t need a specialty item either: “This can just be an old toothbrush.” De Castro says brushing “works wonders on wool and tweeds. Because of the way the material is so tightly woven, the stains sit on the surface.” Create an air space Fletcher recommends examining each item before you put it in the laundry basket. “Ask yourself: is it actually in need of cleaning, or can it be worn again?” Sometimes pieces can be rested between wears, since certain reasons for washing garments (like faint odours) fade with time. Fletcher suggests “airing them, hanging them on a balcony or in a steamy shower room”. While shower steam works well, an electric steamer is even more efficient. De Castro says steaming will “immediately refresh a piece and release most of the creases, making it look more polished”. This is particularly good for outwear such as coats and jackets, suits and knitwear. If you don’t want to put already-worn things away with your clean clothes, Fletcher suggests creating a new place to keep them, like a hook on the back of your wardrobe or bedroom door. When it does come time to wash, Fletcher suggests you “put off” doing it “until you have enough for a full load”. Know what you’re washing De Castro says we need more information about our clothes to ensure we are not washing them too much, at the wrong temperature or too often. She says when “we don’t know the properties of the materials that we’re washing” we often wash clothes unnecessarily, using too much water and detergent. Since different materials require different methods of care, detailed and accurate care labels are important, and so is understanding the properties of each fibre. But don’t blame yourself; the problem is structural, says De Castro. Globally, there is a lack of regulation around labelling clothes. “We need the regulations that are present in food, beauty and pharmaceuticals when it comes to declaring and disclosing the ingredients that are in our clothes” so we can care for them correctly, she says.The Drones’ worst show ever was in York in England on 24 April 2007. York is like a citadel, it’s a walled city, and they were doing all this medieval cosplay when we arrived – the women were all dressed as Maid Marian and all the men were like knights in shining armour. I vividly remember a guy dressed in chain mail pushing a pram. Remembering the frisson there used to be between the UK and minions like us from the colonies, it made us laugh – like, look at these fucking idiots. And the minute we got into the gig venue, it was the same thing – kids dressed up like 1977-by-numbers punks. More cosplay! I don’t think any Australian band back then ever looked forward to the UK leg of a tour, unless they were in London or at an All Tomorrow’s Parties festival. People usually came to our shows but at this one they just didn’t, except for these three little 15-year-olds who were dressed up like Joe Strummer, and they were yelling at us, which was a bit annoying. These days you can have people like Courtney Barnett and King Gizz and the kids will go sick, but back then, people really hated Australians in England. Anyway, all our equipment broke down. The gig ended with just me, playing through my amp which had somehow survived. Everyone else’s amps had died all at the same time. I wrapped it up, went off and we went out the back to where the van was, and every window in the van had been smashed. Everything had been stolen. So we were like, for fuck’s sake! How much worse can it get?! We were making a list for the cops about everything that had gone missing. (Maybe we made a few exaggerations on some stuff … ) And just when I’m about to hand over the list, they got a call on the radio that they’d found the guy. So all the cops took off. Half an hour later they came back with all of our shit in these huge police evidence bags, and all of it was completely covered in mud. Somehow this single guy had lugged five people’s stuff down by a canal, and the cops had found him, beaten the crap out of him and got all our shit back. They were all covered in mud too, but they were very pleased with themselves, and we were quite happy to see our stuff. Eventually it was time to go. We went to the nearest dumpster, pulled all the cardboard out of it and gaffer-taped it to the car so we’d have windows for the drive to Somerset, where we actually were playing an All Tomorrow’s Parties gig. That was the longest, coldest drive in human history. The only good thing we got out of that were those police evidence bags – they lasted for about five years as laundry bags. They were fucking great! It was miserable but funny. We always found a way to make things funny. I’m amazed at how resilient we were. Gareth Liddiard’s band Tropical Fuck Storm is touring Australia nowOften we have noble reasons for ending up with more than a few expired items lurking in the back of our pantry or fridge. We might have bought something unfamiliar to try a new recipe or expand our palate, and haven’t got around to using the rest. Or, not wanting to be wasteful, we keep something on hand, just in case we need it again. Or – perhaps a less noble reason – there’s too much stuff in the way and we forgot that something existed. Besides the obvious drawbacks of clutter, there are some less obvious effects it could have on us. “Our brain actually really likes order,” says Libby Sander, assistant professor of organisational behaviour at Bond Business School. “Seeing clutter is kind of a constant drain on our cognitive resources.” Clutter can affect our mood, sleep, stress levels and focus: “It makes us feel tired or stressed; you might be sitting in the lounge room trying to relax, or trying to work from home, and your brain is unconsciously thinking about the messy kitchen.” Sander says people often avoid decluttering because they are overwhelmed by the scale of the task. “I think while things like Marie Kondo[’s method] have been hugely popular, her approach can often be quite stressful for people – the idea of just doing everything at once.” Not so enthused by the idea of emptying out your entire fridge or pantry? A shelf-by-shelf approach is more manageable and means you’re more likely to see it through. “Just do one shelf in the fridge, then throw things out, clean it, put things back. And then once you have done the whole fridge, or the whole pantry, then you can say, ‘OK, well, maybe I’ll reorganise what shelf everything goes on now that I’ve got more room.’”Welcome to 2022, a year in which predictions about the economy are going to be replete with caveats of “assuming nothing else happens”, which the past two years have shown is a foolish position to take. But at least we can be certain 2022 will have a federal election. We know this not just because the constitution demands it, but because the latest mid-year economic and fiscal outlook (Myefo) contained a record $16.9bn in “decisions taken, not yet announced”. This entry in the budget papers is usually large before an election, but the Morrison government in 2018 and last month has taken it to extremes: If the graph does not display please click here So get ready for anything – from another round of car parks to tax cuts – to help sway votes. We also need to get ready for a lot of talk about how strong the economy is. Whenever you hear this talk, remember two things – interest rates are at record lows and the budget deficit is larger than it was during the global financial crisis: If the graph does not display please click here This is not a bad thing – the last thing we need is a budget surplus, especially when the cost of government borrowing remains at historic lows: If the graph does not display please click here We will no doubt hear talk about needing to cut spending and live within our means and return to surplus. And yet all the while, the ability to invest in infrastructure and renewable energy remains as cheap as it was at the last election when government debt was $300bn lower. But what the record low interest rates and near record deficit means is that talking about the strength of the economy is a bit like measuring how high someone can jump while ignoring that they are using a trampoline. Clearly Covid has also had a massive impact on how we view the economy – and the election campaign. While there had been some small chance of an early March election, once Omicron came along the prospect of an election before Anzac Day reduced greatly: If the graph does not display please click here As Scott Morrison decides we need to “push through,” the question is: what does the future hold for the economy and its impact on the election? Clearly the impact is large and abrupt. Last November ANZ bank’s chief economist was predicting: “In the next six months we’re in for a bit of an economic boom.” Now ANZ is saying we are spending so little it is like we are acting as though we are in a lockdown. Retailers generally like to talk about a big Christmas, and the Australian Retailers Association tipped a “record $21 billion to be spent in post-Christmas sales” but that prediction was made in early December – before Omicron took hold. Few retailers would be boasting about how great things are right now. Oddly, the Omicron surge has had almost no impact on forecasts for interest rates. In early November the market predicted the Reserve Bank of Australia would increase the cash rate to 0.25% by June, and it would be up to 0.75% by this time next year. That expectation remains unchanged: If the graph does not display please click here This suggests a slight chance of a rate rise in the first week of May, which would certainly be an interesting final twist to the campaign. Any increase, though, would need to be justified due to inflation increases. Here we do strike another Omicron snag. The next official inflation data that comes out in two weeks will only cover up to December – thus missing out on any price rises that are occurring due to labour-supply constraints. Any current price rises will only be registered in the consumer prices index release in the last week of April – making it one of the big economic data releases expected during the campaign, followed by cost of living data in the first week of May. Given how cost of living dominates election talk, that could be an unpleasant point for the government – especially if the figures suggest the RBA needs to increase rates on 3 May. As it is, the inflation expectations remain pretty subdued – and certainly not at a level that requires the Reserve Bank to act: If the graph does not display please click here Importantly, the Reserve Bank is as concerned about wage rises as it is inflation. On this score, the December Myefo would have you believe good times are ahead, because it forecasts wages to grow by 2.25% in the 12 months to June this year, before rising to 2.75% next year and then 3% in 2024: If the graph does not display please click here However, given the government does not see unemployment falling from June 2023 to June 2025, that does appear to be a rather optimistic view of how wage rises work. And given there are already suggestions that the Omicron wave will dampen wage growth for a bit longer, as business remains wary of people staying away, it might also be a bit soon to be start banking that pay rise. It all makes for a weird election campaign. Is the economy strong? Well, yes, if we ignore government spending and low interest rates doing a record amount of help. It also means that while this year’s election campaign will no doubt focus on the economy, any such debate will be overwhelmingly coloured by the state of Covid. Greg Jericho writes on economics for Guardian AustraliaAgeing brings with it inevitable physical declines, including loss in bone density which can lead to osteoporosis. This condition affects 3.8% of Australians, although many people don’t know they have it until they have a bone fracture. Importantly, it can be prevented and managed through lifestyle factors including exercise. “Physical activity is one of the most effective tools to counter age-related health conditions,” including osteoporosis and osteoarthritis (which impacts the joints), says accredited exercise physiologist Richelle Street. There can be several barriers to moving more, compounding the problem. “Fear of falling, fear of pain and fear of fractures are typical obstacles to engage in physical activity in older persons,” Street says. Other barriers include social isolation and limited transport. But the benefits are far-reaching, including increased bone density and reduced risk of falls and fractures, physical fitness and strength, improved posture, mobility and enhanced mood and vitality. And most physical activity is safe for people with osteoporosis, exercise physiologist Abbey Dalton says, although it’s important to avoid the risk of falling. There are some general recommendations, but readers are advised to consult with a health professional for a safe exercise plan. The move: squat to overhead press Some types of exercise are particularly good at increasing bone density, thus reducing the severity of osteoporosis and risk of fracture, according to Dalton. These are high-impact, multidirectional activities (such as tennis or volleyball) and weights heavy enough that you can’t lift them more than eight times before tiring. They might not be for everyone, though. “If this kind of training isn’t for you then focusing on preventing falls is going to be more your target,” says Dalton. An ideal strength exercise would be a squat to overhead press using dumbbells, as it loads and strengthens as many bones as possible in one exercise. If you need to build up to this, Dalton suggests starting with a sit to stand off a chair with light weights, or even modify it so the arms don’t go right above the head, then build up as the shoulders get stronger. Be sure to keep a straight back, bending at the knees and sticking the bottom out rather than stooping forward. The class: tai chi Some facilities offer specific osteoporosis exercise classes, which can be a great way to learn skills to manage it. If balance is an issue, which is important for avoiding falls, Dalton recommends a tai chi class. This can also help with improving posture and body strength, says Street. Another option is a falls-and-balance class. One that includes some basic strength training will give even greater benefits. If you’re able to tackle it, a heavy-weight class can help build bone density. Ideally, a mixture of activities will give optimal results. “A class that has some variety with a circuit of weight that gets all the different muscle groups and some bounding and jumping, such as box jumps or side shuttles, will give the most benefit if achievable for you,” Dalton says. The activity: dancing Here’s where you can turn up your favourite music and have some fun in your own home. “You would be surprised how often I prescribe people dancing in their lounge room – particularly for those with osteoporosis,” says Dalton. “If you are able to dance where you jump and bound around in all different directions as randomly as possible, this is really good for bone density.” On a less vigorous level, Healthdirect recommends some simple balancing exercises such as standing with the feet close together, standing on one leg or walking backwards. The hard pass: golf While any exercise is beneficial, Street recommends that people with osteoporosis avoid activities that increase the risk of falling or sudden, forceful movements or twisting motions (such as swinging a golf club) unless they are gradually introduced as part of a tailored program. It might be prudent to avoid activities with greater chance of falls, like horse riding, skiing and mountain bike riding. But if passionate about these, Dalton advises to minimise risk.The number of Covid patients in hospital in England and Scotland has continued to increase, according to newly reported figures, as the UK reported 142,224 Covid cases on Monday – the first rise in six days. According to the latest figures, there were 17,120 Covid patients in hospital in England and 1,432 in Scotland, up from 14,210 and 1,033 respectively on the previous Monday. Figures for Wales and Northern Ireland were not available. The latest daily case figures, which reflect infections picked up by testing, bring the UK total for the past seven days to 1,201,563, up just 1% compared with the total for the week before. The daily figure fell after 4 January when 218,724 cases were reported – a figure that included a backlog of reporting for Northern Ireland and Wales – to 141,472 on Sunday before rising to 142,224 on Monday. The figure also does not include reinfections for all the countries in the UK, and reflects cases by date reported rather than by specimen date. A further 77 deaths in the UK within 28 days of a positive Covid test were reported on Monday.A full invasion of Ukraine, with the aim of pacifying the capital, Kyiv, would result in Vladimir Putin starting a war on a scale not seen since Iraq in 2003 – prompting western experts to question whether a lasting Russian victory could be achieved. Estimates suggest about 100,000 Russian troops are massing near Ukraine’s borders. Yet, experts following the crisis closely say that for an invasion of the whole country that number would need to nearly double again, and would almost certainly involve forces passing through Belarus. Dr Fred Kagan, a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, said: “This will likely require an invasion on a scale not dissimilar to 2003, somewhere between 150,000 and 200,000 troops.” He predicted that a force that size could be in position by the end of January. About 175,000 US and other allied troops were involved in the invasion of Iraq. Is occupation possible? Kagan, who co-authored a series of reports that led to the 2007 US troop surge in Iraq, said the real challenge for Putin was how an almost certainly hostile Ukraine may be held by the Russians if there was an insurgency after the capture of Kyiv. A determined operation would require one counter-insurgent per 20 inhabitants, said Kagan in a paper he co-wrote with other experts from the Institute for the Study of War. That “would suggest a counter-insurgency force requirement on the order of 325,000 personnel” would be needed to hold Kyiv and Ukraine’s major cities in the south and east, they added. Ukraine has an army of 145,000, according to the International Institute of Strategic Studies (IISS),, but there are also an estimated 300,000 veterans of the low-intensity conflict in the Donbas region of the country that started in 2014. Polling says a third of Ukraine’s citizens would be willing to take up “armed resistance”. Burnt by the Soviet experience in Afghanistan, Russia generally viewed US attempts to hold countries against insurgents as a mistake. “Putin will have studied what happened to the US in Iraq after 2003. The difficulties of dealing with partisan activity keeps my mind open to the possibility that the Russian president does not intend to invade and conquer Ukraine,” Kagan told the Guardian. Russia’s advantages Nevertheless, Moscow has overwhelming advantages in terms of an initial invasion, most notably in terms of rocketry and airpower. Ukraine faces potentially terrifying consequences, in an all-out assault, which could shatter a country’s morale and prompt millions to flee west, rather than fight. Rob Lee, a former US marine and fellow with the Foreign Policy Research Institute, said: “Russia has the capacity to devastate Ukraine’s military units from afar with weapons such as Iskander ballistic missiles. We almost never see modern weaponry like this unleashed; it gives Russia the capability to inflict thousands of casualties a day.” A military assault will also have a transformational effect on international opinion. Civilian casualties in considerable numbers are almost certain, amounting to an operation unlike almost any Putin has conducted before, including the war with Ukraine in 2014, where responsibility for military action was denied. Dr Samir Puri, a senior fellow at the IISS, who has previously spent a year as a conflict monitor in Ukraine, said: “It is hard to imagine a full invasion without the use of airpower, but that is such a huge threshold for Russia to cross.” Much has been made about Ukraine’s recent purchase of weapons from the west, but the Javelin antitank missiles have a range of about 1.5 miles (2.5km) and can only delay an mechanised advance. The country has a relatively modest number of Turkish TB2 drones for now, half a dozen or a dozen, tiny compared with Russia’s thousands of tanks, the core of any ground force. Capturing Kyiv Russia also has to decide how to deal with Ukraine’s cities, principally Kyiv, with a population of 3 million, but also Kharkiv in the north-east, with a population of almost 1.5 million. “Urban warfare is hard, it does fearful damage and Russia struggled with it in Aleppo,” Kagan said, citing Putin’s intervention in Syria’s civil war. Speculation about Russia’s plans – based in part on apparent leaks published in the German newspaper Bild – suggests the Kremlin would surround Kharkiv and ultimately Kyiv, cutting off supplies, hoping in a medieval fashion they will surrender. That may be less violent but would still undercut the idea of Russia acting as a unifying force. Nor is encircling Kyiv easy, western analysts say. The key points of the city, including the presidential palace, are to the west of the readily defensible Dneiper River. The first bridges south of the city are 60 miles away; a dam four miles north has turned the stretch of the river that runs to the border with Belarus into a lake. Exploiting Belarus The simplest way across the river is to cross in a safe territory – Belarus to the north. That would require Minsk’s support, which would be highly probable given its recent rapprochement with Moscow. In a speech to mark Orthodox Christmas on 7 January, the Belarusian president, Alexander Lukashenko, said his country would “do everything” to take back Ukraine. Russian mechanised forces would aim to encircle Kyiv from the west. One route is to cross the Pripet marshes, which freeze in winter, and the Chernobyl area (not deemed a great complication for a modern military able to operate in a radiation zone). An alternative would be to strike from further west in Belarus, such as the Baranovichy training area. A key sign that Russia is ready to act, Kagan said, will be if “Russian mechanised forces deploy to Belarus”. Even if Putin does not invade, a permanent Russian military garrison in Belarus would have advantages to the Kremlin, as an potential threat not just to Ukraine but to the Baltic states to the north. It would “create a large military base that would give Russia air dominance over Nato’s eastern flank”, said Orysia Lutsevych, a research fellow at foreign policy thinktank Chatham House. Putin’s military alternatives The risks inherent in invasion and occupation leave experts such as Dr Taras Kuzio, an associate fellow with the Henry Jackson Society,arguing in a newly released paper that an all-out attack “the least likely” of the military scenarios available to Putin. Instead, the Ukraine expert sees three other options. In the first, Russia simply occupies and annexes the part of the Donbas controlled by separatists, a partial invasion mirroring the 2008 Georgia crisis. That began, Kuzio wrote, after “repeated military provocations” by proxies “led to intervention by Georgian troops”, giving Putin a pretext to respond. A second is to enlarge the occupied territory with a land corridor to previously annexed Crimea, capturing the coastal city of Mariupol. Russia could also seize other key industrial sites and try to degrade Ukraine’s nearby military. “They could take out Turkish TB2 drones and artillery in the Donbas” in an overt, limited campaign designed to weaken Ukraine, said Lee. A final option, said Kuzio, is the “revival of the 2014 ‘New Russia’ project” that would try “to cut Ukraine off from the Black Sea”. This would amount to seizing the south, capturing the port of Odessa and perhaps the industrial city of Dnipro. Taking Odessa, population 1 million, would probably require a dramatic air and naval operation, using paratroopers from Crimea followed by marines landing on nearby beaches. Of those options, annexing occupied Donbas would almost certainly be popular in Russia, However, it would be an extremely limited response given the Kremlin’s insistence that its chief goal, as most recently repeated by Sergei Ryabkov, Russia’s deputy foreign minister, is “the non-expansion of Nato, the non-accession of Ukraine, Georgia and other countries to the alliance” – raising concerns that a military campaign is probable. “You have to take a step back and ask what Russia’s political goals are,” said Lee. “If Russia wants to force a change in Ukraine’s political orientation, you can see why the Kremlin might look at military options.”Nurseries in England have been forced to reduce their opening hours and even close entirely because of staff shortages after Covid-19 cases soared in early-years settings, with almost 3,700 reports in a single week. According to government figures published on Monday, during the week before Christmas, Ofsted received 3,697 notifications of coronavirus in nursery, preschool and childminding settings. Each notification covers a single site and can represent more than one case. The latest figures represent a significant jump in cases. Last January, Covid-19 notifications at early-years settings peaked at 2,357 reports, which was then exceeded in November with 2,707 in a single week. The Early Years Alliance (EYA), which represents 14,000 members in the sector, said with coronavirus reports at a record high, it was “no surprise that so many early-years settings are reporting being forced to reduce opening hours, close rooms or, in the worst cases, close entirely due to Covid-19 cases”. Neil Leitch, chief executive of the EYA, said: “The government has to date offered little to no support to help keep settings open, despite the fact that, without them, other critical workers who have young children are unable to continue doing the vital work we rely on them for. “Statutory adult-to-child ratios in early-years settings ensure a high standard of care and education, but make it particularly difficult for the sector to manage staff absences, which often occur at the last minute. Given the nature of the crisis, allowing greater flexibility on current ratio rules, in a way that still prioritises child safety and wellbeing, would help settings to remain open through these most challenging moments. “But government must act now if we are to ensure that settings are to be able to remain open and offer the continuity of care and education that children and families need.” Schools are already being affected by disruption in nurseries. Headteachers have reported that staff with young children have been unable to come to work because of nursery closures. At one early-years establishment, 11 of 30 staff were off with coronavirus. The Oak National Academy, a virtual school set up by government early in the pandemic to provide free online lessons during the Covid disruption, has reported a sharp increase in schools using its resources amid the surge in the Omicron variant. Oak had 340,000 weekly users last week, the highest number since schools returned from lockdown closures in March 2021, up from 166,000 for the week commencing 13 December. Pupils use Oak’s resources for remote learning while off ill or self-isolating and schools are able to use online lessons when teachers are absent. Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders (ASCL), said: “It is ominous if we are already seeing an increase in the number of teachers and pupils using online lessons because it suggests that there are a lot of children having to remain at home and learn remotely at a very early stage in the term.” The government is due to publish latest school attendance figures on Tuesday. Oak data suggests the sharpest increase in the use of its online resources has been in schools in the East Midlands and North West. Schools in England are also continuing to struggle with staff absence. A survey by the NASUWT teachers’ union found that nearly a quarter of teachers (23%) think staff absences because of Covid-19 are having a significant impact. Of the nearly 7,000 teachers who responded to the survey, 61% said they were having “some impact”, with almost half (46%) saying they had had to cover for absent colleagues. Less than half (44%) said their school had a plan in place for deploying CO2 monitors and 18% said there was no plan at all. A Department for Education spokesperson said: “We have provided extensive guidance for the early years workforce on the measures to take to reduce the spread of Covid-19, as well as significant financial support to protect providers from the impact of the pandemic. Providers can use existing flexibilities set out in the early years statutory framework to manage short-term workforce pressures, so long as children continue to be cared for safely.”Supporters of a prominent university professor, and one of Afghanistan’s most vocal critics of the Taliban, are calling for his release after he was arrested on Saturday. Faizullah Jalal, a professor at Kabul University, was detained by the Taliban after the group claimed he was responsible for a series of messages on social media attacking them. Taliban spokesperson, Zabihullah Mujahid, tweeted: “A fanatic named #Jalal has been arrested for his remarks on social media inciting people against the #system and playing with human dignity,” adding screenshots of posts from a social media account with Jalal’s name and photograph. But his daughter, Hosna Jalal, said the accounts listed by Mujahid are fake. “We had in fact reported them to Twitter a week prior, but they didn’t take any action. We have emails to prove that,” she said. Hosna, who is currently studying in Europe, said she first learned of the arrest from social media. “We don’t know where he is being held or how he is doing. The Taliban have refused to let us talk to him. We were able to confirm the news through friends who were with him at the time of the arrest,” she added. Jalal is one of the country’s best-known political commentators and a long-time activist against authoritarian regimes. He was arrested in 1978 for his role in protests against the communist coup in Afghanistan and was held and tortured in Pul-e-Charkhi prison. After his release, he joined Kabul University as a lecturer. In 1993, he was appointed vice-chancellor of the university, a position he held until 1996, when the Taliban seized Kabul. In 2001, after the fall of the Taliban, he was appointed deputy minister of education, before returning to academia. He is married to Massouda Jalal, Afghanistan’s first female presidential candidate and a former minister in the now abolished Ministry of Women’s Affairs. “This is hard for my mother but she understands, because all his life he has been part of the non-violent civil resistance,” Hosna said. “Every time I talk to him, he tells me how happy he is being among the people, being their voice. I am very proud of him, and we pray he is released and reunited with his people,” she added. Jalal’s supporters, particularly women’s groups, have taken to the streets in Kabul calling for his immediate release. Human rights groups, including Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, have also raised concerns over Jalal’s detention. “Despite the fact that Faizullah Jalal’s family have confirmed that the Twitter account set up in his name is fake, he remains detained in custody. The Taliban authorities must immediately and unconditionally release him,” Samira Hamidi, Afghan activist and Amnesty International’s South Asia campaigner, told the Guardian. Jalal appeared on a televised debate with a Taliban panellist in November 2021, telling him: “You can’t govern with force, terror, power and by destroying. This country belong to all people. The country doesn’t belong to one group, one ethnicity, one class or a group of four people.” His family grew very concerned over his safety after the debate. “We urged him to leave Kabul because the Taliban can be vengeful,” his daughter said. “(But) He has never wanted to leave. Even when we left, he refused to leave. And I know even after this he will not leave.”The Conservatives warned that if Jeremy Corbyn were elected prime minister he would take Britain back to the 1980s. With all the cheese and wine parties at Downing Street (Dominic Cummings makes new claim of party in No 10 garden in lockdown, 7 January), it seems as if Johnson is aiming for the 1970s. Pete Lavender Nottingham • Pots and kettles, worms not so much turning as performing pirouettes … Dominic Cummings leaves me breathless. He “claimed he warned at the time this appeared to be against the rules but it went ahead regardless”. Really? Vivien Scorer Southwell, Nottinghamshire • Elaine Yeo, a retired GP, writes a brief letter but delivers a big punch (Letters, 7 January): “I’ve long felt that general practice is an art – the art being when to use the science.” As a semi-retired psychoanalytic psychotherapist, I feel exactly the same. No matter what “the science” – the grand master of our times – prescribes, it always falls short of grasping the subtleties and paradoxes of human relationships. Peter Wilson Ashford, Kent • I remember as a child nightly praying for God to “lead us not into Thames station but deliver us from evil”, both of which he has subsequently failed to do (Letters, 7 January). Richard McNicol Malmesbury, Wiltshire • A year ago we were writing on the jam jar labels: “Marmalade 6-1-2021. Goodbye, Trump”. What should we write this year? Muriel and Christopher Nankivell Birmingham • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I expect you have had numerous stories of Royal Mail detective work after your report (‘Lives across from the Spar’: bizarrely labelled letter finds way to UK address, 7 January). Here is mine. A friend we made in Cuba promised to send us a card the following year when he visited Cambodia. He kept his word, but forgot his address book. Luckily he remembered our home town and its general location. He also provided a brief description of us. Sure enough, our local post office rose to the challenge. We have kept the card because it makes us smile and we have exchanged postcards with him every year since – correctly addressed, of course. Jane Burke Saltburn-by-the-Sea, North Yorkshire • I can beat Feargal Lynn. When I was at Poles Convent, a boarding school in Ware, Hertfordshire, in the 1960s, letters would frequently be delivered with the address rendered pictorially by some vertical lines, a question mark and a heart. We thought it was a scream; I think it was the most fun we had there. Kathy Doyle Cheshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Bruce Watson, guitarist and songwriter I knew [singer/guitarist] Stuart Adamson when he was in Skids and I was in the Delinquents and all the bands in Dunfermline used to rehearse in stables next to each other. When Skids were doing their third album he said to me: “Wouldn’t it be great to do a twin guitar thing?” I thought he was just being nice. Then after Skids split he knocked on my door and said: “Remember that conversation? Do you still want to do it?” The first Big Country lineup got on a tour with Alice Cooper, which was a crazy mistake. The crowd were throwing bottles of piss at us and all sorts, so we were pulled off the tour. Our rhythm section were really good musicians, but for some reason it wasn’t gelling. Our manager had seen Tony Butler [bass] and Mark Brzezicki [drums] playing with Pete Townshend. They were basically a rhythm section for hire, so we got them to play on some of our demos and thought: “This would be a great band.” We persuaded them to join us and it clicked. The checked or tartan shirts idea came from Bruce Springsteen. American working guys wore them – plus you could buy them cheap at Millets! The plan was for a twin guitar band that wouldn’t sound like Thin Lizzy or Status Quo, so we avoided playing blues licks. We played a lot of drone strings, so people said “the guitars sound like bagpipes”. Chance started out as an idea I put down on a four-track recorder. Stuart came up with the chorus and the lyrics, which were always fantastic. The music was usually really uplifting but there was a lot of tragedy in Stuart’s lyrics. Chance is almost a kitchen sink drama. Some nights we’d go off stage and the audience would just start singing the chorus – “Oh Lord, where did the feeling go?” They wouldn’t stop, so you’d go back on and play along with them. I still dream about Stuart [the singer killed himself in 2001]. Chance can move you to tears, especially that line. I try not to think about it too much on stage when I’m playing it now, otherwise I’d just break down. Tony Butler, bass and backing vocals I wanted Mark and I to be the Sly and Robbie of Soho, but Big Country’s manager asked us if we wanted to have a play with these guys from Scotland. We got together and I couldn’t understand a word they were saying – but it was a great band to play in. Live it was fun from start to finish, and the songs were dynamic enough to keep an atmosphere going for ages. Being a black British West Indian, I like music to move in a certain way and that was an attraction to Stuart. Mark and I made the music swing. Initially, Stuart wasn’t a very good singer. He’d always been a sideman – whether to Richard Jobson in Skids or whoever – but he was writing songs and wanted to be the person singing them. [Producer] Steve Lillywhite put a lot of work in with Stuart helping him to find his own voice and bridge from being a guitarist to a singer-guitarist-frontman. Stuart was well read but he didn’t have to look too far for inspiration. Chance is about a situation he would have encountered many times in a small town in Scotland: woman gets married young, has two sons, guy leaves and suddenly she’s a single parent. She fell for the first guy who treated her well – “He came like a hero from the factory floor” – and there’s that hint of violence, or at least rejection in her childhood, with “your father’s hand that always seemed like a fist”. Stuart did something very special with the chorus. He wasn’t religious, but he used “Oh Lord” in the sense that someone might scream out “Oh Jesus Christ” when something goes wrong. I got to know Stuart as well as he wanted me to. He was at pains to let people understand that he was a normal guy from a small town and that he wasn’t anything special or a “spokesperson for a generation”. He followed football, sat in the pub, kept himself to himself and didn’t talk about his feelings. Strapping his guitar on was the only thing that made him different, but in his songs he was able to articulate ordinary people’s lives and that connected. Vinyl reissues of Big Country’s first live album Without the Aid of a Safety Net and sixth album The Buffalo Skinners are out now. The current lineup – featuring Bruce Watson and Mark Brzezicki – are touring the UK until June. • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.At weekends Yevgeny Tereshchenko goes to the woods outside Kyiv and practises his shooting. “We need to be ready, morally and physically,” Tereshchenko explained, showing off a video in which he springs athletically into action and fires a rifle several times. A Ukrainian army officer until two years ago, Tereshchenko is preparing for a possible Russian attack. If Moscow does launch a further military operation against Ukraine, assuming diplomatic talks fail this week, he and his friends are ready to fight, he said. “There are a lot of us. It’s our house, our country,” he pointed out. Tereshchenko conceded that Russia has a formidable army, with 100,000 troops massed on the border. It could swiftly overrun much of Ukraine “in a Blitzkrieg”, he said. But he predicted that should the Kremlin seize new territory it would quickly find itself embroiled in a bloody and costly partisan war. “There will be many Russian casualties,” he anticipated. “The Kremlin can seize runways, demand concessions. But they will find it hard to hold cities. During the day they will see a civilian population. At night we will attack them with weapons and grenades.” As Russia and the US sat down on Monday for talks in Geneva, with Nato-Russia negotiations due to take place on Wednesday, the mood in the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv, was calm. Snow had settled for the first time this winter on the city’s cobbled boulevards and fairytale art nouveau mansions. Some people, like Tereshchenko, were following political events keenly. Others were doing their best to avoid them. One local journalist said she had gone on vacation, reasoning that it made sense to take a break now before a possible Russian attack later this month. “Actually I had an exam today. I’m focused on normal life,” said Nikita, a 20-year-old IT student sitting in a downtown coffee bar. “This situation has been going on since 2014. You can’t live under constant pressure. You adapt.” His friend Diana admitted: “I’m trying not to think about it. It’s too much negative. “Yes, the situation with Vladimir Putin is a bit scary. But we have so many other problems in Ukraine, including Covid. To think about one more is hard,” she said, before jumping in an Uber. Others were fatalistic in the face of Kremlin threats. Last summer Putin published an essay in which he asserted Ukraine and Russia were “one people”. He wants Nato to rule out membership for Ukraine and effectively to return eastern Europe to a Russian zone of influence. Would there be more war? “What Putin thinks he generally does,” Tatiana, a middle-aged pharmacist, said. “I wouldn’t describe myself at this moment as an optimist.” She added: “Some of the things he has written about history are ridiculous. He twists things for his own purposes. He lies.” Tereshchenko said he had fought in Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region, where Moscow-backed separatists run their own mini-fiefdoms from the cities of Donetsk and Luhansk. He said there were some “traitors” active in Ukrainian politics, who would be willing to work with Russia in the event of a takeover. Ukraine and Russia are different countries with different traditions – one democratic, the other strongly autocratic and repressive, he said. He reeled off a series of dates, starting with 1648 when Ukrainian Cossacks allied with Crimean Tatars to throw out their Polish overlords. The rebellion led to the creation of a hetmanate, a “democratic system” in which Ukrainians voted for a military chief or hetman. At the same time, eastern Ukraine became part of the Russian empire. Over the next two centuries Ukrainian traditions, culture and language were eroded, he said. Ukrainian statehood was too precious and too hard won to be sacrificed once again to Russian ambitions, he suggested. “There are groups of us in every town. Resistance won’t stop.” Tereshchenko was scathing about the US-Russia discussions taking place in Switzerland. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelensky was not at the table. “It’s true our leadership is weak. But how can you decide the future of a state without the state present?” he said.After returning to school earlier this week as a 15-year-old pupil, the notion that the government is seeing schools as a petri dish where herd immunity can be studied, sampled and scrutinised is becoming increasingly evident (Editorial, 4 January). The government has a long litany of failures when it comes to protecting our schools and colleges: a scandalous shortage of testing equipment, inadequate provision of ventilation and now a vaccine rollout lagging behind in the 12-15 age group. This is a time for real leadership, yet this government seems to be unable to implement the basic public health measures to keep our schools, colleges and pupils safe. Harry Aldridge Plymouth, Devon • I’ve had to self-isolate after contracting Omicron, and was therefore signed off sick by my college (Heads warn of weeks of Omicron disruption in English schools, 3 January). As one of the many teachers in this situation, and with a specialism in English, I’d like to raise a concern about the education secretary’s use of language. The problem of staff being off sick or in self-isolation has been described by Nadhim Zahawi (and consequently elsewhere) as one of “absenteeism”. I’m happy to accept that I’ve been absent from work, but a quick Google search will remind one that absenteeism describes “the practice of regularly staying away from work or school without good reason”. Could this be another example of the trickle-down of Britannia Unchained thinking from the government? Andrew Bailes London • If the government’s decision to direct secondary school pupils to wear masks in classrooms is to help mitigate the infectiousness of Omicron, I am confused by Nadhim Zahawi’s decision to ask schools to double up classes to cope with staff shortages. While Mr Zahawi’s own experience was in the independent sector with small class sizes, perhaps it has escaped his notice that doubling up in a state school classroom is likely to result in 60 pupils sitting in very close proximity. I wonder whether he has been paying sufficient attention in lessons given by scientific advisers. Ian Roberts Pett, East Sussex • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Boris Johnson’s response to the acquittal of the Colston Four has shades of another “trial” – namely, the one that flowed from Franz Kafka’s pen. Here is an individual who condemns the editing of history, yet is happy to completely revise his own history – both verbal and in print – should it suit his own needs at any given time. In fact, he was on record at last week’s PMQs denying a statement about the impact of inflation that he had made on camera, to a reporter, last year (Johnson fumbles and flails under pressure from Rayner, 5 January). If that is not editing retrospectively – which he laments so vocally in connection with the Colston case – then what is? But there seems to be no depths to which he won’t sink in his hypocrisy and opportunistic denialism. Never mind the confected outrage at the tearing down of one controversial statue; this PM is tearing down the reputation and integrity of his office and democracy itself, and continues to do so with impunity. Which is the greater threat to the social fabric? Colin Montgomery Edinburgh • Boris Johnson’s response to the verdict in the Colston statue trial demonstrates that logic didn’t form a central part of his Eton and Oxbridge education. “What you can’t do is go around seeking retrospectively to change our history or to bowdlerise it or edit it in retrospect. It’s like some person trying to edit their Wikipedia entry – it’s wrong,” he claimed (Politics live, 6 January). This must take some kind of prize for the world’s worst analogy: on Wikipedia people are usually trying to delete uncomfortable parts of their history that they don’t want in the public arena; whereas the Colston statue demonstration has successfully brought to light and underlined the barbaric history of the UK’s worst slave trader, previously seen as a pillar of Bristol society. Colston hasn’t been deleted from history by the toppling of his statue, his story has simply been revealed in all its awfulness. Carl Gardner London • Boris Johnson has recently been quoted as saying that while he wouldn’t comment on the acquittals of the four individuals, he didn’t think it right that people should go around changing British history. I fail to see how removing a contentious statue in any way changes British history. What Colston (and others) did remains done and cannot be undone. Modern attitudes to all of those actions can be, and hopefully are being, changed and his legacy reappraised. None of that in any way changes the history behind the story. What Johnson’s comments show, however, is how he and his ilk are prepared to misuse words and history for political advantage. Graham Bould Dereham, Norfolk • The news that the attorney general may refer the acquittal of the Colston Four to the court of appeal (Suella Braverman accused of politically driven meddling over Colston Four, 7 January) is straight from the dictator’s playbook intrinsic to any rightwing authoritarian regime; wherever the courts hand down rulings considered unacceptable, the court must be brought to heel or the laws changed. Just as “sleaze” should rightly be called “corruption”, so these attempts by our anti-democratic government to limit the independence of the judiciary should rightly be called fascist. Richard Giles Tynemouth, Tyne and Wear • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Earlier today I set you the puzzle below, which is based on Gödel’s incompleteness theorem. As I discussed in the original post, this theorem is one of the most famous in maths and states that in any mathematical system there will always be true statements that cannot be proved. For example, in a formal mathematical setting, the statement ‘This sentence is unprovable” is both true and formally unprovable. When Gödel published his theorem in 1931 it up-ended the study of the foundations of mathematics and its consequences are still being felt today. The two tribes of If In the Ocean of Deduction lies the logical island of If. People born here belong to one of two tribes: the Alethians and the Pseudians. The only way to tell an Alethian from a Pseudian is to talk to them. Alethians always speak the truth, no matter what they are saying. Pseudians will always utter falsehoods, no matter what they are saying. At the centre of the island, the Master of the Alethians keeps the Ledger of Identity, a book that lists the names of everyone born on the island together with their tribe. The information in the Ledger of Identity is correct and freely available to anyone who asks. One day, an intrepid explorer arrives on If. She encounters various inhabitants and identifies them as Alethians and Pseudians by asking clever questions. After several successful such encounters, she meets a man called Kurt. The explorer does not know his tribal affiliation, but before she has time to ask him a question, he says “You will never have concrete evidence that confirms that I am an Alethian.” 1. Is Kurt an Alethian, a Pseudian or neither? 2. How might this relate to Gödel’s incompleteness theorem? Solution 1. Kurt is neither. If he was a Pseudian, then the statement “You will never have concrete evidence that confirms that I am an Alethian” is true. But Pseudians never tell the truth, so Kurt cannot be Pseudian. If he was Alethian, then everything he says, and therefore also the statement “You will never have concrete evidence that confirms that I am an Alethian” is true. But we know the statement is false, since the explorer can go to the Ledger of Infinity, look up his name, and check that he is Alethian. So Kurt is not Alethian. In conclusion: Kurt was not born on the island of If. 2. Gödel’s incompleteness theorem states that there are mathematical statements that are true but not formally provable. A version of this puzzle leads us to something similar: an example of a statement that is true but there is no concrete evidence for its truth. For example, assume that the explorer is the first person ever to step on the island who wasn’t born there, so everyone is either an Alethian or a Pseudian, and that the explorer knows this fact. Let us also imagine that the moment Kurt speaks, the Ledger burns to ashes. (The destruction of the ledger is to avoid running into the self-contradictions we saw in 1.) By our previous argument, no Pseudian can ever utter Kurt’s statement, so Kurt cannot be a Pseudian. Thus, by our additional assumption about everyone being born on If, he must be an Alethian, and thus, his utterance is true, i.e., the explorer will never have concrete evidence that he is an Alethian. But she will also never have concrete evidence that Kurt’s statement itself is true: if she ever does, it would be concrete evidence that he is an Alethian (since only those speak the truth). But that would say that the statement is false. So, Kurt’s utterance is true but there is no concrete evidence for its truth. Indeed, his sentence is precisely the type of self-referential statement that forms the basis of Gödel’s proof of his incompleteness theorem. To repeat what I said at the top of the story: in a formal mathematical setting, the statement ‘This sentence is unprovable” is both true and formally unprovable. In summary, the island of If is a magical place where all true statements about tribal identity can be verified in the Ledger. When we take away the Ledger, however, it doesn’t take too long to find a true sentence for which there is no concrete evidence. The world of mathematics is analogous to If without the Ledger. Maths has no unmediated access to truth, which leads to the existence of statements that are both true and unprovable. I hope you enjoyed today’s puzzle. Thanks to Professor Benedikt Löwe of Churchill College, Cambridge, for suggesting the idea. If you are interested in logic, many events are taking place on Friday January 14 to celebrate UNESCO’s World Logic Day. I’ll be back in two weeks. I set a puzzle here every two weeks on a Monday. I’m always on the look-out for great puzzles. If you would like to suggest one, email me. I’m the author of several books of puzzles, most recently the Language Lover’s Puzzle Book. I also give school talks about maths and puzzles (online and in person). If your school is interested please get in touch.“Fauci ouchie”, the rhyming phrase for a Covid-19 vaccine dreamed up in honour of Dr Anthony Fauci, has been named the “most creative word or phrase of the year” by the American Dialect Society. Founded in 1889, the society is made up of linguists, lexicographers, etymologists and scholars dedicated to the study of the English language in North America. More than 300 members took part in this year’s annual meeting, at which “Fauci ouchie” beat “chin diaper” – defined as a “face mask worn below the chin instead of properly covering the nose and mouth” – to the accolade. The meeting also saw “insurrection” named the overall word of 2021, beating vax/vaxx. “More than a year after the attack on the US Capitol on Jan 6, 2021, the nation is still coming to grips with what happened that day,” said Ben Zimmer, chair of the society’s new words committee. “At the time, words like coup, sedition and riot were used to describe the disturbing events at the Capitol, but insurrection – a term for a violent attempt to take control of the government – is the one that many felt best encapsulates the threat to democracy experienced that day. The lasting effects of that insurrection will be felt for years to come.” The informal word of the year title went to “yassify”, which is “to apply image filters to a person’s photo to transform it into a cartoonishly beautiful image; more generally, to make beautiful or glamorous”, while the “most useful” crown went to “hard pants”. These are defined by the ADS as “pants that lack an elastic waistband or stretchy fabric, unlike the ‘soft pants’ favored by those working from home during the pandemic”. The new word deemed “most likely to succeed” by the society was “antiwork” – meaning a “position supporting the refusal to work, pushing back against labour exploitation”. The society said its selection of the word of the year is the longest-running such vote anywhere, dating back to 1990. In 2000, the society chose its “word of the past millennium” as she, the feminine pronoun. “Before the year 1000, there was no she in English; just heo, which singular females had to share with plurals of all genders because it meant they as well,” it said at the time. “In the 12th century, however, she appeared, and she has been with us ever since.”Hollywood’s most tiring movie franchise has finally expired (with any luck) in a spasm of pure hyperactive pointlessness. Hotel Transylvania was the spooky, Halloweeny, animated family comedy that first surfaced in 2012 about Count Dracula (voiced by Adam Sandler) running a wacky hotel for his fellow scary creatures in darkest Transylvania – Tex Avery meets the Munsters. He discovers that his teen vampire daughter Mavis (Selena Gomez) has fallen for the lost human backpacker, Johnny (Andy Samberg) who shows up at the hotel by accident. The 2015 sequel, co-written by Sandler, had Mavis and Johnny present Count Dracula with a grandchild and the 2018 threequel sent them all off on a frantically unfunny summer vacation. After this, I wrote: “A fourth one doesn’t bear thinking about.” But here it is. Adam Sandler has dropped out and now it’s Brian Hull doing the Dracula voice. The non-premise now is that Dracula is thinking of leaving the hotel to Mavis and Johnny, but his son-in-law’s outrageous incompetence makes him have second thoughts; so he lies and tells Jonny there is a law that only monsters can inherit the hotel. Johnny gets the elderly Prof Van Helsing to zap him with a secret “Monstification” ray-gun which turns him into a scary creature, but its errant beams turn all the other monsters into human civilians, including Drac himself. Cue all sorts of strangely tired, laugh-free goofiness, with none of the funny lines and wit that come as standard with Pixar/Disney films. I guess it would pacify very young children. • Hotel Transylvania: Transformania is released on 14 January on Amazon Prime Video.MEET THE NEW TOON, SAME AS THE OLD TOON There’s a faint irony in Arsenal taking to the pitch in crisp, clean, pristine, freshly laundered, all-white shirts only to end up touching cloth. The 14-time FA Cup winners went out meekly and messily at the first hurdle last night, thoroughly outplayed by Nottingham Forest. Left-back Nuno Tavares delivered not so much a performance, more a dirty protest, misplacing passes and shanking balls to such an extent that, upon being hooked after a mere 34 minutes, he was forced to theatrically yank off his gloves to prove to his manager he still possessed some basic motor skills. He’ll have better days. They surely can’t get any worse. But while one of the country’s superclubs losing to a Championship side represents something of a mild surprise, the result doesn’t register as a massive shock. Nottingham Forest may have been down on their luck for two or three decades, but when all’s said and done, they’re still Nottingham Forest. Cambridge United, on the other hand, have only won six League One matches all season, yet on Saturday afternoon a club from the Premier League, the richest in the world, still managed to lose to them at home. Hey Arsenal, hold this bottle of Broon, will you. Yes, it’s true that Newcastle United are not very good at the moment. Yes, you wouldn’t put too much money on them hitting the largest part of a cow with a ukulele. Yes, they haven’t won the cup since 1955. Yes, they’re the living embodiment of the quintessential cup shock, their defeat to Hereford in 1972 subsequently played on the BBC more times than the national anthem. Yet even though in many ways their defeat to a third-tier rabble was thoroughly predictable, it still classes as a proper old-school embarrassment. One for the ages. Speaking of which, the defeat ensures Newcastle’s 67-year wait for a domestic trophy drags on, though they might have a good chance of winning the Championship next year. Spare a thought for Yasir al-Rumayyan, who after the match gave the players he’ll soon replace a performative message of support, and might only now be realising what a scrape the Saudi Public Investment Fund has got itself into. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE Join Scott Murray from 7.55pm GMT for hot FA Cup MBM coverage of Manchester United 2-1 Aston Villa. QUOTE OF THE DAY “This is a person who three years later was still complaining about the referee in the 6-1. Get over it, Unai” – Gerard Piqué takes aim at Villarreal boss Unai Emery for dredging up an old handball decision involving the Barça defender when asked for his views on the state of La Liga referees. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Football Weekly looks back on a glorious weekend of FA Cup drama, from Cambridge to Kidderminster via the City Ground. Have a listen here. FIVER LETTERS “I love Ally McCoist as a co-commentator, but I was disappointed on Sunday to hear him refer to ‘Notts’ Forest in the FA Cup against Arsenal. It’s a good job that nobody links the name of his favourite club to one of their rivals” – Jim Hearson. “You’ll no doubt recall my letter from 9 August, when I informed you that I had just picked up three of the Premier League’s five possible ‘aka’s for my fantasy league team (Wan-Bissaka, Bukayo Saka and Patson Daka). Predictably, my experiment (akasperiment?) did not go well. Saka has done great, but Daka hasn’t really played much and frankly I feel lucky to only have minus-five points from former footballer Wan-Bissaka. We had our mid-season auction last night and I jettisoned the latter two. Heed my warning” – Sholem Lenkiewicz. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Jim Hearson. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Manchester City cannot be held responsible for the abuse suffered by eight men at the hands of Barry Bennell more than 30 years ago, a high court judge has ruled. The eight men are “shocked and dismayed” at the decision and plan to appeal, their solicitor confirmed after the verdict. Zimbabwe were this close to getting a valiant 0-0 draw with tournament favourites Senegal. But then Sadio Mané popped up from 12 yards. Barça-are-back latest: the Catalan club are able to register new signing Ferran Torres under Financial Fair Play rules after defender Samuel Umtiti agreed to an effective salary reduction as part of his contract extension. “FC Barcelona wishes to publicly express its gratitude to Samuel for his willingness,” a club statement fawned. Bologna have responded angrily after Sunday’s game at Cagliari, postponed due to Covid-19 cases at the club, was rearranged for this Tuesday. The Serie A side have said the decision “shows contempt for the most elementary principles of competitive fairness,” with players in isolation unable to train before the match. Federico Chiesa faces several months out after suffering knee-ligament knack in Juventus’ win over Roma. The Italy winger will undergo ACL surgery this week. But good news for West Ham: Kurt Zouma will boost their push for Champions League qualification by returning ahead of schedule from a hamstring twang! And Kidderminster will host West Ham in the FA Cup fourth round, while fellow non-leaguers Boreham Wood go to Bournemouth and Nottingham Forest host the holders, Leicester City. Plus some less intriguing fixtures. STILL WANT MORE? There were more than 10 games in the FA Cup third round but that hasn’t stopped 10 talking points from the weekend jumping on the bandwagon. Tom Jenkins was at Boreham Wood’s win over Wimbledon and spotted a famous face in the crowd. Bayern lost as the Bundesliga returned but the spectre of empty stands loomed over the weekend, writes Andy Brassell. Sure, it might have had seven goals, a red card, a penalty, game-changing substitutions, VAR interventions, injuries and more, but what has Roma 3-4 Juventus ever done for us? Niko Kovac took Monaco from relegation candidates to title contenders – so why on earth did they sack him, asks Adam White. It’s not getting better for Newcastle yet, writes Ewan Murray. Jonathan Wilson takes in the Afcon 2022 opener. Jamie Jackson on Manchester United’s pressing problems. Speaking of which – has Cristiano Ronaldo had enough of Old Trafford life already? It’s all in Monday’s Rumour Mill. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! A MODEST BUMPNovak Djokovic ended an extraordinary day in Melbourne with his Australian Open dreams revived – for now – after winning an appeal against his visa cancellation. But his battle to stay in the country may yet have another twist in the tale, with the Australian government threatening to revoke his entry visa for a second time. The circumstances have left the the world’s No 1 men’s tennis player, who spent four days in an immigration detention centre after his medical exemption from strict coronavirus vaccination rules was denied by border officials, in limbo days before he is due to begin the defence of his title next Monday. A remarkable 24 hours also saw Djokovic’s fans pepper-sprayed by police as they celebrated his release in Melbourne, his mother claim that her son had been “tortured” while in custody, and his father appeal to Queen Elizabeth to put pressure on the Australian government. However shortly after emerging from his lawyers’ offices a free man when a judge quashed the decision to deny his entry to Australia, Djokovic insisted that he wanted to focus purely on his tennis in the coming days. “I’m pleased and grateful that the judge overturned my visa cancellation,” he wrote alongside a photo of himself and his team on court at the Rod Laver Arena, where he has won a record nine men’s singles titles. “Despite all that has happened, I want to stay and try to compete at the Australian Open.” “I remain focused on that. I flew here to play at one of the most important events we have in front of the amazing fans.” It is unlikely to be that straightforward. Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, is still considering revoking Djokovic’s visa using powers granted to him by Australia’s Migration Act. A spokesman for Mr Hawke said the decision was an “ongoing process” and a decision is expected in the next 48 hours. Hawke, one of the closest political allies of prime minister Scott Morrison, now has a momentous political decision to make: let Djokovic stay and play for a record 21st grand slam singles title; or deport him, which comes with a hefty three-year ban from re-entering Australia. To exercise that power, Hawke will have to be satisfied that there is a ground to cancel the visa – in this case the alleged threat to public health – and that it is “in the public interest to cancel the visa”. The day started with Djokovic being released after a lengthy seven-hour hearing in a Melbourne court, with Judge Anthony Kelly calling the actions of the Australian Border Force “unreasonable”. When Djokovic had arrived in Melbourne last Thursday officials had initially agreed to give him until 8.30am to speak to Tennis Australia and respond to the proposed visa cancellation after he told them he was unvaccinated and they said his medical exemption was invalid in federal law. However, his visa was then cancelled at 7.42 am and he was sent to a detention centre. “We all play by the same rules,” Judge Kelly said. “Stated in other terms: those rules were not observed.” Court documents showed Djokovic’s reason for seeking a medical exemption from Australia’s vaccination requirements was that he contracted Covid on 16 December. This was accepted by Tennis Australia and the Victorian state government medical panels which granted him the exemption on 30 December. However a delegate of the home affairs minister cancelled his visa after he arrived in Australia on the basis that the tennis star might pose a risk to public health. The Australian government argues recently having Covid by itself does not justify an exemption in federal law, because Djokovic has recovered. His initial exemption caused a huge backlash in Australia, where 90% of the adult population are fully vaccinated, while the country imposed some of the strictest lockdowns in the world that prevented citizens from returning home. As the news filtered through that Djokovic had been successful, supporters gathered at his lawyer’s office to celebrate. Later police pepper sprayed some fans who blocked the path of a car they believed was carrying Djokovic, with some also banging on the window, throwing bottles at the vehicle and even jumping up and down on top of it. Meanwhile in Serbia, Djokovic’s mum Dijana said that the decision to revoke her son’s visa was the “biggest victory” of his career. She then alleged that her son had suffered “torture” while staying at immigration hotel where refugees and asylum seekers have long complained of poor conditions. “It is bigger than any grand slam,” she added. “He hasn’t broken any of their laws and he was subjected to torture, to harassment. We will hear even more about what he has gone through.” Meanwhile Djokovic’s father, Srdjan, urged the queen to put pressure on the Australian authorities. “I call on the Queen of Britain, Elizabeth, the leader of the Commonwealth, to intervene and protect the human rights of my son Novak Djokovic and to stop the political prosecution that has been carried out against him since he came to Australia,” he said. “Over the past few days, it’s been very, very difficult for everyone in the world who is free thinking,” he added. “But he is mentally extremely, extremely strong. They took away all his rights as a human being. He refused to revoke his visa. They gave him no right to prepare his defence for several hours, and they took away his phone. Fortunately they gave him back his phone. He contacted his legal team who mounted a fantastic defence, that they could not match.” However in the days ahead Djokovic will likely also be asked to justify why he posed for photographs with children at a prize-giving ceremony in Serbia the day after a positive PCR test was confirmed. Photographs on the Belgrade Tennis Association’s Facebook page posted on the 17 December show Djokovic posing with a group of young people at a tennis awards ceremony. The French newspaper L’Equipe insist that he also posed for a photoshoot with them on 18 December. However when his brother Djordje was asked on Monday about Djokovic’s movements after his positive Covid test in December he immediately closed down the press conference. Meanwhile the president of the Serb parliament, Ivica Dacic, said he expected Hawke to revoke Djokovic’s visa on Tuesday. “Obviously the Australian authorities will decide to deport Djokovic, who will then not be able to enter Australia for the next three years,” said Dacic, a former Serbian prime minister whose Socialist Party is part of the ruling coalition. Dacic said the incident would leave “a lasting mark on relations between Serbia and Australia. “Every state has the discretionary right to refuse or allow entry to any person, but it never happens to prominent people such as Djokovic,” he said. “That is something you rarely see. In general, [Australia’s] behaviour has been shameful and disgraceful.” *Additional reporting by Milivoje Pantovic with N1 Television in BelgradeAldi’s sales edged higher in the month leading up to Christmas, as the German discounter predicted it would prosper as households tightened their belts. Sales at the UK’s fifth-largest supermarket chain were up 0.4% in December 2021 compared with the equivalent month in 2020, despite a boost that year from people ordering more groceries amid a lockdown that forced restaurants and cafes to close. Kicking off the Christmas updates for supermarkets, Aldi claimed figures from the research firm Kantar showed it was the “only major supermarket” to increase its sales in December. Sales growth over the month was driven by new store openings and record sales of its premium range, and strong demand for beer, wine and spirits. Aldi’s chief executive said the discounter stood to benefit even further if people opted for cheaper shopping lists this year, as a cost-of-living crisis looms because of rising energy bills and higher taxes. Giles Hurley, Aldi UK’s chief executive, said: “There’s no doubt that 2021 was a long and difficult year for lots of people, but our amazing colleagues stopped at nothing as they came together to deliver the Christmas that our customers deserved. “As we look ahead, the top priority for most families this year will be managing their household budgets in the face of rising living costs.” Aldi UK and Ireland, privately owned by the German company Aldi Sud, said its total sales were up 8.1% compared with 2019 before the pandemic affected trading. However, analysts estimated that the chain’s sales fell at established stores, with all growth coming from new store openings. Kunaal Shah, a retail analyst at GlobalData, said Aldi’s festive performance was disappointing: “Growth achieved by the discounter in 2020 was predominantly driven by higher consumer grocery spend during the national lockdowns helped by the closure of the hospitality sector, but Aldi’s poor online proposition has held it back in 2021 and will hinder the retailer’s future growth plans as consumers increasingly buy online.” However, the upmarket northern grocer Booths also enjoyed increased sales in the Christmas period. Sales at the group’s 27 established stores rose 6.5% in the three weeks to 1 January. The family-owned company said shoppers had planned ahead amid fears of restrictions because of the Omicron variant of Covid-19, with sales of frozen party food grow almost tripling – up 170% – and frozen desserts up 41%. The supermarket’s chief operating officer, Nigel Murray, said there was also a late surge: “Customers clearly trusted Booths to ‘deliver the goods’ as the final trading week saw record sales levels achieved.” The strong numbers at both ends of the market indicate a second decent Christmas for supermarkets as Omicron put a dampener on visits to pubs, bars and restaurants and encouraged many to entertain at home. While Aldi claimed to be the only major supermarket to enjoy higher year-on-year sales during December 2021, several big supermarkets are yet to release figures. Tesco, Sainsbury’s and Marks &amp; Spencer are due to publish their festive trading results later this week.She was the first deaf contestant and winner of Strictly Come Dancing, and now Rose Ayling-Ellis is set to make history again by taking part in the UK’s first arena touring show that will have a British Sign Language interpreter at every performance. For each of the 33 shows of the forthcoming Strictly Live UK tour, producers are providing a registered interpreter who will appear on two large screens either side of the stage, meaning deaf people can sit almost anywhere in the venues to enjoy the event. After winning the Strictly glitterball trophy, EastEnders actor Ayling-Ellis said she hoped her achievement would help with “breaking the barriers” for deaf people. Her appearance on the BBC One dancing competition helped increase awareness of the deaf community and sign language. After her partially silent dance with Giovanni Pernice last autumn, searches for information about sign language rose by almost 500% and the BSL Courses website reported an increase of almost 3,000% in sign-ups for its free training programmes. Ayling-Ellis, who stars in Strictly Live UK along with fellow former contestants including Sara Davies and Tilly Ramsay, said: ”I’m delighted that every performance of the Strictly Live Tour will be signed by a BSL interpreter and put on to the screens so the whole audience will be able to see it. “With 33 shows across the country, I really hope this news encourages more deaf people of all ages to come and enjoy the show.” Camilla Arnold, series producer for the BBC’s long-running deaf community show See Hear, told the Guardian: “To have BSL access at every performance on the Strictly tour is a huge milestone for the deaf community, as we have, up to now, been restricted to very few dates with BSL access for performances and shows. “This is such an exciting period for the deaf community, with See Hear celebrating its 40th birthday last year, the possibility of the BSL bill (England) being passed at some [time] in the near future and, of course, Rose … shining the torch for the deaf community.” Although many theatres and arenas, such as the O2, can provide sign language interpretation to make shows more accessible, the producers behind the Strictly Live UK tour said their show is the first national British tour to feature a BSL signing at every performance. Strictly Live UK begins in Birmingham on 20 January before going to other major cities including Manchester, Glasgow, Newcastle and London.Bugs, butterflies and the blues were all important interests to my friend, Peter Moody, who has died aged 77. He will be remembered by his friends and family for his modesty and good humour. In the early 1960s, while he was working in Epsom, Surrey, Peter used to go to the local art college at lunchtimes to hang out with the musicians Duster Bennett and Top Topham. With Roger Pearce, the guitarist from the Muskrats, they formed the Grebbels; the singer and guitarist Peter Green regularly watched them play. The Grebbels were managed by the promoter Giorgio Gomelsky, alongside the Rolling Stones and the Yardbirds. They played frequently at London venues including the Crawdaddy, Eel Pie Island and the Marquee club. After the Grebbels split with Gomelsky, Peter joined the John Dummer Band. Later, living in Bristol, Peter also started his own blues record label, Sunflower, and immersed himself in the city’s vibrant folk-blues scene at the Dug Out and the Troubadour. He met the singer-guitarist Al Jones and they gigged together. Later, Peter also played with the Eddie Martin Band. Born in Taunton, Somerset, he was the younger child of Clare (nee Godfrey) and Edward Moody, the manager of an asbestos company. The family moved to Surrey in the mid-50s, settling in Cheam, but Peter’s love of nature and steam trains evolved from his annual holidays back in the West Country, spent with his grandmother in Lympstone, Devon. Interested in insects and butterflies, and particularly hover flies, he meticulously recorded the species he observed in the countryside and garden, keeping photographic records. In Surrey, he attended Wallington Independent grammar school, where he made lifelong friends. He went on to work for a building supplies company in Epsom, moving in 1966 with his parents to Bristol, where he had a successful management career in that industry. From his marriage to Lynn he had three children. When they separated in the mid-90s, Peter moved back to Surrey and re-met his former teenage girlfriend, Shirley Howe. They married in 2009. In 1997 Peter was offered a job with Trojan Records as a researcher and compiler and developed their Indigo R&amp;B label. Also, on his own initiative, Peter pursued royalties for blues musicians, concerned they should be paid their rightful dues. Towards the end of his life Peter took great delight in working on a Fleetwood Mac blues album. He was also very proud of his extraordinary American regional blues compilations; and found a welcome home with the Wienerworld record label for his beautifully crafted collections. He had recently produced a British blues rarities release, Something Inside of Me: Unreleased Masters and Demos from the British Blues Years 1963-1976, in which he can also be heard accompanying Al Jones. He is survived by Shirley, the three sons from his first marriage, and six grandchildren. His sister, Pat, died in 2005.Something amazing happened on Saturday: Levante Unión Deportiva won a game of football. “How lovely! I’m very emotional. How lovely it is to win, to feel this again,” their captain, “commander” José Luis Morales, said when the longest wait ever was at last over, a little hope let in at 3.54pm on 8 January 2022. They hadn’t experienced this since 10 April 2021, eight weeks from the end of last season. They hadn’t experienced this at all. That day, Levante defeated Eibar 1-0. Since then, nine months and 27 matches passed, every team in primera: they didn’t beat any of them. Twenty weeks into the season, 273 days later, this weekend at last they did. Officially the worst team in La Liga history – Sporting Gijón’s 24-game winless run from 1998 was surpassed a month ago – on Saturday afternoon Levante defeated Real Mallorca 2-0. “No, it’s not the Champions League, but it’s a first,” their coach said. It might still prove to be nothing, relegation a reality, only this moment will always be something. “The best gift The Three Kings could bring,” Morales called it, having recovered from Covid and come on to clinch victory. If it had to happen sometime and it probably had to happen like this. At the end of a week in which furious fans waited for the bus, whistling them home from a 5-0 hammering in Villarreal; in which the manager, their third this season, admitted “I don’t know if we’ve hit rock bottom” but it felt like it, and the president said he would willingly walk, pleading with everyone not to “self-destruct”. At the end of a game where they were somehow still standing, their goalkeeper saving a penalty and their opponents having two goals disallowed, but still not safe until the very last kick which must become come the first. Asked to sum it up, Soldado said: “Relief. Suffering. Need.” Soldado had scored the opener just after half time, his first for the club he joined for €500,000. Roger Martí had then hit the bar. But Mallorca had pushed Levante back. Brian Oliván saw a penalty saved by Aitor Fernández, aided by a spot of what Morales called kirikocho or jinxing from afar. Fer Niño then had a goal ruled out for a handball spotted by the VAR and Takeshi Kubo had one taken away when he was ruled offside straight from a short corner. Now, Aitor said, Levante were “all hanging from the goal posts,” desperately holding on. Until at last they could let go. The clock said 95.47 when Mallorca got a last corner, goalkeeper Leo Román up, only for Levante’s centre-back Róber Pier to clear it up the line, past another ball on the pitch, for Roger. Way over on the other wing, Levante’s subs and staff were on their feet waving frantically. Some pleaded for the whistle, others for Roger to run. Up the wing, anywhere, just out of there. The camera on them, poetry in pictures, they soon changed their minds: Roger had seen Morales sprinting alongside. With the clock on 96.35, he scored, all those months and all those defeats falling away as he pulled at the badge on his shirt. Liberated, the rest set off down the touchline to join him. They were everywhere, impossible to keep count of them all, something almost biblical about the sudden, surreal glimpse of Shkodran Mustafi’s crutches raised somewhere in the stampede. This was the resurrection and in the corner they were roaring, the pile of people growing, fans tumbling down the terrace. Everywhere there were embraces, screams. Duarte lifted Morales like a trophy. Jorge Miramón was in tears. They had actually done it. A boy in the stands fell exhausted into his dad’s arms. Standing alone on the touchline, Mallorca manager Luis García silently waited for the Levante coach to return from the corner to shake his hand and congratulate him. His name is Alessio Lisci and he had done what more experienced and supposedly more qualified men could not, the first coach to win with Levante this season. He is younger than the man who had just scored the winner and looks it too. Born in Rome in late 1985, Lisci never played beyond the seventh tier in Italy and began coaching early. One day, he wrote to every club in Spain. Three replied: one fell through; Atlético Madrid offered him a job coaching seven-a-side; and Levante invited him over to work in the academy. That was over ten years ago. Now, at 36, he is the youngest coach in La Liga. The 10th Italian to manage here, on some list with Sacchi, Capello, Ancelotti and the rest, his experience was a little different. At youth level, coaching is not well paid so Lisci worked as salesman for an Italian food importer, visiting restaurants in the providing parmesan, pasta and tomato. “That helps,” he says, “because when hard times come, you know you have been through harder ones.” He briefly departed when the coach he worked under with the Juvenil A (U19s) was sacked but was called back, able to continue thanks to the Leonardo Da Vinci programme. Nicknamed the Conte of Buñol, Lisci is methodical, open, ambitious, dedicated to the point of admitting it damages your personal life. He coached the Alevin D (U12), Infantil E (U13), Infantil C (U14), Cadete B (U16), Juvenil B (U18), and was been assistant coach in the Juvenil A (U19). In December 2020, he was given the B team. A year later, he was announced as first team coach. Unable to afford anyone else, Levante knew there were few other options but also that they could trust him; he knew that if an opportunity ever presented itself, it would be because things were bad but that there was something there somewhere. Paco López had taken charge of more games than anyone in the club’s history, he was Levante, yet was sacked after picking up four points in eight games. Javier Pereira left having picked up three in seven, the entire sporting directorate sacked with him: Manolo Salvador, David Navarro and Manu Farjado. Lisci came with good will – he is one of them, a club man in the middle of the crowd talking to angry fans last Monday – but on an impossible mission, or so it goes. His first game was a 0-0 draw with Osasuna. That was followed by three losses in which they conceded 18 goals but on Saturday there he was, leading his players into a celebratory circle, a win finally secured nine months later, fans chanting: “Yes, we can!” “Thanks for your patience, thanks for your support, sorry for the delay,” Lisci tweeted. “This is a day we deserved,” Morales said. As he ducked into the tunnel, Levante’s captain recorded a message, thanking the fans: “With you, we can do it,” he shouted. “Come on! Shit on the mother!” After the goal Lisci had embraced him, then stepped back to point at him. Asked afterwards what his manager had said, Morales replied: “That we’re going to get out of this.” He has done it before. Last season, Lisci took over and lifted the B team to salvation. “And that was harder: that team was sunk,” he said. “What I went through last year helps a lot this year”. There is a plan too, he told Cadena Ser: forget every game is a final, it’s about short and mid-term targets, achievable objectives. Levante remain bottom, three points off Cádiz, five behind Elche, six behind Alavés and safety. Getafe are seven in front, Mallorca nine. Lisci knows his defence is a mess, that his best players are two or three years past their best, that there is no money and that relegation remains likely. But least it’s not a certainty any more. After Villarreal, Lisci insisted “this is not our league”, but this is: Mallorca was the first of a three-game relegation run followed by Cádiz and Getafe, and they won. That, he insists, changes everything, bringing hope, unity, a shared cause. “This has to be the start of something,” Aitor said. “It’s very hard: the players suffer it a lot, there’s tension, the team doesn’t let go,” Lisci admitted after Levante’s first La Liga win in 28 and his first ever. “But weeks ago, I said the first would come like this, with suffering. You’re not going to end the run with a 3-0. This is how I dreamed it and it’s good to win this way because there will be more games like this. Things change now. In the dressing room the players had another face, other thoughts. You can say I’m mad but this has cleared our minds. It’s hard but you can do it.” Ten months later, longer than any other club had ever taken, Levante finally did. Now they just have to do it all over again.Labour has said that a leaked letter suggests the housing budget, and not new taxes for developers, may end up paying the £4bn cost of new protection for leaseholders living in flats with dangerous cladding. The shadow levelling up secretary, Lisa Nandy, made the claim in the Commons, where she said the announcement from Michael Gove was less substantial than he implied. (See 3.50pm.) Gove insisted the government was willing to use taxation to force developers to pay up. (See 3.54pm.) He also said the government would legislate to protect leaseholders not just from cladding costs, but from non-cladding costs too. (See 5.38pm.) Boris Johnson has said the government is “looking at the science” of moving to an isolation period of five days in England instead of seven for a positive Covid case, after calls to ease staffing shortages across the economy. The number of Covid patients in hospital in England and Scotland has continued to increase, according to newly reported figures, as the UK reported 142,224 Covid cases on Monday – the first rise in six days. Hospitals in England will be able to use private hospitals and staff under a deal with the NHS to maintain services as Omicron cases surge, avoiding delays in treatment for patients with illnesses such as cancer. Boris Johnson will not face a new investigation by the parliamentary standards commissioner, Kathryn Stone, over the refurbishment of the Downing Street flat, No 10 has confirmed. The UK has recorded 142,244 new Covid cases and 77 further deaths, the government has announced. That means the number of new cases over the past week is just 1% up on the total for the the previous week. That for is all from me for today. But our Covid coverage continues on our global live blog. It’s here. Commenting on Gove’s announcement, David O’Leary, policy director at the Home Builders Federation, told Radio 4’s PM programme said the solution to the cladding problem needed to go beyond developers and builders. He explained: We are keen to work with the government - and we have [been] throughout the process - to find solutions. We would like to see other sectors brought into the discussion as well. There are questions to be asked about the product manufacturing sector. Clearly there are some issues with testing and the testing regime on products on which we are reliant. This a conversation that needs to go beyond property developers. This is from Jack Simpson, news editor at Inside Housing, on what he says was the most significant new revelation from the Gove exchanges in the Commons. The point about non-cladding related costs being covered was not explicit in the department’s press release, or in the briefing issued in advance. Some of the criticism of the announcement (like Sadiq Khan’s, see 5.03pm) has said non-cladding costs should have been covered. But after Lisa Nandy, the shadow levelling up secretary, said in the chamber that non-cladding costs needed to be covered, Gove replied: “I agree.” The Labour MP Clive Betts, who chairs the Commons housing committee, raised the same point, and, again, Gove provided an asssurance. He said: We will make sure that we provide leaseholders with statutory protection. That’s what we aim to do and we will work with colleagues across the house in order to make sure that that statutory protection extends for all of the work provided in order to make building safe. Gove had made this point in some interviews this morning too, but the departmental press notice was more ambiguous. And the Green party has also criticised the Gove announcement. This is from its co-leader Carla Denyer, a Bristol city councillor. She said: Michael Gove’s announcement that developers will be expected to foot the bill for replacing dangerous cladding is welcome, but the issue is far from wrapped up. He is relying on the goodwill of developers, far too many of whom have already shown themselves to be irresponsible and motivated by profit rather than safety ... Developers must also be required to address defects in council and social housing. It’s completely unacceptable that these costs should fall on housing associations or councils whose budgets are already at breaking point. Sadiq Khan, the Labour mayor of London, has said today’s announcement does not go far enough. A spokesperson for Khan said: Today is a step forward and it is encouraging that ministers are realising that the cost of cladding remediation should not fall on leaseholders. But it should not have taken anywhere near this long ... Leaseholders living in buildings with non-cladding related defects will be deeply disappointed and distressed that today’s announcement will do nothing for them, as they face eye-watering charges to make their homes safe. The mayor is also concerned that a lack of any new public money for remediation will lead to future cuts in budgets for much needed new social rented homes. Michael Gove has announced that the government will spent £27m on installing communal fire alarms in buildings where there are currently “waking watch” patrols. These were required after the Grenfell Tower fire. The Department for Levelling up, Housing and Communities has released an exchange of letters showing that Jeremy Pocklington, the permanent secretary, did not approve of this decision because it was not allowed under normal government spending rules. He told Gove: In the normal course of events, these costs would be borne by the private sector, and waking watch costs are currently being met by leaseholders. This approach, therefore, does not meet the Managing Public Money test for value for money. Gove had to issue a “ministerial direction” to effectively order Pocklington to release the money. Ministers are perfectly entitled to use ministerial directions, but the system exists to make them think twice before going ahead with a proposal of questionable legitimacy. Explaining why he was going ahead, Gove said: Waking watch costs are a national scandal and there is an urgent need to tackle this problem given the detrimental impact it is having on leaseholders. Whilst some building owners have already installed fire alarms, some with the help of the Waking Watch Relief Fund announced last December, I am persuaded that this £27m fund is the quickest and most effective way to correct this scandal which persists. The Department for Levelling up, Housing and Communities has now put out a news release with details of what it says is Michael Gove’s four-point plan to protect leaseholders. And here is the department’s summary of these measures. Opening up the next phase of the building safety fund to drive forward taking dangerous cladding off high-rise buildings, prioritising the government’s £5.1bn funding on the highest risk; Those at fault will be held properly to account: a new team is being established to pursue and expose companies at fault, making them fix the buildings they built and face commercial consequences if they refuse; Restoring common sense to building assessments: indemnifying building assessors from being sued; and withdrawing the old, misinterpreted government advice that prompted too many buildings being declared as unsafe; and New protections for leaseholders living in their own flats: with no bills for fixing unsafe cladding and new statutory protections for leaseholders within the building safety bill Back in the Commons Gove says that, until he took this job, he was not aware of how some developers “play fast and loose with the rules”, for example by setting up special purpose vehicle shell companies to “evade their responsibilities”. He says they represent “the unacceptable face of capitalism”. I was not fully aware, until I took on this responsibility, of how some within the development industry play fast and loose with the rules and set up special purpose vehicles, shell companies and so on to evade their responsibilities. They exhibit the unacceptable face of capitalism, I am afraid. That’s a phrase first popularised by Edward Heath when he was prime minister. He was referring to Lonrho. Here is the letter (pdf) that Michael Gove has sent to developers telling them he expects them to contribute to the £4bn cost of removing dangerous cladding. And here is an extract. I will open discussions through a roundtable that brings together 20 of the largest housebuilders and developer trade bodies, followed by ongoing negotiations with all those in scope. In addition, given leaseholders and those affected by the Grenfell Tower tragedy are central to this process, we will be working closely with them throughout and will bring them to the table to discuss solutions at appropriate junctures. I do not intend for these discussions to take place behind closed doors. I expect a public commitment to this framework by early March. At that point we must have a clear, fully-funded plan of action that we can make available to the public and to affected leaseholders. I am sure you are as committed as I am to fixing a broken system. I want to work with you to deliver the programme I have set out. But I must be clear, I am prepared to take all steps necessary to make this happen, including restricting access to government funding and future procurements, the use of planning powers, the pursuit of companies through the courts and – if the industry fails to take responsibility in the way that I have set out – the imposition of a solution in law if needs be. Jeremy Corbyn, the former Labour leader, says after the Grenfell fire, local authorities inspected their properties. But some private landlords did not. He says he spoke to leaseholders in his constituency recently who were stuck; they could not move. Will they be assured now all their costs will be covered? Gove says he agrees with Corbyn. He says he does not want to over-promise, but he hopes they can move quickly. And he says he agrees with Corbyn about how local authorities responded more quickly than the private sector. Robert Jenrick, Gove’s predecessor, welcomes the announcement. He says it builds on the plans to help leaseholders he produced. This prompts jeering from Labour. Jenrick’s plans were seen by many as unsatisfactory. Gove leaps to Jenrick’s defence. He says he knows how hard Jenrick worked to secure justice for leaseholders. If others knew that too, they would not be jeering, he says. If you knew what I knew about how hard Robert had worked in order to try to secure justice you wouldn’t be trying to make a cheap point about it. We all care about this issue, but few care about this issue as much, and certainly no-one in this chamber has worked as hard to try to help those people as he has. Clive Betts, the Labour chair of the housing committee, asks whether leaseholders will get statutory protection from costs. And what will be the impact on social housing? Gove says he wants to put the protection for leaseholders into statute. And he says he wants to ensure the new burden on developers does not affect the social housing supply. UPDATE: Betts said: If developers don’t pay for the measures in the house today or taxes aren’t raised and there are cuts to his budget as a result, is that going to come off social housing provision as well? What assessment has been done for the total impact on future housebuilding for social housing? Gove replied: When it comes to making sure that we don’t have an adverse impact on social housing, or indeed on the work Homes England is leading on to bring together intermediate brownfield land for the private sector development, we will absolutely make sure we will do everything possible in order to make sure we have responsibility discharged on those who are ultimately those with the balance sheets and big bucks. Gove said the largest housing developers in the UK had “made profits of £16bn” in the last three years, and these “significant sums” should be “devoted to ensuring the building safety crisis is met alongside the building supply pipeline in future”. Felicity Buchan, the Conservative MP for Kensington, where Grenfell Tower is, says speed is essential. She welcomes Gove’s proposals, but says we are already four and a half years from the fire. She says she hopes it is implemented quickly. Gove says he wants to move quickly. In reply to Nandy, Gove says the chancellor has authorised him to use taxation as a threat to the industry. He says the residential property developer tax shows the government is already willing to use taxation in this way. UPDATE: Gove said: We do need to have additional backstops and it is clear that taxes can, if necessary, play a part. I don’t want to move there but we do have the absolute assurance that we can use the prospect of taxation in order to bring people to the table. All taxation decisions are made by the chancellor. No chancellor, no chief secretary would ever say anything other than that. But the fact that the chief secretary and the chancellor authorised me to use the prospect of taxation, the fact we already have taxation through the residential property developer tax shows that we’re prepared to take every step necessary. Lisa Nandy, the shadow levelling up secretary, says Labour supports Gove’s desire to get developers to pay for these repairs. But Gove has not explained how this will happen. And she quotes from a Treasury letter to Gove saying that, if the industry does not pay up, the funds will have to come from his department. So, although Gove is telling the public that taxation is the backstop option, that is not what he is telling his colleagues. Overall, she says Gove’s statement marks a welcome change of tone. But the more she looks at the detail, the less it stands up. UPDATE: This is what Nandy said quoting the letter from Simon Clarke, the chief secretary to the Treasury. She said: Gove was told ‘you may use a high-level threat of tax or legal solutions in discussions with developers’ ... ‘but whether or not to impose or raise taxes remains a decision for me (the chief Secretary) and is not a given at this point’. It appears what he’s told the public - that tax rises are the backstop - is not what he’s told the Treasury. This letter says ‘you have confirmed separately that DLUHC budgets are a backstop for funding these proposals in full should sufficient funds not be raised from industry’. That is not what the secretary of state told the house a moment ago. So can he clear this up: has the chancellor agreed to back a new tax measure if negotiations fail or is he prepared to see his own already allocated budgets, levelling-up funding or monies for social or affordable funding raided? Or is his plan to go back to the Treasury and renegotiate and legislate if he fails in March? If that is the case, it’ll take months and there’s nothing to stop freeholders passing on the costs to leaseholders in the meantime. The letter was leaked to Newsnight. Gove says leaseholders in buildings over 11 metres high will not have to pay to remove dangerous cladding. He says amendments to the building safety bill will be tabled to help protect them. Developers will be expected to pay, he says. If they do not, the government reserves the right to legislate. Gove says medium-rise buildings are generally safe. He says the government’s guidence affecting them is being withdrawn because it is being interpreted in too cautious a way. There should be more use of mitigations like sprinklers in medium-rise buildings, he says. Gove says the next phase of the building safety fund will open early this year. Those who profited from building unsafe homes should pay to put them right, he says. He warns them: “We are coming for you.” He says a dedicated team in his department will work on this. And he says companies linked to those involved with Grenfell Tower are already being penalised. UPDATE: Gove said: We will also ensure that those who profited and and continue to profit from the sale of unsafe buildings and construction products must take full responsibility for their actions and pay to put things right. Those who knowingly put lives at risk should be held to account for their crimes, and those who are seeking to profit from the crisis by making it worse should be stopped from doing so. Today I am putting them on notice. To those who missold dangerous products like cladding or insulation, to those who cut corners to save cash as they developed or refurbished people’s homes, and to those who sought to profiteer from the consequences of the Grenfell tragedy - we are coming for you. Gove is now into the substance of his statement. He say leaseholders are sharing a “desperately unfair” burden. He is clear that industry should bear the costs, he says. Before the statement Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Speaker, criticises the fact that details of Gove’s statement were leaked to the media at the weekend. He says he hopes Gove will order a leak inquiry. Gove starts by saying he has asked the permanent secretary in his department to conduct one. And here is more detailed preview of what Michael Gove will say by Jack Simpson for Inside Housing. Michael Gove is about to give his Commons statement on cladding. And here is my colleague Peter Walker’s preview story of what Gove will announce. This is from the Health Service Journal’s Lawrence Dunhill, with new Covid hospital figures for Greater Manchester. The latest Covid infections data from Scotland suggests the alarming surge in cases linked to the Omicron variant has now peaked, with officially recorded positive cases and test-positivity rates now falling. The daily figures for Monday from Public Health Scotland show a continuing rolling seven-day average fall in test-positivity and in positive cases overall, with 11,827 new cases recorded overnight. The agency warned, however, that there were hold-ups in case reporting from laboratories, which could skew the daily figures. Prof Linda Bauld of Edinburgh University, a social policy adviser to the Scottish government, warned last week that official testing data would become less relevant after ministers relaxed the rules around PCR tests last Wednesday. She told PA: “We’re not going to be able to use daily positive cases as a marker any more. The government is looking with Public Health Scotland about how we report that and we reflect it.” Even so, the agency’s modelling, updated last Friday, forecast the Omicron wave would peak later this week before sharply declining this month – peaking earlier than Scottish government ministers had feared. In late December and early January, Scotland posted a series of daily records of 15,000-17,000, peaking at 20,217 – a figure thought to be inflated by some delayed results. Monday’s figures also show, however, that hospitalisations and admissions to intensive care are continuing to creep up, illustrating the normal delay between infections and hospital admissions. There were 1,432 Covid-positive people in Scottish hospitals on Sunday, of which around 60% were admitted because of the virus rather for another medical reason. The total number of people in intensive care moved up slightly, from 63 reported on Sunday to 65. There were no new deaths reported. Keir Starmer made his comments about Labour’s proposed windfall tax on energy companies (see 1.07pm) in a pooled interview for broadcasters. It covered various other topics too. Starmer said Boris Johnson would have “very serious questions to answer” if he did attend a lockdown-busting party at Downing Street last year. But, asked if Johnson would have to resign in those circumstances, Starmer did not go that far. “Let’s see what the findings are and then go from there,” he said. But he said Johnson had already lost “huge authority”. He said: The prime minister has lost huge authority with the public because of these allegations of parties in Downing Street. To stand at a press conference, instructing the country to comply with restrictions - which really impacted families across the country - whilst at the same time there’s emerging evidence of parties in Downing Street does diminish his authority, his moral authority, to ask others to comply with those rules. Starmer said he would back the isolation period being cut from seven days to five days - provided the scientific evidence justified that. He welcomed the help being announced today for leaseholders facing crippling costs to remove dangerous cladding - although he said it was “very late”, and the plans were “still very vague”. He said he was opposed to MPs getting a pay rise in April. He said: I think that MPs do not need a pay rise and we should all be saying that we don’t need that pay rise and it shouldn’t go ahead. The mechanism is independent but I think it’s for me, as leader of the opposition, to say that I do not think we should have that pay rise. Russian oligarchs’ use of London to launder their fortunes is to come under renewed scrutiny after the Conservative-controlled foreign affairs select committee agreed to re-examine the government’s apparent inability to crack down on the practice, my colleague Patrick Wintour reports. Here is a summary of the main points from today’s Downing Street lobby briefing No 10 said that it hoped evidence would be available “soon” to justify cutting the isolation period from seven days to five days. (See 12.41pm.) Conservative MPs are pushing for the isolation period to be cut, and more than half of cabinet ministers are said to be in favour too. A five-day period would bring England into line with the rules in the US. But in the US people who leave isolation after five days are expected to wear masks around others for another five days – a proposal that some of those demanding a shorter isolation period in the UK may be less willing to embrace. The PM’s spokesman played down the prospect of access to free lateral flow tests being ended any time soon. He said that although the government’s roadmap out of lockdown envisaged free lateral flow tests being abandoned eventually, there were “absolutely no plans” for that at the moment. “There’s no doubt that the use of lateral flow devices are both interrupting chains of transmission and saving lives,” he said. It was “too early to say specifically when we will have moved from the point where we’ve got extremely high prevalence currently, and when it will be right to consider a different approach”, he added. The spokesman said Kathryn Stone, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, had notified No 10 that she would not be investigating the Downing Street flat refurbishment. Stone apparently accepted that financial support relating to a ministerial activity (ie, refurbishment of the Downing Street flat where the PM lives) was something to be declared in the ministerial register of interests, not the MPs’ register (which she polices). The spokesman refused to deny that Johnson attended a BYOB drinks party in Downing Street during lockdown last year. (See 11.18am.) Asked why Johnson would not answer a question on this when he was asked about it earlier, even though he must have know whether or not he attended, the spokesman said that in his response Johnson was making the point that this was a matter for Sue Gray, the civil servant investigating a series of allegations about lockdown-busting partying at No 10. The spokesman said Martin Reynolds, the PM’s principal private secretary, is staying in post. Johnson had full confidence in him, the spokesman said. There has been speculation that Reynolds, who reportedly organised the party revealed by the Sunday Times yesterday, is being lined up as the fall guy and will be moved to another job. The spokesman said that he had seen the “speculation”, but that Reynolds was staying in position. (From the tone of the exchanges, it sounded as if the spokesman meant staying ‘for now’, but he did not use those words.) Earlier today Dominic Cummings, the PM’s former chief adviser who first revealed that the party in the Sunday Times story took place, posted this on Twitter earlier saying he expected Reynolds to be given an ambassadorial post. Cummings also suggests that Jack Doyle, the PM’s communications director, and Dan Rosenfield, the PM’s chief of staff, will be forced out by the partygate scandal. The spokesman said Johnson would like to see the Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority exercise “restraint” over MPs pay. Ipsa has already authorised a 2.7% pay increase for MPs which will take effect in April, when voters also start having to pay the national insurance increase. Asked if the PM thought that was right, the spokesman said: I would say we would expect restraint on matters like this given the current circumstances, but beyond that I think it’s right that we let Ipsa set out their proposals as an independent body. Given that the increase has already been announced, it is hard to see what calling for “restraint” might mean. Ipsa was set up specifically to stop MPs having to decide on their own pay. The spokesman would not say if the PM had read Piers Morgan’s debut column in the Sun today calling Johnson a “shambles”. He said he had not discussed it with the PM. For Guardian readers who have not read it either, this is how it starts. It takes the form of an open letter to Johnson. Morgan starts: Dear Boris, You’re a shambles. I don’t say that lightly. You’re the prime minister of my great country and as such, I fervently want you NOT to be a shambles. But all the current evidence suggests that by the dictionary definition of that word – “In a state of total disorder” – you’re officially a shambles. In fact, that’s the modern, more generous meaning. Back in the 16th century, a “shambles” meant a “place of terrible slaughter or bloodshed” which, trust me, is where you’re now heading politically if you don’t buck your ideas up pretty damn sharpish. Keir Starmer has restated Labour’s call for a windfall tax on oil and gas firms to pay for measures to help people pay their fuel bills. He said: Energy bills are going through the roof. That particularly impacts the elderly and the vulnerable and the government is doing absolutely nothing about it, they are asleep at the wheel. So we have put forward a plan that will reduce energy bills for all households by just under £200 and reduce it for those who are most in need - on lower and middle incomes - by 600. So we’re stepping into the vacuum of leadership that the government has left with a plan to actually reduce bills, because this is a really important issue for so many families, particularly this winter. In an interview this morning Boris Johnson refused to deny a report in the Sunday Times (paywall) that he and his wife, Carrie, attended a “bring your own bottle” Downing Street drinks party during lockdown in spring last year. In their report yesterday, Tim Shipman, Caroline Wheeler and Gabriel Pogrund wrote: The party on May 20, 2020, was thrown by Martin Reynolds, Johnson’s principal private secretary, the most senior civil servant in Downing Street. Three sources say Reynolds emailed officials inviting them to a drinks party and adding “BYOB”, which stands for “bring your own bottle” — removing any doubt that it was a planned party. The email is key evidence in a sleaze inquiry being run by the Whitehall enforcer Sue Gray, which is now threatening to force the resignations of several senior members of Johnson’s team. The suggestion the prime minister himself attended the event – not denied by No 10 – makes this allegation more serious for Johnson than other recent revelations ... The first lockdown was introduced in late March 2020. It was only on 1 June that year that people were allowed to mix outside in groups of up to six, and it was not until 4 July that two households were permitted to mix indoors or outdoors. Asked this morning if he had attended the party, Johnson replied: All that, as you know, is the subject of a proper investigation by Sue Gray [the senior civil servant investigating allegations of No 10 lockdown-busting partying]. Asked if he had been interviewed by Gray, Johnson replied: “All that is a subject for investigation by Sue Gray.” There are no urgent questions in the Commons today, and just one ministerial statement, the Michael Gove one on cladding, at 3.30pm, the parliamentary authorities have announced. At the Downing Street lobby briefing the prime minister’s spokesman was also asked about the possibility of the minimum Covid isolation period in England being cut from seven days to five. Boris Johnson confirmed earlier that this was being kept under consideration. (See 11.18am.) The PM’s spokesman went a bit further, saying the government would like it to happen “soon” – provided the scientific evidence justifies the change. He said the UK Health Security Agency was continuing to look at whether the scientific evidence justified cutting the isolation period to five days (ie, whether that could be done without risk of still-infectious people being released into the community). He said: If it is possible to go further, we would want to act quickly, but it needs to be based on the latest evidence. And that work is still ongoing. We certainly have not received any further updated advice. Asked whether he expected the rules to be changed within days, or weeks, or months, the spokesman said he could not say. But he added: It is something we want done soon. But what is important is that we don’t prejudge the conclusion, and that we allow those that are looking at this to consider the evidence base and provide thorough advice. The Downing Street lobby briefing has just finished. As my colleague Heather Stewart reports, the PM’s spokesman said that Kathryn Stone, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, has told No 10 that she won’t launch an inquiry into allegations that Boris Johnson’s declarations about the refurbishment of Downing Street flat broke the MPs’ code of conduct because she considers it a matter for the ministerial register of interest. I will post more from the briefing shortly. The Conservative MP Andrew Bridgen has said the isolation period should be cut from seven days to five days. Bridgen is one of the large number of Tory MPs anxious to ease the existing Covid restrictions quickly and his view is probably widely shared by colleagues. Earlier today John Redwood, the former Conservative cabinet minister, posted this, referring to today’s Telegraph story. (See 11.18am.) Labour has again accused Boris Johnson and Michael Gove of breaking a promise they made when they were leading the Vote Leave campaign in 2016 to get rid of VAT on fuel if the UK voted for Brexit. In interviews this morning Gove (see 10.40am) signalled that getting rid of VAT now would be a mistake because it would be better to target help on those most in need (Johnson made the same argument last week), and in his own TV clip Johnson also said it was people on low incomes who needed help most. (See 11.37am.) Ed Miliband, the shadow climate change secretary, said: Both Boris Johnson and Michael Gove promised to cut VAT on energy bills. But when push comes to shove, when families and pensioners really need support, they’ve broken that commitment. While Michael Gove backpedals, Rishi Sunak is missing in action. Labour would give families security by immediately cutting VAT on energy bills now - part of our plan to save households around £200 or more, with extra support for those feeling the squeeze the most, paid for by a windfall tax on oil and gas companies facing record profits. Johnson and Gove made their VAT promise in 2016 in a joint article for the Sun. Here is an extract. In 1993, VAT on household energy bills was imposed. This makes gas and electricity much more expensive. EU rules mean we cannot take VAT off those bills. The least wealthy are hit particularly hard. The poorest households spend three times more of their income on household energy bills than the richest households spend. As long as we are in the EU, we are not allowed to cut this tax. When we Vote Leave, we will be able to scrap this unfair and damaging tax. It isn’t right that unelected bureaucrats in Brussels impose taxes on the poorest and elected British politicians can do nothing. Boris Johnson has posted a message on Twitter this morning welcoming the news that Virgin Media O2 customers will not face roaming charges when they use their phones in the EU. As Faisal Islam, the BBC’s economics editor points out, Johnson’s tweet does not mention the fact that other operators are reintroducing roaming charges, as they are allowed to now that the UK has left the EU. In his pooled interview Boris Johnson was also asked about the cost of living crisis. He made three general points. Johnson confirmed that the government was looking at what it could do to help people with their energy bills. He said that he understood how difficult it was for people and that he had discussed this with the chancellor, Rishi Sunak. He did not say what the government might do, but he hinted that help would be focused on people on low incomes. “We’re certainly looking at what we can do,” he said. He added: We’ve got to help people, particularly people on low income. We’ve got to help people with the cost of their fuel. And that’s what we’re doing. He stressed that this was an international problem. He said: This is the result of global price spikes as a result of the economy coming back from Covid ... There’s a general inflationary pressure caused by the world economy coming back from Covid. In the US, I think, inflation is likely to be the highest it’s been since the early 80s. The eurozone is experiencing exactly the same thing. Here in the UK we’re seeing the same problem. He said that the government was already spending £4.2bn on programmes that were helping people pay their fuel bills. He mentioned cold weather payments, warm homes discounts, winter fuel payments, as well as grants to councils to help them support people in need. And he said the government wanted people to be aware of the support already available. Boris Johnson has recorded a pooled broadcast interview at a vaccination centre this morning. He used it to play down suggestions that free lateral flow tests might be abandoned any time soon, as a report claimed yesterday (it has always been the plan to give them up eventually), but he did suggest the government was open to the possibility of cutting the minimum isolation period from seven days to five days. Only six days ago Sajid Javid, the health secretary, ruled this out. Here are the main points Johnson made on Covid. Johnson said the government could consider the case for cutting the minimum isolation time from seven days to five days. Last week Javid said the government was not looking to change this. But today Johnson said there was an “argument to be had” about this issue. “The thing to do is to look at the science,” he said. Asked if he was speaking to ministers like Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, who yesterday said cutting the isolation period to five days would be helpful, Johnson said that he was, and that ministers were looking at this. According to a report by Charles Hymas and Harry Yorke in the Telegraph today, and 60% of cabinet ministers, are also in favour of shortening the isolation period. They report: Rishi Sunak and ministers from the main economic ministries believe cutting isolation from seven days could help reduce staffing shortages caused by the omicron variant, the Telegraph understands. One government source suggested 60 per cent of the Cabinet were in favour of the move, although they stressed that such a move would have to be sanctioned as safe by scientists. Johnson suggested lateral flow tests would continue to be distributed for free “as long as they’re very important”. Asked if the current arrangements would stay in place for just weeks, or months, he replied: “I think we will use them as long as they’re very important.” Here are the key points from Michael Gove’s various broadcast interviews this morning. Gove, the levelling up secretary, said that lateral flow tests would remain free “as long as we need”. But he said it was impossible to say how long that would be. Yesterday it was reported that ministers are preparing to stop distributing them for free. Gove said that he was wrong to think tighter Covid restrictions were needed when the cabinet debated the issue before Christmas, and that Boris Johnson was right to take the opposite view. (See 9.35am.) Gove said that Britain was moving towards a situation where restrictions would be unnecessary because people were used to living with Covid. But we weren’t there yet, he said. He told Sky News: We are moving to a situation - we’re not there yet - but we are moving to a situation where it is possible to say that we can live with Covid and that the pressure on the NHS and on vital public services is abating. But it’s absolutely vital to recognise that we are not there yet and as the health secretary has reminded us, there will be some difficult weeks ahead. And later he told the Today programme: And I think one of the things that we do need to think about is how we live with Covid, how we live with this particular type of coronavirus. There are other coronaviruses which are endemic and with which we live, viruses tend to develop in a way whereby they become less harmful but more widespread. So, guided by the science, we can look to the progressive lifting of restrictions, and I think for all of us the sooner the better. But we’ve got to keep the NHS safe. He insisted the government was spending enough to deliver its levelling up agenda. “That budget is there to be used, deployed and allocated to support levelling up,” he said. He was responding to a question about a Times article (paywall) by Ben Houchen, the Tory mayor for Tees Valley, who suggests that voters have yet to see evidence that levelling up is happening. Houchen says: Voters are also realists — they know that levelling up is not something that will be delivered in just a year or two, it will be a decades-long project. But they do need to see progress, and this means steel going up to deliver new factories, spades in the ground for new energy infrastructure, and cranes in action as new bridges are built out over waters. These are all the visible signs that people need to see to bring confidence that real, lasting, progress is being made. Gove dismissed claims that there was a tension between “red wall” Tories like Houchen, who want to see more government spending in their areas, and Conservatives like Lord Frost, who want lower taxes. Asked if Houchen and Frost would be able to agree on what the government should be doing, Gove replied: I imagine they would be in full agreement, they would be a nest of singing birds ... There are choices that do need to be made. But, ultimately, we’ve made those choices. We’ve committed to the public spending required in order to generate economic growth, and as we will in due course get that economic growth, we will also in due course cut taxes. One of the things I think everyone - certainly everyone from the Conservative party, but I think actually, most people in politics - would agree is if we can have every part of the United Kingdom operating as effectively economically as London and the south-east currently do, that provides not just opportunity for more individuals, it also provides more for the exchequer as well. He signalled that he was opposed to cutting VAT on energy bills - even thought the Vote Leave campaign he jointly led promised this as a Brexit dividend in 2016 - saying that government support for those needing help with energy bills should be focused “on those who need it most”. A VAT cut would help everybody, particularly those with larger houses and larger bills. Gove said that, if developers did not agree to pay for the removal of dangerous cladding, the government would if necessary raise the money from them via taxation. He told Sky News: We want to say to developers and indeed all those who have a role to play in recognising their responsibility that we want to work with them. But if it’s the case that it’s necessary to do so, then we will use legal means and ultimately, if necessary, the tax system in order to ensure that those who have deep pockets, those who are responsible for the upkeep of these buildings, pay rather than the leaseholders, the individuals, who in the past were being asked to pay with money they didn’t have for a problem that they did not cause. He also said leaseholders will not have to pay large sums to remedy fire defects in blocks of flats that go beyond cladding. He said it was not right for builders to claim they were complying with government regulations when they installed the cladding responsible for the Grenfell Tower fire tragedy. He told LBC: There were lots of steps that were taken which put people at risk, and without wanting to pre-empt what the independent inquiry into Grenfell will conclude, I think it is ... you would be hard-pressed to say that putting, essentially, sheets of liquid petrol encased in metal on the side of a tower block was the right thing to do. I think it’s fair to say that, actually, those who argue that they were compliant [with regulations] in doing that, I don’t think have a very strong case. I think you’d have to be a very, very, very selective reader of the evidence there in order to draw that conclusion. Good morning. Michael Gove, the levelling up secretary, was making a rare appearance on the morning interview round today. He was mostly talking about the announcement about the £4bn support package for leaseholders hit by excessive cladding-removal costs, which will be the subject of a Commons statement later. But he was also asked about Covid, and in an interview on the Today programme he effectively admitted that he was wrong, and Boris Johnson was right, when the cabinet considered the need for tougher restrictions for England in the week before Christmas. When it was put to him that he had favoured tighter restrictions, but that developments since then suggested they were not needed, he replied: From some of the things that I’ve said and written people will know that, in the spectrum of opinion, I was at the more cautious end. Perfectly legit to draw that inference. But the prime minister, who’s had so many different things to balance, publicly that we would be able to get through this with the booster campaign. So if more were required, then we would be ready to put in additional measures. We always keep that under review. But his judgment has been vindicated. The interview almost did not happen because Gove got stuck in a BBC lift on his way to the studio, prompting numerous jokes about his need personal need for a more efficient levelling up strategy. This is from the BBC’s Jack Lamport. I will post more from Gove’s morning interviews shortly. Here is the agenda for the day. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. Morning: Boris Johnson is doing a visit, where he is expected to record a pooled TV interview. 3.30pm: Alok Sharma, Cop26 president, gives evidence to the Lords environment committee about delivering the Cop26 agenda. After 3.30pm: Michael Gove makes a statement to MPs about a £4bn package to help leaseholders facing crippling cladding-removal costs. I will be covering UK Covid developments here today, but for wider coronavirus coverage, do read our global live blog. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comAlmost seven decades on from the invention of coronation chicken, members of the public have been invited to suggest a dessert celebrating the Queen’s 70-year reign. Fortnum &amp; Mason has launched a competition for people to come up with ideas for the Platinum Pudding. The contest will be judged by a panel including baking royals such as Dame Mary Berry. Guardian readers were asked to send in their ideas via a callout for what they think the new dish should be – from Eton messes to a vegetarian-friendly version of Poulet Reine Elizabeth. Drop scones – ‘the Queen sent her recipe to President Eisenhower in 1960’ For neurologist Ian Coyle-Gilchrist, the right pudding to mark the Queen’s 70-year reign has a degree of historical significance. Coyle-Gilchrist, 38, would give the prize to drop scones. “The Queen wrote to President Eisenhower in 1960 with her recipe for drop scones [which he apparently particularly enjoyed, according to a Guardian report],” said the 38-year-old from Foxton in Cambridgeshire. While he has made scones before – though “not for a very long time” – Coyle-Gilchrist says he is not really a baker himself, and doesn’t have a recipe to hand. However, he chose the dish because he thinks that “a reliable and traditional recipe represents the Queen rather well”. “The fact that it has been used effectively to represent the Commonwealth in international diplomacy makes it even more fitting,” Coyle-Gilchrist adds. Trifle – ‘a summer reimagining of a traditional trifle’ For amateur baker Julie M Palmer, 59, a “reimagining of a traditional trifle” for the summer months is the perfect choice. Palmer, a marketing and communications executive in East Ayrshire, goes for a trifle because she says “it’s something that can be made by anyone”. “I’m thinking a reimagining of a traditional trifle: a Victoria sponge recipe for the bottom soaked in champagne, a layer of strawberry mousse, an apple jelly layer, a pea-flavoured custard and Italian meringue piped on top,” Palmer says, adding that the champagne could be swapped for English sparkling wine. The 59-year-old says she’s chosen the “fresh and sweet” flavours “to evoke memories of a summer’s day” as the Queen will be celebrating in June. Palmer, who started baking in 2019, says it is her “dream to appear on the Great British Bake Off” but adds that she’s “not quite there yet”. She says she has only ever made a traditional sherry trifle before, but she’s going to have to give this recipe a go. ‘Eton mess – let’s face it, our current political situation is a mess’ James Henry Mills in Stourbridge said his pudding of choice would be Eton mess. “Let’s face it, our current political situation is a mess,” said the 77-year-old retiree. “The PM is an Eton boy and Eton tends to churn out our leaders who over the years have made a right mess of things.” Mills said he is one of the people who remembers the Queen’s coronation but is coming round more to the idea that “she’s becoming increasingly irrelevant”. “Why do we need a pudding anyway? I appreciate she brings a great wealth of good feeling in the country because of her long reign, but I think it’s better to get rid of the whole self-serving structure, including all these lords and ladies.” ‘Tofu Reine Elizabeth – accessible for all’ While it definitely wouldn’t make it past the pudding criteria Fortnum &amp; Mason has outlined on its website, the suggestion from Rebecca Taylor, a 36-year-old nurse in York, felt like a sign of the times. “I used to love coronation chicken but now I make coronation tofu,” she says. “Whatever it is it should be made from sustainable ingredients which don’t have a detrimental effect on climate change.” Taylor, who has been vegan for three years, said it was important that the winning prize was “something delicious … and easy to make so it is accessible for all”. Since embracing a plant-based diet after visiting a dairy farm, she has become “more aware of the ecological effects of how damaging meat and dairy is to the world”, stressing the importance of making “sustainable choices while still enjoying food”. Banana loaf – ‘weren’t we all making them during lockdown?’ And Christine Elaine Daviesma from Macclesfield in Cheshire suggested banana loaf because “weren’t we all making them during lockdown?” Daviesma, 62, said her first thought when she was thinking of a suggestion was “everyone pulling together”. “We all love the Queen and we’ve all had a bit of a difficult time the last two years, so why not a banana loaf? “They’re quite easy to make and it’s a good way to use those horrible bananas that turn black when they’ve been left out too long. I just make the recipe up as I go along but it’s something we can all make together.” • This article was amended on 11 January 2022 to remove a reference to a tofu dish as being “allergen-free”.New legislation will protect leaseholders from the costs of all post-Grenfell building safety defects, not just combustible cladding, the government has said. The secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities, Michael Gove, told parliament the government would give leaseholders statutory protection that extends to all works required to make buildings safe. The move followed anger at reports that officials were only planning to force developers and materials manufacturers to pay to replace combustible cladding on buildings taller than 11 metres. As about £1.3bn was wiped off the stock market valuations of the UK’s major housebuilders, Gove insisted he had the backing of the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, to threaten developers with tax rises if they don’t pay £4bn to fix the defective buildings that are blighting tens of thousands of households in the wake of the Grenfell Tower disaster. Lisa Nandy, the shadow housing secretary, questioned whether this would be sufficient. “What makes him think he can force developers, who for four years have refused to do the right thing, to pay up?” she asked in the Commons. “Has the chancellor agreed to back a new tax measure if negotiations fail, or is he prepared to see his own already allocated budget, levelling-up funding or monies for affordable or social housing raided?” Gove replied: “We do have absolute assurance that we can use the prospect of taxation in order to bring people to the table.” However, a leaked letter from the Treasury to Gove insisted that new or increased taxes were “not a given at this point”. Nandy suggested that would weaken the government’s hand against developers. The End Our Cladding Scandal campaign group, which represents affected leaseholders, said: “Rishi Sunak still does not appear to understand the gravity of our situation and is seemingly doing all he can to evade ensuring homeowners are protected.” Gove also said he was unable to give any guarantees that people who have already paid to fix their homes would receive retrospective compensation. Nevertheless, Gove’s statement represented a marked shift of tone by the government in tackling the building safety crisis. It announced it would scrap a plan to loan money to leaseholders in medium-rise buildings between 11 and 18 metres in height with fire safety defects. It will also scrap advice that all wall systems need to be checked for fire safety. “Medium-rise buildings are safe, unless there is clear evidence to the contrary,” Gove said. “Those who knowingly put lives at risk should be held to account for their crimes.” “We will make industry pay to fix all the remaining problems and help to cover the range of costs facing leaseholders,” he said. “Those who manufactured combustible cladding and insulation, many of whom made vast profits even at the height of the pandemic: they must pay now instead of leaseholders.” He singled out two firms that made cladding and insulation used on Grenfell. “If you look at the behaviour of people who work for Kingspan and Arconic and the evidence that has been presented to the Grenfell inquiry, [it] is truly dreadful.” However, developers said they should not be held wholly accountable. Stewart Baseley, the executive chair of the Home Builders Federation, said: “Any further solutions must be proportionate, and involve those who actually built affected buildings and specified, certificated and provided the defective materials on them.” Taylor Wimpey, which made a pre-tax profit of £287.5m in the first six months of 2021 but saw its share price slide 3.3% by 3pm on Monday, said the government’s plans to fix the cladding crisis must hit others in the supply chain. “There are many organisations involved in the issue of fire safety, including large business in our supply chain, and indeed government themselves,” a spokesperson said. Reece Lipman, 32, who owns 25% of his flat in Romford, east London, but is liable for 100% of the building safety costs he faces, said Gove “has got the rhetoric right and is now talking with a much firmer tone”. However, he insisted that what has been seen as “just a cladding crisis” is in fact “a full-blown building safety crisis”. He likened government action so far to bailing “water off the Titanic with pots and pans”. Officials said they were aware that persuading developers to accept responsibility when so many professionals and manufacturers are typically involved in construction projects was “without a doubt difficult”. They said it was possible that government budgets would need to be used in the first place to get urgent remediation works under way while persuading developers to pay up in parallel. One threat could be to increase the 4% tax on developers’ profits that is already planned to try to raise £2bn over the next 10 years to help cover remediation costs. Gove said the timescale for getting buildings fixed would be “rapid” but not “immediate”. He has assigned a team of forensic accountants to trace the ownership and developers of affected buildings. From its analysis of 1,000 blocks with fire risks, it believes 43% are owned by 14 corporate groups and a further 10% are owned by five developers, which between them made £1.2bn in profits last year. They figure that with the top seven developers making £16bn in the last three years, “there is plenty of cash in the system”. Some observers said they believed the threats might be persuasive. “Gove may find that the developers will pay up immediately to avoid damage to reputation and to avoid being banned from the government scheme,” said a senior lawyer working on the Grenfell Tower public inquiry. That could trigger “a cascade of threats of legal action”, with the case against some of the main materials manufacturers potentially strengthened when the Grenfell Tower inquiry produces its final report towards the end of this year.Fifa has confirmed its independent ethics committee has opened an investigation into allegations of widespread sexual abuse in Gabonese football. The former coach of Gabon’s Under-17 coach is facing charges of raping minors and sexual assault along with two other coaches after accusations by alleged victims were reported by the Guardian. Patrick Assoumou Eyi – known as “Capello” - faces up to 30 years in prison if found guilty of charges that could also include attempted rape on minors and endangering the life of another. Serge Mombo, a leading football official in Gabon, has also been accused of sexually abusing young players and demanding sex as a condition of them securing places in national teams. Mombo was re-elected as president of La Ligue de l’Estuaire, Gabon’s senior football league, in June 2021. He is also set to serve as the kit man for Gabon’s senior men’s team at the Africa Cup of Nations in Cameroon. Mombo, a former policeman, denied the abuse claims, made by alleged victims and witnesses to the Guardian. “Given the seriousness of the allegations being made, we can confirm that Fifa’s independent ethics committee has opened an investigation and is currently looking into the matter,” said a Fifa spokesman. “Please understand that no further comment can be made at this stage.” A former player who claimed he was abused by both Eyi and Mombo when he represented Gabon’s Under-17s in 2017 said the official attempted to proposition him with promises of a place in the starting lineup. On Friday, Mombo – who has also served as a referee – described the allegations made against him as “unethical”. “I wanted to laugh about it but the facts are too serious to pass up,” he wrote on Facebook. “I feel touched in my self-esteem and the perpetrators of this plot will answer for their actions. The archives are there to show that this action to destabilize the same authors does not date from today. I was an international referee, now President of the League, I have never been at the centre of these dirty works which I condemn with the utmost energy.” He added: “It’s unethical to smear people for a job. The position of kitman in the national team is not contractual, it is a one-off.” Gabon faced Comoros in their first match at Afcon on Monday evening.There was a mythical time when a succession of young nobles got to be king for a year, and were then ceremoniously killed, and someone in my house (not me) knows what this epoch was called. I refuse to look it up or commit it to memory because half-remembering some ancient parable and then beefing it up with Google gravitas is the kind of thing the prime minister would do. But prime minister for how much longer? Because this brutal practice of yore is now the operating model for the Conservative party: anoint a leader in great floofy garlands of praise; let them at it for a year or so; then destroy them. It’s a blood sport. You can tell they’re nearing the kill when Piers Morgan delivers a crushing verdict – that the prime minister is “a shambles”. “But … dude,” you might exclaim, into your marmalade or whatever, “we always knew he was useless. You’re the one who voted for him!” That’s not the point, ladies and gentlemen: consistency is for little people, along with accountability. Morgan isn’t here to justify his own choices, he’s here like a picador to deal the playful opening wound of the final act. It’s hard to cheer all this on when you know it will just start right up again, with a different king, who will be similarly sacrificed. Mr Z and I spend a lot of time arguing about what the Tory right actually want. He thinks they have an overarching policy agenda that is too controversial to say out loud, so they have to perpetually ventriloquise it through successively less honest leaders, until they get to their happy place. I think all they want to do is be in charge and survive for ever, and they’ll move from host to host, refining their genetic makeup. Over time, they become more widespread, yet somehow weaker, then stronger for a bit. It’s an imperfect metaphor, since I change my mind regularly on who the host is: is it their doomed leader, or their doomed voter, or the entire nation? I also don’t have a clear idea of what herd immunity would look like. What does it mean for the Tory right to become endemic? Do they become symptomless, so that we know they’re probably out there, but cease to vote for them? Or will we be lateral-flow-testing for spasms of the war on woke for ever? Nevertheless, I think I’m right on the fundamentals. You could lose whole chunks of your waking adult life reading Britannia Unchained and The Road to Serfdom, smashing your head against the fallacies, only for Liz Truss to turn around and say she’s not that into the free market any more because she met a protectionist at a party. You could drill forever for the big idea, only to finally reach it and discover a single slogan, repurposed from a mashup of Marie Antoinette and Molly-Mae Hague: “We all have the same 24 hours, and if you haven’t got a load of cake at the end of it, well then, you’re inadequate”. It’s just not worth it, is my point. To return to those gilded young kings-for-a-year, whose provenance I refuse to look up: at what point did they start to think, hang on, the person before me got ritually sacrificed – could that be some sort of a clue? We’re now in the Rocky-phase of the leader’s downfall, where the party urges BoJo to regain his mojo, knowing that he cannot, because it was an illusion of collective devising in the first place. It is medium enjoyable to watch, except eerily reminiscent of seeing Theresa May have a coughing fit: inexorable doom is actually not that fun, whoever’s it is. One day soon, Conservative hopefuls will wise up, and nobody will want the job. In an era of “unprecedenteds”, we’ll have reached a party so strung out that nobody wants to lead it, the final endpoint of unprecedentedness. Or at least, hopefully we will. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistGlobal financial markets tumbled on Monday amid growing investor concerns about the US Federal Reserve potentially putting up interest rates in response to surging inflationary pressures. Share prices fell back on both sides of the Atlantic with the FTSE 100 shedding 40 points, or 0.5%, in London, to finish the day at 7,445, while stocks fell by a more substantial margin on Wall Street as traders bet on the American central bank leaping into action from as early as March to tackle high inflation rates. On a day of selling pressure around the world, the Nasdaq index slumped into correction territory, defined by financial investors as a drop of more than 10% from a previous peak, amid a sell-off in US tech stocks from an all-time high reached in November. Housebuilders were among the biggest fallers in London after the UK government announced a £4bn package forcing developers to help remove dangerous cladding from buildings in the wake of the Grenfell Tower disaster in June 2017. Shares in Persimmon and Barratt fell by about 5%, while Taylor Wimpey and Berkeley dropped 3.5%. The gyrations come as financial markets worldwide adjust to the prospect of central banks ramping up interest rates in response to soaring cost of living, despite weaker levels of economic growth at the outset of 2022 after the emergence of the Omicron variant of Covid-19. The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell by 1.5% on Monday afternoon in New York, while markets in France and Germany finished the day down more than 1% amid heightened investor caution worldwide. US government bond yields hit a two-year high as investors bet the Fed could raise rates from as early as March, in a jittery trading session ahead of official US inflation data due on Wednesday. US inflation surged to 6.8% in November, the highest level since 1982. Minutes released late last week from the latest Fed meeting in December showed officials considered whether interest rates needed to rise “sooner or at a faster pace” in response. Inflation in the UK reached 5.1% in November and is expected to peak close to 6% this spring, driven by an expected sharp increase in household energy bills this April amid soaring wholesale prices. Despite weaker UK growth in recent months amid supply chain disruption and rising coronavirus infections, the Bank of England is expected to steadily raise interest rates from the current level of 0.25% to more than 1% this year as the central bank seeks to quell inflation. Chris Beauchamp, chief market analyst at IG, said: “Investors seem, for the moment, to have entirely lost their appetite for stocks.”Hospitals in England will be able to use private hospitals and staff under a deal with the NHS to maintain services as Omicron cases surge, avoiding delays in treatment for patients with illnesses such as cancer. The move comes as hospitals have also been told to find extra beds in gyms and education centres owing to rising numbers of Covid patients. The three-month agreement means private healthcare staff and facilities will be on standby to support the NHS if required and to maintain services for patients who can be referred, including some of those waiting for cancer surgery. Nightingale hubs are being created in the grounds of some hospitals as part of a move to create up to 4,000 extra beds. Announcing the deal, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, said: “This agreement demonstrates the collaboration across our healthcare services to create an additional safeguard that ensures people can continue to get the care they need from our world-leading NHS, whenever they need it.” The move has been put in place to make sure the health service is not overwhelmed and to avoid implementing further Covid restrictions on socialising at pubs, clubs and sports venues as have been introduced in Scotland and Wales. Last week, the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said more than one in six NHS trusts across England had declared a critical incident due to Covid pressures in recent weeks, adding that the Omicron variant was putting “very real” pressure on the health service. The agreement includes Practice Plus Group, Spire Healthcare, Nuffield Health, Circle Health Group, Ramsay Health Care UK, Healthcare Management Trust, One Healthcare, Horder Healthcare, Aspen Healthcare and KIMS Hospital, the NHS said. Paolo Pieri, the CEO of Circle, said that since the first Covid wave in March 2020, its hospitals had supported the NHS by performing urgent, life-saving operations and treatments for more than 400,000 NHS patients. “We stand ready to support the NHS in its time of need,” Pieri said. Spire said the final details of the contract still had to be agreed. The deal expires on 31 March. A Whitehall source told the Telegraph: “We are going to do everything we can to avoid more restrictions … Our lines of defence through vaccines, testing and antivirals are crucial and holding up but we are also boosting NHS capacity as much as we can. “Sajid wants the NHS to make use of the independent sector if needed. The aim is to ensure as much capacity as possible is available to help the NHS get through the Omicron wave.” In March 2020, a similar deal costing about £400m was agreed, when private hospitals provided more beds, ventilators and thousands of healthcare staff to help the NHS fight against Covid. At the time, 20,000 staff were offered, including 10,000 nurses and 700 doctors. The Centre for Health and the Public Interest (CHPI), a thinktank that has raised concerns about how little NHS-funded work was done under the previous deal, said it doubted the independent sector had the capacity to treat meaningful numbers of NHS-funded patients. “This new announcement raises more questions than it answers,” said Sid Ryan, a researcher at the CHPI. “Firstly, it’s not clear what help the private sector can really provide when it relies so heavily on NHS consultants working privately outside their core NHS hours. The private sector may have beds, but their workforce is vanishingly small, and just as challenged by Omicron as the NHS, so it seems unlikely their support will be the key difference-maker. “The last time NHS England stepped in to override local contracting by NHS trusts, the taxpayer ended up footing the bill for a lot of empty hospital capacity. Are we risking that happening again?” The number of hospitalisations has been slower to rise than Covid cases, relative to previous waves of the disease, with ministers buoyed by the booster rollout. However, hospitals have struggled as a result of NHS staff being among the hundreds of thousands of people self-isolating because of the rapidly increasing number of Omicron cases.Robert Durst, the convicted murderer and disgraced multimillionaire real estate heir, has died. He was 78. Durst died in a California hospital while serving a life sentence for the murder of Susan Berman, his friend and confidante who prosecutors say helped him cover up the killing of his first wife. In a statement, Chip Lewis, an attorney who represented Durst at trial, said Durst died “early this morning while in the custody of California’s Department of Corrections.” Lewis added Durst had gone into cardiac arrest at a hospital in Stockton, California. “We understand that his death was due to natural causes associated with a litany of medical issues we had repeatedly reported to the court over the last couple of years,” Lewis said. Durst had tested positive for Covid-19 immediately after the October sentencing for Berman’s killing and was transferred to the hospital, where he was placed on a ventilator. His attorney said at the time that Durst “was having difficulty breathing and he was having difficulty communicating”. Durst’s death comes months after he was charged with murder in the death of his first wife, Kathleen McCormack Durst, who disappeared in 1982. He was accused of second-degree murder in the disappearance of McCormack, who went missing on 31 January 1982 at age 29. Her body was never found and she was declared legally dead in 2017 at the request of her family. In September, Durst was found guilty of murdering Berman, a friend who prosecutors say he shot at point-blank range in her home to prevent her from telling police what she knew about McCormack’s disappearance. Durst’s health seemed to deteriorate throughout the trial and at some points he appeared to have trouble breathing. He had bladder cancer and regularly used a wheelchair in court. At the sentencing, Berman’s relatives pleaded unsuccessfully with Durst to tell the McCormack family where he buried his first wife’s body. “Any hope of any kind of redemption you can find is in letting them know where to find Kathie,” Sareb Kaufman, Berman’s stepson, said. The Berman case marked the first homicide conviction for Durst, who has been linked to the deaths of three people in three states over four decades, and came six years after the documentary series The Jinx: The Life and Deaths of Robert Durst again brought the multimillionaire into the spotlight. The series chronicled McCormack’s disappearance, the murder of Berman in 2000, and the 2001 death of a neighbor in Texas, where Durst was hiding out, disguised as a deaf-mute woman. He famously appeared to confess to the killings in the final episode of the series, saying to himself, “What the hell did I do? … Killed them all, of course.” Durst avoided a murder conviction for the death of his neighbor, Morris Black, but spent three years in prison for other charges in the case, including evidence tampering for dismembering Black’s body. The son of real estate magnate Seymour Durst, Durst grew up in Scarsdale, New York, and said that at age seven he witnessed his mother’s death in a fall from the family home. He obtained an economics degree from Lehigh University in 1965, and later entered a doctoral program at the University of California, Los Angeles, where he met Berman. Durst dropped out and returned to New York in 1969, where he became a developer in the family business. But his father passed him over to make his younger brother, Douglas, the head of the Durst Organization in 1992. With Durst’s death, the one murder conviction he faced for Berman’s killing is now vacated. Under California law, a conviction is vacated if a defendant dies while the case is under appeal, said Laurie Levenson, a law professor at Loyola Law School. Robert Abrams, the attorney for the family of Kathleen McCormack Durst, said the investigation into Durst would continue. “Although Robert Durst has died, the ongoing investigation into those who helped him coverup her murder continues. On January 31, 2022, the 40th anniversary of Kathie’s murder, we will provide a further update. In the interim, please say a prayer for Kathie and his other victims,” Abrams said in a statement. The Associated Press contributedAt last: a scheme that roughly resembles a financial solution to the government’s scandalous failure to ensure combustible cladding is removed from mid-rise residential homes. It’s not perfect, and one can quibble with many details in Michael Gove’s plan to invite, with menaces, developers to pledge to cough up £4bn by March. But the secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities is heading in the right direction. First, he’s doing something. It is four-and-a-half years since the Grenfell Tower tragedy, so a muscular attempt to end the quarrels over who should pay to fit proper cladding on buildings between 11 metres and 18 metres tall, as opposed to higher buildings that have been covered by a separate £5bn fund, is long overdue. The government’s dodging of responsibilities to residents has been shocking. Second, Gove has definitively broken ranks with his predecessor, Robert Jenrick, who took the grotesque stance that leaseholders in mid-rise buildings should borrow to cover the costs themselves. That was patently unfair: individuals found themselves living in unsellable homes and were not to blame for their predicament. Third, Gove has gone where the money is – the building industry. This is the contentious part because there is no earthly way that he, or the companies, will be able to produce a perfect “polluter pays” formula that distributes the bill equitably. High-profile stock market housebuilders, rather than private companies and those based overseas, are inevitably easier to chase. And it was woefully unclear in Gove’s announcement how much building materials companies, which should be more directly in the firing line, will be expected to contribute. On that score, one can summon a degree of sympathy with the large housebuilders. They will pick up the lion’s share of the bill for a crisis that was created in large part by lax regulatory standards among quasi-government bodies. Note that a few large firms – Taylor Wimpey and Persimmon to the fore – are already funding remediation work; it would be unfair if that is not acknowledged in the argy-bargy over sums. Nor do legitimate grumbles over details stop there. Gove’s department needs to say more about how the £4bn has been calculated and how it will be spent. The figure looks high, say executives, if it is merely meant to cover cladding replacement, where scaffolding costs fall dramatically on 11-metre to 18-metre buildings (up to six storeys) versus tower blocks. Alternatively, the sum is too small, according to campaigners, if it is supposed to include non-cladding fire-safety issues such as defective fire doors, flammable balconies and missing firebreaks. Or is Gove’s parallel effort to “end the situation of buildings being declared unsafe when they are not” intended to fill the gap between the £9bn of visible funding (including the new £4bn fund) and previous estimates that have been as high as £15bn? Clarity is needed and it’s not reassuring that Gove’s department is still appealing for details about the number of affected buildings in the 11 metre to 18 metre category. Acquiring accurate information, you might have assumed, would have been the first task. An independent overseer of this programme is needed. There is a danger that the execution gets bogged down in bureaucracy, thereby extending leaseholders’ misery. Yet the housebuilders would be well advised not to bleat too hard. Yes, they’re a soft target for a government in search of funds, but that is partly because life has been made splendid for them over the past decade. George Osborne’s Help to Buy wheeze, as a House of Lords committee report reminded us on Monday, was a £29bn gift that succeeded mostly in inflating house prices in England – and, by extension, housebuilders’ profits margins. For many, returns on capital employed of 30% or more have become normal, which suggests the pace of housebuilding itself should not be greatly affected by Gove’s extraction of a few billion quid over several years. The four FTSE 100 housebuilders alone have made combined pre-tax profits of £16.5bn over the past five years. Share price falls on Monday of 5%-ish feel about right: shareholders will be hit, but not catastrophically so. Corporate boards would therefore be well advised to play ball with Gove’s request-cum-threat. They would be within their rights to press him to harry the building materials firms harder than he seems to be doing, but the cladding scandal has gone on too long and needs resolution. The companies don’t have a real choice in the matter: it’s time to throw some money in the kitty.From the NFC North to the AFC East, the firings began almost immediately after the NFL’s first 17-game season concluded. The Vikings fired coach Mike Zimmer and general manager Rick Spielman on Monday following an 8-9 season. Division rival Chicago parted with coach Matt Nagy and GM Ryan Pace after going 6-11. And in a relative surprise, Miami dismissed coach Brian Flores, whose Dolphins went 9-8, including a sweep of archrival New England. Indeed, the career coaching records for each total 130-112-1. Yet, while in South Florida the Dolphins seemed to be overachievers with a modest roster, both the Vikings and Bears were major disappointments this season. As were the New York Giants (4-13), and general manager Dave Gettleman retired Monday, though he likely would have been fired otherwise. One major problem for Minnesota and Chicago resides in neighboring Wisconsin: the Packers. While Green Bay is an NFL power and perennial championship contender, the Vikings and Bears have done more teasing than triumphant. “We are determined to have sustained success and bring Vikings fans the Super Bowl championships they expect and deserve,” owners Zygi and Mark Wilf said in their statement after letting go of Zimmer and Spielman. Zimmer was 7-8-1 against the Packers, which isn’t bad considering how Green Bay has performed in recent years. It was simply not close to good enough in that division.The Bears under Nagy were 1-7 against the Pack in the longest running rivalry in pro football. Nagy, the 2018 Coach of the Year, simply was following the path of his predecessors: Chicago’s past six head coaches have had a losing record against Green Bay. There also has been no evident progress at quarterback in Chicago, and the defense has taken a step backward. The 2018 Khalil Mack trade, Pace’s biggest move with the Bears, began well and now looks unproductive. Minnesota’s talent pool seems deeper than Chicago’s, from a high-paid quarterback, Kirk Cousins, with some success to standout runners and receivers. The payroll has been high, but the results in 2021, and the lack of progress in the standings, doomed both Zimmer and Spielman. Flores, however, didn’t appear to be in danger of losing his job. One of three Black heads coaches in the NFL, Flores brought Miami back from an awful first half of the schedule, turning around from 1-7 to 9-8 — including victories in the opener and finale against his former boss in New England. Dolphins owner Stephen Ross, who kept GM Chris Grier, hinted at communication issues. “I’ve been looking at this over three years now and watching the organization grow,” Ross said. “I think an organization can only function if it’s collaborative and it works well together, and I don’t think we were really working well as an organization ... to win consistently at the NFL level.” Gettleman, 70, saw the Giants go 19-46 during his tenure and were rarely in playoff contention in that period. New York’s offense was virtually invisible in 2021 even though the team spent in free agency for No. 1 receiver Kenny Golladay and tight end Kyle Rudolph, then spent a first-round draft choice on wideout Kadarius Toney. “It was a privilege to serve as the general manager of the New York Giants the last four years and to have spent so many years of my career with this franchise,” Gettleman said. “We obviously have not had the on-the-field success I expected, and that is disappointing.”It took me a long time to embrace my Māori identity. On my mother’s side, I whakapapa (relate, through ancestry) to Kāi Tahu, the largest iwi (tribe) of Te Waipounamu (the South Island of New Zealand), but I grew up believing I was only Pākehā (NZ European). I spent most of my childhood living with my Pākehā father. Even though my Māori ancestry was mentioned occasionally, I resisted the suggestion that I was Māori. I didn’t grow up on a marae (Māori village), or speak te reo – and I didn’t look like the Māori kids I knew. It was only as an adult, with the encouragement of my Gran, on my mother’s side, that I started to explore my Māori heritage. Today, I proudly identify as both Pākehā and Māori. I’ve returned to my marae, and I’m reclaiming my Indigenous language. I’ve been supported in this by the aroha (love) of whānau (family) and friends, as well as the writing of thinkers such as Tā Tīmoti Kāretu, who reminds us that if we have Māori ancestry, we’re Māori, and Hana O’Regan, whose work on Kāi Tahu history and identity continues to sustain me. At one point, I had a realisation: we aren’t all “one or the other”. The urge to separate us out is a colonising one, and it has been used to marginalise and exclude people of colour around the world. Challenging binary distinctions – “either/or” – in favour of inclusion – “both … and” – underpins a lot of radical thinking, including feminism and queer theory. “Either/or” doesn’t really work for us here in Aotearoa. For a long time, there has been a tendency to think of New Zealanders as “either Māori or Pākehā” – but many of us are both, and some of us are neither. For example, there are Chinese families who have been here a lot longer than some Pākehā families; and many Chinese New Zealanders are Māori too. Why do I tend to describe myself as “Pākehā”, rather than “NZ European”? Maybe it’s because it was only when I began learning te reo that I really started giving attention to my heritage – including my English, Irish, and Scottish ancestry. Also, the word “Pākehā”, being a Māori word, captures a connection to this place that “NZ European” doesn’t. Some people mistakenly believe the word “Pākehā” is an insult, but I think it has mana (honour or prestige). When I think of Pākehā, I think about the people I know who wear the term comfortably. They are, without exception, generous, reflective, and humble. Still, a lot of white New Zealanders reject the term in favour of “NZ European”. I’m not sure why they feel we have to choose. Eschewing the “either/or” mindset allows those of us with European ancestry to embrace both – explicitly acknowledging our European heritage with one, and emphasising our connection to this place with the other. There are those who believe that anyone who rejects the term “Pākehā” is racist, but that isn’t the case. Some New Zealanders who were born in Europe are reluctant to call themselves Pākehā, because it is often taken to mean people whose ancestors settled in Aotearoa. Also, I know people who have European ancestry, but who immigrated to New Zealand from non-European countries (like South Africa) and aren’t sure that the word accurately describes them. Some NZ Europeans may simply feel that a Māori word they struggle to pronounce isn’t the best fit when describing their non-Māori heritage. It’s helpful to remember, though, that reciprocity requires us to extend the same consideration to others. If NZ Europeans think they are being misrepresented when people call them “Pākehā”, I would encourage them to take a moment to think about the many ways Māori have been, and continue to be, “othered” on our own lands. They might also consider the ways they relate – or resist relating – to te ao Māori (the Māori world). As New Zealanders, all of us have a responsibility to learn about, and become familiar with, our country’s Indigenous heritage – whether our ancestors have been here since the beginning, or for 250 years … or if we made the brave journey to Aotearoa ourselves. (Learning te reo Māori – even just a bit – is a great place to start!) It’s natural that a discussion about ethnicity should begin with personal identity – but it mustn’t end there. Attending to ethnicity will help us create a better community. It can support us in thinking critically about how power is distributed, and who is unfairly disadvantaged in our society. Ethnicity data helps us to see that our education, health, and criminal justice systems are failing Māori and Pasifika. Recording and monitoring it can assist us in designing and evaluating initiatives that address institutional racism. Likewise, a critical understanding of ethnicity in Aotearoa can challenge the anti-Asian sentiment which has intensified during the Covid-19 pandemic. As we continue to explore ethnicity, let’s remember that all of us belong here. We may relate to Aotearoa in diverse ways, but together we can imagine a community in which everyone thrives. Philip McKibbin is a writer from Aotearoa New Zealand of Pākehā (New Zealand European) and Māori (Ngāi Tahu) descentCambridge University has scrapped a programme that taught prisoners alongside students after the deadly 2019 Fishmonger’s Hall terrorist attack was carried out at one of its events. Jack Merritt, 25, who was employed by the Learning Together programme at the time, and Saskia Jones, 23, who was one of its volunteers, were killed by the convicted terrorist Usman Khan at an event to mark the fifth anniversary of the scheme. An inquest into their deaths was critical of Learning Together’s failure to spot the danger Khan posed and its lax attitude to security. Now a Cambridge University review of the programme has recommended it should end. The inquest heard that Learning Together regarded Khan as a “poster boy” for the programme, as he appeared to have become a reformed character after taking part in several of its courses while at Whitemoor high security prison. Khan even featured in promotional video played at an earlier Learning Together event held months after he was released. The inquest jury concluded this played a part in the collective failure by the authorities to do nothing to stop Khan attending Fishmonger’s Hall or search his bag, which contained the knives he used to carry out the attack. The jury said the authorities had a “blind spot to Khan’s unique risks due to his ‘poster boy’ image and lack of psychological assessment post released from prison”. Last November in a prevention of future deaths report, Judge Mark Lucraft QC, a former chief coroner, set out 22 “matters of concern”, several of which were directed at the university and Learning Together. Lucraft questioned why no formal risk assessment of the Fishmonger’s Hall event had taken place. And he asked how serving and recently released serious offenders could attend the event without many of those involved knowing. On Monday, Dave Merritt, Jack’s father, told the Guardian: “The Learning Together programme did a lot of good for the prisoners and the Cambridge University students who participated in it, and for that reason it is sad that the programme will not continue. “However, the university, the course leaders in particular, failed in their safeguarding responsibilities towards their staff and students, by failing to carry out any risk assessments of potentially dangerous individuals such as Khan, or events such as Fishmonger’s Hall. “This was covered extensively in the inquest, and formed a key section of the coroner’s prevention of future deaths report. It is regrettable that the university has never acknowledged its failings, either at the inquest or subsequently. The course leaders were idealistic, ambitious for the programme and naive about the risks that dangerous, high-risk, category A, Terrorist Act offenders such as Khan pose. “All the agencies in managing Khan – prison, probation, police, MI5 – regarded his involvement with Learning Together as a ‘protective factor’, in the absence of any evidence to support this. In the words of our barrister, Nick Armstrong of Matrix Chambers, it was if they were intoxicated by the ‘fairy dust Learning Together sprinkled over them’. “Given the jury’s verdict and their strongly worded statement and the coroner’s report, we are not surprised that the university has decided that Learning Together cannot continues under its auspices. We take no satisfaction in this; we strongly support prisoner education and rehabilitation programmes in general, provided that they are subject to rigorous risk management.” During the inquest, a lawyer for Jack Merritt’s family had asked the co-directors of Learning Together, Dr Amy Ludlow and Dr Ruth Armstrong, why they did not rule out working with terrorist offenders on safety grounds. Ludlow told the inquest that research did not support such exclusions. In a response to the coroner, published on Monday, Cambridge University said: “There now needs to be a ‘clear stop’ to the delivery of the Learning Together programme in the university, both within and beyond prisons. The programme is therefore at an end.” It added that in future, the university’s Institute of Criminology would ensure any contact with students and offenders was closely supervised, and would not permit contact with serious offenders beyond research interviews subject to risk assessments. In its response to the coroner, Learning Together said: “Drs Armstrong and Ludlow take this opportunity to reiterate that their personal and professional reflection, profound grief, and trauma is deep and ongoing following the tragedy of 29 November 2019. As employees of the university, they have taken every possible opportunity to contribute to the university’s process of reflection, consideration and further action.” John Crilly, an ex-offender who was praised for saving lives at Fishmongers Hall by forcing Khan out of the building with a fire extinguisher, said scrapping the Learning Together programme was a “real shame”. Speaking to the Guardian, he said: “It’s the best programme I ever took part in. It opened up my life to what was possible and that there was a world beyond prison that I could be a part of. One bad thing happens and it just ruins everything for everyone.” Prof Stephen J Toope, the university’s vice-chancellor, said: “The Learning Together programme helped change many lives for the better. But the London Bridge tragedy caused unimaginable grief. As a result, an independent review recommended that the programme be halted.”KPMG has apologised for misconduct and misleading the UK’s accounting regulator after former auditors were accused of “forgery” related to audits including that of Carillion, the major government contractor that collapsed four years ago. Jon Holt, the chief executive of KPMG UK, said it was “clear” that misconduct had occurred, in a statement published to mark the start of a disciplinary tribunal on Monday. The Financial Reporting Council (FRC) has alleged that KPMG misled its investigators over routine inspections of the audits of Carillion and the sofware company Regenersis, in 2016 and 2014 respectively. The FRC has alleged that “relevant individuals acted with a lack of integrity in dishonestly or recklessly misleading the regulator”, according to tribunal documents. The tribunal on Monday heard via a public video call a number of allegations of “forgery” by KPMG’s auditors, including the “fabrication” of documents. The FRC’s counsel, Mark Ellison, told the tribunal that auditors manufactured spreadsheets and minutes of meetings to appear as if they were created during the audits, when in fact they were created months later, and then presented as genuine to inspectors. Carillion collapsed in January 2018, resulting in 3,000 job losses and causing chaos across the 450 public sector projects in which its services were used. The collapse of the company, which had £7bn of debt, turned into one of the highest-profile accounting scandals in recent years. Parliamentary committees have said KPMG was “complicit” in Carillion’s “questionable” accounting practices, including “complacently signing off its directors’ increasingly fantastical figures”. However, the tribunal will not investigate the circumstances of Carillion’s collapse. KPMG reported the alleged misconduct to the regulator, although it remains a party to the disciplinary tribunal alongside former partners and employees. The other respondents have denied allegations of misconduct. Holt said: “It is of course for the tribunal to reach a conclusion on the allegations as they relate to the individuals concerned. Nevertheless, it is clear to me that misconduct has occurred and that our regulator was misled.” Holt said the alleged misconduct was “disturbing and upsetting for me and for my colleagues” and was “a violation of our processes and clearly against our values”. “It is unacceptable, we do not tolerate or condone it in any way, and I am very sorry that it occurred in our firm,” he said. The tribunal is expected to hear evidence over the course of several weeks from the FRC, KPMG and the individual respondents. They included Peter Meehan, who was KPMG’s lead partner on the Carillion audit, and Stuart Smith, the lead partner on the Regenersis audit. Lawyers for Meehan and Smith did not respond to requests for comment. If the tribunal finds that wrongdoing has occurred it has the power to impose unlimited financial sanctions on firms or individuals. It also has the power to ban people from the audit profession. Alistair Wright, a KPMG group senior manager, denied allegations of misconduct relating to Regenersis, in a summary of his position sent by his lawyers. He admitted “dishonest” conduct in relation to Carillion because he intended “to increase the risk that the […] inspection team would be misled” on when documents had been created, but denied the allegation that the content of the minutes was false or misleading. Richard Kitchen, who was an audit manager of Carillion, strongly denied the allegations of misconduct. He said via his lawyer that he welcomes the opportunity to give his account to the tribunal. Adam Bennett, a former senior manager, denied all allegations of misconduct against him via his lawyer. Pratik Paw, an assistant manager, strongly denied all of the allegations against him.A late PS. Stocks have managed a late recovery in New York. The Nasdaq Composite fought its way out of correction territory to end the day slightly higher, while the S&amp;P 500 closed just 0.15% lower. The recovery came as US bond yields eased back, after being driven higher by expectations US interest rate rises. Investors may also have spotted some bargains, after Wall Street fell back from its record highs. Bloomberg reports that signs that the omicron coronavirus variant may be peaking in New York also lifted the market, adding: “There are some real risks around rate hikes and whatnot, but if you look at some of the major tech companies that are falling, these companies have a massive cash moat,” Sylvia Jablonski, chief investment officer for Defiance ETFs, said on Bloomberg’s “QuickTake Stock” streaming program. “We’re in a fairly good spot, and these are great buy-on-the-dip opportunities right now.” Time to wrap up. Here’s all today’s stories, on concerns about US interest rate rises: The UK economy: The cladding crisis: The energy crunch: And also: Goodnight. GW Global financial markets tumbled on Monday amid growing investor concerns about the US Federal Reserve potentially putting up interest rates in response to surging inflationary pressures. Share prices fell back on both sides of the Atlantic with the FTSE 100 shedding 40 points, or 0.5%, in London, to finish the day at 7,445, while stocks fell by a more substantial margin on Wall Street as traders bet on the American central bank leaping into action from as early as March to tackle high inflation rates. On a day of selling pressure around the world, the Nasdaq index slumped into correction territory, defined by financial investors as a drop of more than 10% from a previous peak, amid a sell-off in US tech stocks from an all-time high reached in November. Housebuilders were among the biggest fallers in London after the UK government announced a £4bn package forcing developers to help remove dangerous cladding from buildings in the wake of the Grenfell Tower disaster in June 2017. Shares in Persimmon and Barratt fell by about 5%, while Taylor Wimpey and Berkeley dropped 3.5%. The gyrations come as financial markets worldwide adjust to the prospect of central banks ramping up interest rates in response to soaring cost of living, despite weaker levels of economic growth at the outset of 2022 after the emergence of the Omicron variant of Covid-19. The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell by 1.5% on Monday afternoon in New York, while markets in France and Germany finished the day down more than 1% amid heightened investor caution worldwide. US government bond yields hit a two-year high as investors bet the Fed could raise rates from as early as March, in a jittery trading session ahead of official US inflation data due on Wednesday. US inflation surged to 6.8% in November, the highest level since 1982. After a choppy morning on Wall Street, the main indices are still in the red. Both the Dow Jones industrial average and the wider S&amp;P 500 are down over 1%, in a fairly broad selloff. Consumer discretionary stocks are the worst-performing sector, followed by materials producers, industrial stocks and technology companies. The Nasdaq Composite has recovered a little, but is still down 1.5% today - and over 6% so far this year. Danni Hewson, AJ Bell financial analyst, says investors seem to have finally priced in the prospect of US rate rises, after months of rising inflation and increasingly hawkish noises from the Federal Reserve. The fallers present as a who’s who of tech sector darlings with Amazon, Tesla, Etsy and Peloton among those taking a hit. But it’s not just tech that’s bearing the brunt of today’s rout, investors are beginning to think of “growth” as a negative, realisation setting in that those money makers of the past few years will be weighed down by added baggage. “Taper tantrum, manic Monday, whatever label you want to put on today’s carnage the real story will be played out over the rest of the week. Are investors just having a quick panic that will be followed by a deep breath and a spot of bargain hunting or are investors really rattled by what the next twelve months are set to bring? Rate rise rhetoric tends to lead to knee jerk reaction followed by a period of reflection, but with more inflation data hurtling towards us, this week could be unsettling at best. A reminder of the impact of the UK government’s £4bn cladding package on UK housebuilders: Worries about the impact of a rise in interest rates on the value of future earnings are threatening to turn into a painful reckoning for many tech investors, says Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown: The Nasdaq composite index slipped by as much as 4% in early trade, before stemming some losses and is down by around 10% from its November high. Apple retreated further away from the nascent 3 trillion dollar club, falling 2%. Chip maker Nvidia and Mastercard registered falls of more than 5% before recovering slightly. Amazon joined the downward trajectory, slipping by 3.6% in early trade. On the FTSE 100, Scottish Mortgage Investment Trust, which holds a raft of tech darlings like Tesla, Nio and Amazon was among the biggest fallers amid concerns the tech juggernaut is slowing. With other companies in the big data and payments space slipping back, information analytics firm Experian fell lower, ending the day down by more than 5% . The question facing investors today is whether to sell long term winners to buy into the short-term recovery bounce, says David Miller, executive director of Quilter Cheviot Investment Management. In his latest Diary of a fund manager, Miller explains that the answer depends on an investor’s perspective, and their optimism about a return to the pre-covid days. (Some will be sticking with ‘growth’ stocks for their long-term potential, while others will be shifting into ‘value’ companies who suffered during the pandemic) Setting aside the short-term noise, Miller adds, the major assumptions of this year are that; The global economy will continue to grow, not quite as fast as last year which was the best for 40 years, but still above average. The US Federal Reserve will increase interest rates three times during the year, but only by fractions. If economic growth falters, it will back away from being tough. Geopolitical hotspots will continue to be more bluff than action. Covid will remain a problem, but not worse. Europe’s stock markets have just closed, with losses on the main bourses. January continues to be a choppy time for the markets, with the pan-European Stoxx 600 losing nearly 1.5% today. It’s now down 1.8% so far this year. Michael Hewson of CMC Markets explains: It’s been a broadly weaker session for European shares today, as we start a new week with higher yields and inflation worries continuing to temper appetite for risk. The prospect of a faster pace of US rate rises has continued to keep markets on edge, with losses accelerating as US markets reopened after the weekend. While the Nasdaq 100 has plunged to its lowest levels in 10 weeks, the FTSE100 appears to be holding up a little better than its peers, helped by outperformance in financials, as well as consumer staples. Britain’s blue-chip stock index, the FTSE 100, has closed 40 points lower at 7,445 points. That’s the FTSE 100’s lowest close in 2022, as it hands back some of last week’s gains. Steam engineering group Spirax-Sarco (-6.5%), industrial equipment rental firm Ashtead (-5.9%) and consumer credit report firm Experian (-5.4%) were the top fallers. Housebuilders also slid, with Persimmon down 5.1% as the government insists that the industry will bear the cost of the UK’s cladding crisis. Here’s Fawad Razaqzada, analyst at ThinkMarkets, on today’s drop in technology stocks and cryptocurrencies: Investors are wondering what 2022 means for assets inflated with government and central bank liquidity during the pandemic, with technology and cryptocurrencies being the obvious focal points. So far, they have shown a clear desire to move into value and away from low-div-yielding stocks, as bond yields climb across the board as we get closer to the time of lift off. Investors are pricing in a Fed hike in as early as March. Gold’s struggles are a side effect of investors’ desire for higher yielding assets and the US dollar. The precious metal has been unable to find much haven flow despite the crypto and tech sell-off. The markets are throwing a tantrum about the prospect of higher US interest rates, says Callie Cox, investment analyst at eToro: Megatech stocks are under pressure today. Apple is down 2% today, Alphabet (Google) and Microsoft have both lost 2.6%, while Meta (Facebook) has tumbled 4.4%. Tesla is 3% lower, Amazon has dropped 3.3%, while graphics chip-maker Nvidia has slid over 5.5%. Ouch. The technology-focused Nasdaq Composite is now in correction territory. The index has dropped by more than 10% from its record high in November, as Wall Street has priced in higher US interest rates. European markets have dropped deeper into the red too, as the risk-off mood hits equities. In London, the FTSE 100 index is now down 45 points or 0.6% at 7440, retreating from last week’s 22-month highs. Steam engineering group Spirax-Sarco are the top faller (-6%), followed by tech investor Scottish Mortgage Investment Trust, which is suffering from the technology selloff in New York. The pan-European Stoxx 600 index is now down 1.3%. The Nasdaq Composite index has hit its lowest level since mid-October. Wall Street’s selloff is gathering pace, with the Nasdaq Composite now down over 2%. Worries about a possible rise in US interest rates, and anxiety over the impact of the pandemic, are both hitting shares today, says Bloomberg: Technology companies led stock losses in another leg down for pricey growth shares under threat from rising rates and inflation. Some corporate warnings about the negative impacts of the omicron coronavirus variant also soured sentiment. The Nasdaq 100 dropped about 2%, while Treasury 10-year yields climbed to 1.8%. Lululemon Athletica Inc. tumbled as the maker of yoga pants said omicron was constraining its operations, while Torrid Holdings Inc. plunged after the plus-size women’s clothing retailer cut its sales forecast as the variant caused disruptions to its workforce. Bitcoin fell for the fifth time in six sessions, putting it on pace for the worst start to a year since the earliest days of the digital alternative to money. Markets are facing higher volatility as the pandemic liquidity that helped drive equities to record highs is withdrawn. The Federal Reserve will likely raise interest rates four times this year and will start its balance-sheet runoff process in July, if not earlier, according to Goldman Sachs Group Inc. [see earlier post]. A key measure of U.S. inflation -- set to be released Wednesday -- is anticipated to have increased further in December. Stocks have opened lower in New York as the prospect of several US interest rate hikes this year worries investors. The S&amp;P 500 index of US stocks has fallen 1%, shedding 47 points to 4,630 points, extending weak start to the year. Technology stocks are under pressure, dragging the Nasdaq Composite index down by 1.75% in early trading. Tech firms tend to fall out of favour in an environment of higher interest rates and inflation, with investors favouring companies making higher profits today, rather than those which could deliver higher earnings in future years. The Dow Jones industrial average of 30 large US firms has dipped by 0.6%, with bank stocks rising (higher interest rates help their profit margins). Bitcoin has dropped through the $40,000 mark for the first time since last September. It’s down around 4% today at $39,906, or over 40% off its record high (above $68,000) set in November, as worries about higher US interest rates hit risky assets. Wall Street is bracing for US inflation to potentially hit 7% on Wednesday, up from the 38-year high of 6.8% recorded for November. Mohamed El-Erian, chief economic adviser at Allianz, has predicted we could see a ‘7-handle’ on US CPI: Fiona Cincotta, senior financial markets analyst at City Index, says another inflation increase could lead to a US interest rate rise in March: US stocks are set to open lower as investors fret over rising inflation and the Fed hiking interest rates at the same time that Omicron cases are surging higher. US treasury yields rose to a fresh 2 year high amid growing expectations that the Fed will tackle surging inflation head on this year raising rates at a faster pace than initially expected. Tech stocks, which are particularly sensitive to higher interest rate expectations are once again under performing as investors rotate out of high growth stocks into value, with bank stocks rising on the prospect of a rate hike boosting net interest income. Whilst there is no high impacting US data due for release today attention is firmly on US inflation data and a speech by Fed chair Powell later in the week. Inflation is expected to come in at 7%, which could prompt more hawkish commentary from the Fed, cementing the way to a rate hike potentially as soon as March. Wall Street is set to open lower, as worries about potential US interest rate rises hit growth stocks. Nasdaq futures are down 1%, as technology stocks are hurt by expectations of a high interest rate environment. Bank stocks, though, are benefitting from rate hike bets, with US. Treasury yields (the interest rate on US government debt) trading at two-year highs. Higher US inflation could lead to a tougher than expected response from America’s central bank that would send tremors through financial markets and put vulnerable countries at risk, the International Monetary Fund has warned. Adding to growing concerns about the sharp increase in price pressures being registered across the globe, the IMF said emerging market nations should brace themselves for muscular action from the US central bank, the Federal Reserve. “For most of last year, investors priced in a temporary rise in inflation in the US given the unsteady economic recovery and a slow unravelling of supply bottlenecks,” the Washington-based IMF said in a blogpost. “Now sentiment has shifted. Prices are rising at the fastest pace in almost four decades and the tight labour market has started to feed into wage increases. The new Omicron variant has raised additional concerns of supply-side pressures on inflation. The Federal Reserve referred to inflation developments as a key factor in its decision last month to accelerate the tapering of asset purchases.” More here: Covid-19 spurred wealthy motorists to buy more Rolls-Royces than ever before because it made them realise life is short, the luxury carmaker has said. As global cases escalated in 2021, Rolls-Royce Motor Cars, based in Goodwood, West Sussex, booked the highest annual sales in its 117-year history, selling 5,586 vehicles. The company’s chief executive, Torsten Müller-Ötvös, said the pandemic had led to customers, whose average age was 43, responding to the reminder of their own mortality by splashing out on luxury cars. “Many people witnessed people in their community dying from Covid and that made them think life can be short and you’d better live now rather than postpone until a later date,” said Müller-Ötvös. That has helped Rolls-Royce.” He said the carmaker, owned by BMW, had also benefited from the restrictions the pandemic had placed on wealthy consumers’ opportunities to spend their money elsewhere. “It is very much due to Covid that the entire luxury business is booming worldwide. People couldn’t travel a lot, they couldn’t invest a lot into luxury services … and there is quite a lot of money accumulated that is spent on luxury goods.” Big takeover news in the games sector: Grand Theft Auto maker Take-Two is acquiring mobile gaming firm Zynga, the creator of FarmVille. Take-Two has agreed to buy all the outstanding shares of Zynga in a $12.7bn deal, which values Zynga at 64% above its closing price last Friday. The deal will establish Take-Two as “one of the largest and most diversified mobile game publishers in the industry”, bringing together its portfolio of console and PC games with Zynga’s mobile-based titles. A statement announcing the deal explains: Both companies have created and expanded iconic franchises, which will combine to form one of the largest and most diverse portfolios of intellectual properties in the sector. Take-Two’s labels are home to some of the most beloved series in the world, including Grand Theft Auto®, Red Dead Redemption®, Midnight Club®, NBA 2K®, BioShock®, Borderlands®, Civilization®, Mafia®, and Kerbal Space Program®, while Zynga’s portfolio includes renowned titles, such as CSR Racing™, Empires &amp; Puzzles™, FarmVille™, Golf Rival™, Hair Challenge™, Harry Potter: Puzzles &amp; Spells™, High Heels! ™, Merge Dragons!™, Toon Blast™, Toy Blast™, Words With Friends™, and Zynga Poker™ Take-Two will pay $9.86 per Zynga share – $3.50 in cash and $6.36 in shares of Take-Two common stock, implying an enterprise value of $12.7bn. Shares in Zynga have surged by over 50% in premarket trading, from $6 to $9.12. Goldman Sachs analysts have predicted that the Federal Reserve will likely raise US interest rates four times this year, due to steep inflation and the recovery in the jobs market. They also anticipate the Fed will start its balance sheet runoff process in July, if not earlier as Bloomberg explains: Rapid progress in the U.S. labor market and hawkish signals in minutes from the Dec. 14-15 Federal Open Market Committee suggest faster normalization, Goldman’s Jan Hatzius said in a research note. “We are therefore pulling forward our runoff forecast from December to July, with risks tilted to the even earlier side,” Hatzius said. “With inflation probably still far above target at that point, we no longer think that the start to runoff will substitute for a quarterly rate hike. We continue to see hikes in March, June, and September, and have now added a hike in December.” MPs have called on the City watchdog to wrap up their investigation into the collapse of fund manager Neil Woodford’s flagship fund swiftly, so any appropriate action can be taken. The Treasury Committee has urged the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) to draw its investigation into the failure of the Woodford Equity Income Fund to a conclusion as quickly as possible. The fund folded in 2019, leaving hundreds of thousands of investors nursing losses. Treasury committee chair Mel Stride says: “The collapse of the Woodford Fund led to significant losses for many retail investors. The FCA’s investigation is set to move into a new phase, and I have today written to the FCA to urge them to allocate the resources required to enable as swift a conclusion to their investigation as possible.” The committee has also published a letter they received in mid-December by FCA chief executive Nikhil Rathi. Rathi explains that the watchdog was finalising its legal analysis, “with a view to making decisions as to whether to take action and, if so, what action should be taken and against whom.” In a letter replying to Rathi today, Stride says the Woodford situation remains “a matter of keen interest to the Committee”, and urges the FCA to ensure the inquiry has the resources it needs. I expect the FCA to ensure that this investigation and any regulatory action which follows is resourced to ensure as swift as possible a conclusion, and that the FCA will take every opportunity (within the confines of the law) to update the Committee as the investigation progresses. Back in the City, housebuilders are still under pressure as the government laid out plans to make developers help cover the cost of the UK’s cladding crisis. Persimmon (-4.9%) is still the top FTSE 100 faller, as investors digest the situation, as Newsnight’s Ben Chu tweets: Despite nearing a record low in November, eurozone unemployment (7.2%) is still higher than in the UK (4.2%) and the US (3.9%). The Financial Times points out there are few signs that wage increases for European workers are as large as those for their American counterparts, adding: The recent rebound in the eurozone economy is expected to slow because of restrictions to contain the Omicron variant. But Jack Allen-Reynolds, senior Europe economist at Capital Economists, said: “If we are right that activity will start to pick up again in February and March, any impact on the pace of hiring should be shortlived.” Jonas Keck, economist at the CEBR thinktank, says eurozone labour market showed continued improvement in November, with the headline rate of unemployment falling to 7.2%: Due to an environment of general economic uncertainty, Cebr has recently revised its forecast of eurozone GDP growth downwards. GDP in the eurozone is expected to grow by 4.1% over the course of 2022. This slowdown in growth and a potential return of stricter public health measures are, however, not expected to lead to a long-term deterioration in the labour market, as most European countries have been successful in shifting the burden of the pandemic from the labour market to public finances. Despite some near-term headwinds, the general outlook for the eurozone’s labour market is positive.” - Claus Vistesen, macroeconomist for Pantheon Macroeconomics, predicts that eurozone unemployment will keep falling this year. Wages, though, don’t appear to be rising sharply in response, points out Oxford Economics’ Oliver Rakau. But price pressures are building, with eurozone inflation hitting 5% last month, the highest since the euro was created. The pound has climbed to its strongest level against the euro since the start of the pandemic. Sterling hit €1.1995 this morning, the highest since February 2020, despite this morning’s encouraging fall in eurozone unemployment. The pound has rallied in the last month, lifted by optimism that omicron will not derail the economic recovery despite the hit to hospitality in the run-up to Christmas. It means one euro is worth 83.33p, as this chart from interactive investor’s Victoria Scholar shows. Eurozone unemployment has now almost closed the gap with its best pre-pandemic reading after dropping in November, says Bert Colijn, senior eurozone economist at ING. This strong performance is thanks to furlough scheme support and rapid demand recovery. The low unemployment rate opens the door further for sustained higher medium-term inflation. Unemployment continued its rapid decline in November as it fell from 7.3 to 7.2%. Despite restrictions still in place and slowing GDP growth, the labour market continues to boom. All large economies saw declining rates in November, with the most notable drop coming from Spain where unemployment fell from 14.4 to 14.1%. The Netherlands at 2.7 and Germany at 3.2% are among the strongest labour markets in the eurozone at the moment. Colijn is also hopeful that unemployment won’t spike once job protection schemes wrap up, given demand for workers remains strong. With furlough schemes still supporting – part of – the job market, there remains some concern about what will happen when this support ends. We’re not too worried about this anymore as labour demand seems so strong at the moment and take-up of the schemes has already declined dramatically over the course of the pandemic. Unemployment across the eurozone has fallen again, as the region battles back from the economic shock of the pandemic. The euro area jobless rate fell to 7.2% in November, data firm Eurostat reports, down from 7.3% in October and close to its pre-pandemic levels. A year earlier, it was 8.1%, before vaccine rollouts helped the European economy to reopen. During November, the number of people unemployed fell by 222,000 in the eurozone, and by 247 000 in the wider European Union and by 222 000 in the euro area. But that still leaves 11.8m unemployed people in the eurozone, and nearly 14m in the EU. The spread of Omicron, and the introduction of lockdown measures in some European countries late last month, may have slowed the jobs recovery. Manufacturers have warned that Brexit will add to soaring costs facing British industry, amid concerns that customs delays and red tape will rank among the biggest challenges for firms this year. Make UK, the industry body representing 20,000 manufacturing firms of all sizes from across the country, said that while optimism among its members had grown, it was being undermined by the after-effects of the UK’s departure from the EU. One year on from the end of the transition period, two-thirds of industrial company leaders in its survey of 228 firms said Brexit had moderately or significantly hampered their business. More than half of firms warned they were likely to suffer further damage this year from customs delays due to import checks and changes to product labelling. According to the 2022 MakeUK/PwC senior executive survey, Brexit disruption remains among the biggest concerns facing industry bosses for the year ahead as Britain’s departure from the EU complicates the fallout from Covid-19 and the rising costs facing companies. Delays at customs, the additional costs from meeting separate regulatory regimes in the UK and the EU, and reduced access to migrant workers were among top concerns raised in the survey. The report says: “It is clear from these figures that Brexit and the global Covid-19 pandemic have had a scarring effect on the mentality of many businesses, which are traumatised by the ongoing delays and disruptions to their supply chains.” Shares in travel and hospitality firms have risen this morning, on hopes that the pandemic may be easing. British Airways parent company IAG (+2.4%), conference organiser Informa (+1.4%), budget airline easyJet (+3.7%) and Wizz Air (+2.9%), cinema operator Cineworld (+6.5%) are among the risers in London. This follows signs that omicron is less severe than the Delta variant of Covid-19, following record numbers of cases in the UK in recent weeks. Luca Paolini, chief strategist at Pictet Asset Management the economic recovery remains resilient despite the restrictions introduced to combat Omicron. The global recovery remains resilient, thanks to a strong labour market, pent-up demand for services and healthy corporate balance sheets.” Given our positive outlook for the economy, we are looking for opportunities to raise our weighting in stocks in 2022.” The global economy is on track to grow 4.8 per cent in 2022 with the US experiencing a strong recovery in both manufacturing and services.” That could mean US interest rates rise this year, potentially creating turbulence in emerging economies and some volatility in the financial markets. Paolini explains: Price pressures are more persistent than expected, however. Inflation is still running way above the central bank’s official target. We expect core inflation to peak in early 2022, which should prompt the US Federal Reserve to raise interest rates by as early as June 2022.” Here’s AJ Bell investment director Russ Mould on this morning’s early market action. “Despite some tentative positivity in Asian trading, the UK index was not helped by a weak start for the housebuilding sector. “The UK Government is reportedly looking for property developers to take on a greater share of the costs of repairing dangerous apartment blocks in the wake of the Grenfell tragedy in 2017. “Many flat owners have been left with onerous costs for replacing flammable cladding and the latest reports on who will foot the bill should come as no surprise to the sector in that context. “The housebuilders have benefited from generous incentives, such as Help to Buy and the mortgage guarantee scheme, in recent years. However, state support is not a one-way street and the sector needs to do its bit to look after its customers. “With a quiet start to the week for big corporate and economic announcements, markets could remain in a holding pattern until Wednesday when US inflation figures will reveal just how acute inflationary pressures are in the world’s largest economy.” German discount supermarket chain Aldi has announced its “best ever” Christmas, and predicted it would prosper as households tighten their belts. My colleague Rob Davies explains: Sales at Aldi were up 0.4% in December 2021 compared with the equivalent month in 2020, despite a boost that year from people ordering more groceries amid a lockdown that forced hospitality venues to close. Kicking off the Christmas updates for supermarkets, Aldi claimed figures from the research firm Kantar showed it was the “only major supermarket” to increase its sales in December. Its sales growth over the month was partly driven by record sales of its premium range and strong demand for beer, wine and spirits. Its chief executive said the discounter stood to benefit even further if people opted for cheaper shopping lists this year, as a cost-of-living crisis looms due to soaring energy bills and higher taxes. Here’s the full story: Another important housing story...Britain faces a crisis in the wake of the pandemic as confusion about planning rules and shortages of staff undermine government targets to build 300,000 homes a year. A retreat from housebuilding by smaller companies must be tackled by ministers to reduce the shortage of homes, according to a House of Lords committee. A report, titled Meeting Housing Demand, warned: “Too many people currently live in expensive, unsuitable and poor-quality homes, and housing supply needs to be increased now to tackle the housing crisis. Here’s the full story: European stock markets have started the week in the red. The FTSE 100 index has dipped by 10 points, or 0.12%, while Germany’s DAX and France’s CAC are both 0.5% lower. Jitters about the prospect of higher US interest rates continue to weigh on markets, as Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, explains: “Choppiness continues this week with European markets initially opening in the green before shifting into the red. Oil &amp; gas is outperforming while household goods are under pressure. There’s no shortage of risk events for the week ahead including US inflation data, earnings from the US financial giants and comments from Fed Chair Jay Powell. After opening flat, the FTSE 100 is giving back almost 0.5% with the next major support level at 7,450. The DAX and the CAC have swung from gains to losses this morning with a nervous overhang after last week’s volatility capping any notable gains.” In the City, shares in UK housebuilders have dropped after the government ordered the industry to pay £4bn to help remove dangerous cladding from buildings. In a letter to property developers this morning, secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities Michael Gove said they must help foot the bill, following the Grenfell Tower disaster in 2017. “It is neither fair nor decent that innocent leaseholders, many of whom have worked hard and made sacrifices to get a foot on the housing ladder, should be landed with bills they cannot afford to fix problems they did not cause,” Gove is unveiling the £4bn package today to help leaseholders escape the onerous costs involved in replacing combustible cladding. Those who live in blocks between 11m and 18m tall will no longer face crippling bills, which had run into tens of thousands of pounds. Speaking on the BBC Today programme (after being freed from the Broadcasting House lift), Gove explains that the big housebuilders have all been making significant profits, so need to make a fair contribution to the cost of replacing Grenfell-style cladding. Housebuilders are leading the FTSE 100 fallers, with Persimmon (-3.6%), Barratt Development (-3.2%), Taylor Wimpey (-3%) Berkeley Group (-2.8%) all weaker. The government expects that all developers responsible for affected buildings with annual profits from housebuilding of at least £10m will be in the frame for paying up under the new plan. Gove is giving developers until March to come up with a fully funded plan for resolving the cladding crisis. Otherwise, ministers could restrict access to government funds and future procurement if they fail to act, or legislate to force them to pay up. Housebuilders had already set aside funds for cladding issues, and already face a levy on profits to address the problem. The industry argues that other organisations are also involved in the construction of affected buildings, including housing associations, local authorities, and the manufacturers who produced materials that weren’t fit for purpose. Campaigners have warned that leaseholders face other serious fire-safety problems, and massive costs to fix. That includes defective fire doors, flammable balconies and missing firebreaks because of non-compliant building works. Here’s the full story. The prospect of America raising interest rates, and unwinding its bond purchase stimulus programme, is weighing on global markets - so the IMF’s blogpost is well-timed. Shares, and other riskier assets such as bitcoin, fell last week, as investors anticipated that the Federal Reserve could unwind its balance sheet sooner and faster than expected. Sovereign bond prices have also fallen, driving up the interest rates on government debt, as traders anticipate the Fed lifting rates and reducing its holdings of US Treasuries during 2022. Jim Reid of Deutsche Bank says it’s been a dramatic start to the year: To be fair the Fed were starting to catch up with reality late last year but Omicron meant that the market was reluctant to read their more hawkish move as entirely realistic given the risks that the variant presented. However the holiday season provided more evidence that Omicron was notably milder, especially amongst the vaccinated, and the result has been that the market has looked through this more than they were willing to before Xmas whilst at the same time the Fed have become even more hawkish by upping the ante on QT. So a perfect storm. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Turbulence could be approaching as the US central bank prepares to wind back its massive stimulus programme, and emerging economies would be in the front line. The International Monetary Fund has warned this morning that emerging markets could suffer painful spillovers once the US Federal Reserve starts to tighten monetary policy. With US inflation hitting near 40-year highs, US interest rates could rise soon. Those spillovers could include capital surging out of emerging markets, dragging down their currencies. That would be particularly serious for countries with large debts or high inflation. The IMF explains in a new blogpost this morning: Broad-based US wage inflation or sustained supply bottlenecks could boost prices more than anticipated and fuel expectations for more rapid inflation. Faster Fed rate increases in response could rattle financial markets and tighten financial conditions globally. These developments could come with a slowing of US demand and trade and may lead to capital outflows and currency depreciation in emerging markets. The Fed is on track to end its asset-purchase programme in March, and expects to raise interest rates three times this year. The minutes of its December meeting show that it could start to cut its balance sheet, known as quantitative tightening (QT), soon too -- news that rattled the markets last week. Such tightening could have more severe implications for vulnerable countries, the IMF adds: In recent months, emerging markets with high public and private debt, foreign exchange exposures, and lower current-account balances saw already larger movements of their currencies relative to the US dollar. The combination of slower growth and elevated vulnerabilities could create adverse feedback loops for such economies. So, with the Fed sounding hawkish, and omicron hitting supply chains and pushing up costs, emerging market policymakers need to prepare for a storm. Several emerging economies, such as Brazil, Russia, and South Africa, raised their interest rates in 2021, due to high inflation. But more action may be needed. Those with high debts denominated in foreign currencies should look to reduce, or hedge, that exposure, while those with high debts may need to cut spending or lift taxes faster, the IMF says. Such ‘fiscal tightening’ would weigh on growth and employment, of course, which highlights the dilemma facing emerging market politicians and central bankers. Worryingly, the IMF also warns that there could be bank failures in some weaker countries, saying: For countries where corporate debt and bad loans were high even before the pandemic, some weaker banks and nonbank lenders may face solvency concerns if financing becomes difficult. Resolution regimes should be readied. The ongoing Covid-19 pandemic also threatens emerging markets -- many of whom have not benefitted from the mass vaccination rollouts seen in advanced economies. The IMF concludes: While the global recovery is projected to continue this year and next, risks to growth remain elevated by the stubbornly resurgent pandemic. Given the risk that this could coincide with faster Fed tightening, emerging economies should prepare for potential bouts of economic turbulence. The agenda 10am GMT: Eurozone unemployment figures for November 3pm GMT: US wholesale inventories for NovemberRishi Sunak will attempt to quell growing Conservative unrest over the cost of living as delegations of MPs press him to cancel a planned tax rise and ditch VAT on energy bills in exchange for savings on tackling the pandemic. The chancellor will convene MPs for several evening summits this week as tensions grow over pressures faced by households from April, with a planned 1.25-percentage-point rise in employee national insurance contributions (NICs) and soaring energy bills once the price cap is reviewed. Labour will hope to pile pressure on Sunak and Boris Johnson on Tuesday with a binding vote in parliament on cutting VAT on home energy bills. The motion, put forward by Labour in its opposition day debate, guarantees parliamentary time for a bill to enact the cut, a device that means Tory MPs must actively oppose it rather than abstain. MPs’ demands are wide-ranging but the cut to VAT, which Sunak and Johnson have previously ruled out in favour of more targeted action, has “the most widespread support”, according to one veteran Tory. “It doesn’t hurt that it’s something we can now do because of Brexit,” said another senior Tory plugged into several key parliamentary pressure groups. Many are set to urge the chancellor to go further and delay the NICs rise from April, expected to bring in £12bn that Sunak wants to use to cut NHS waiting lists and fund the new social care system in the medium term. David Jones, a former Brexit minister, said the pressure on many households would be immense from April. “To have this tax increase at the same time the cap is removed from energy prices is very difficult. That is a couple of thousand pounds increase for many families,” he said. One senior backbencher, John Redwood, warned Sunak on Monday that his own ambitions depended on his standing in the party on these issues. “Those who brief that Mr Sunak should be the next PM should tell him imposing an avalanche of unpopular and unwise tax rises will undermine that ambition,” he tweeted. Another MP said they would urge Sunak to ditch the rise and focus on making savings on pandemic spending, including NHS test and trace. “I will urge him to cut the NICs rise – £12bn is not a lot of money compared to the current Covid spend. There is a great deal of support in the parliamentary party for that.” Though not all MPs said they would back revoking the NICs rise, one minister warned it had left Sunak exposed. “The party hates the NICs rise. Sunak himself wouldn’t have done it apart from to head off other spending demands with warnings of more tax rises. So no wonder he comes under pressure to ditch it when there’s a hook to do it. The chancellor has to realise that the party and the country are just not where he is on tax and spend.” Johnson said he had discussed cost of living pressures with Sunak on Sunday night. “I understand how difficult it is for people, I understand the pressures that people are facing on household finances,” he said on Monday. “It’s making life very tough. And we’ve got to make sure that people are aware of all the things that they can do, all the money that we’re putting in via local councils to help people in hardship, the cold weather payments, the warm homes discount, the money for pensioners.” Cabinet ministers have all but rejected a windfall tax on North Sea oil and gas profits, proposed by Labour. MPs said that was less of a priority. “Most colleagues think it’s counterproductive at a time when we want to encourage inward investment,” a former minister said. Johnson’s spokesman said a windfall tax had “not been ruled out” but hinted again that a targeted approach would be taken. “We want an approach that helps those most in need,” the spokesman said. The communities secretary, Michael Gove, underlined that new support measures were likely to be targeted to the most vulnerable. “I think that the prudent and the responsible thing to do is to recognise that we need to take a balanced approach, and a balanced approach means that when we can support, we provide support most for those in the most difficult circumstances,” he told Sky News. Ministers are understood to have discussed extending the warm homes discount on bills for the most vulnerable but Tory MPs argue it does not help enough households. Treasury sources said they were reluctant to raise the tax burden on the oil and gas sector, pointing to additional taxes on the extraction rate of oil and gas and headline tax rates on profits more than double other businesses. Labour has criticised the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, who told LBC that “oil and gas companies … are already struggling”, though the companies are expected to report “near record” income in 2021-22.Joe Biden wants to go down in history as a transformative US president. He began his time in office by passing a popular economic stimulus and Covid-19 relief bill. The Biden White House basked in comparisons with Franklin Roosevelt’s country-changing presidency. With Democrats in control of the executive and legislative branches of government, the sky seemed the limit. However, in recent months Mr Biden’s agenda – most notably on climate change – has been buried in a legislative graveyard. This is in part because the US Senate is a rare law-making body: it needs a supermajority for ordinary business. Its rules require 60 senators to give the green light for a bill to go to the floor for passage with a straightforward vote. This is the hurdle required to beat a filibuster, where debate is extended so that no vote on a bill can take place. Frustrated and hamstrung, President Biden has cooled on such mechanisms. He’s right to think about ending this manoeuvre, which is used to block legislation a majority wishes to pass. The 41 Republican senators needed to defeat “cloture” motions – those required to end a debate – could represent less than a quarter of the US population. As EJ Dionne pointed out in the Washington Post last October, the filibuster “is now a barrier to normal governing … From 1917 through 1970 (53 years), there were only 58 cloture motions. From 1971 to 2006 (35 years) there were 928. From 2007 to now (14 years) there have been 1,419.” As the use of the filibuster has become more frequent, so have the threats for “the nuclear option” to change the rules and impose simple majority votes. When Barack Obama was in the White House, Democrats eliminated the filibuster on presidential nominations other than those for the supreme court. In 2017, with Donald Trump as president, Republicans got rid of those too. On Tuesday, Mr Biden will give a major speech on voting rights in Georgia. The Republican party at a state level has been promoting suppression and gerrymandering legislation that targets minority voters and, in some cases, permits the takeover of the election administration to override an official count. The Democrats are pushing two bills to secure American democracy. This is a battle that Mr Biden cannot afford to lose. However he will struggle because of the filibuster. This could be abolished by a simple majority vote but, absurdly, two senators on the right of the party – Joe Manchin of West Virginia and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona – won’t back him. The best Mr Biden can do with his one-vote Senate majority is negotiate a filibuster carve-out for voting rights. What the past year has taught Mr Biden is that advances for economic and political rights will be dead on arrival in the Senate unless he can rewrite its procedural rule book. He must do so, and convince holdout Democrats that unless they back the party agenda, they risk dooming every legislative expedition. Electing Mr Biden and Democratic majorities in Congress were meant to deliver the party’s agenda, not let it be obstructed by its opponents.It has been a change that some fans have been waiting a generation to see. For others, the experience of standing in a crowd to watch a football match is entirely new. After the first matches in a trial of safe standing at five grounds in England and Wales, two supporters share their perspective on the pros, cons and possibilities Ben Murdoch, J Stand, Old Trafford I remember standing before all-seater stadiums were introduced. I earned my stripes on the Stretford End and safe standing feels different. It’s not the same mass of heaving humanity as it was. Before it was just a free-for-all and now, essentially, you’ve got a seat. I don’t think you will get the same kind of roar as you did in the olden days. You probably can’t recreate the same atmosphere but in some ways that is a good thing as it could be dangerous sometimes. I prefer being able to stand at football as you feel like you can get more involved in the match. Barrier seats have been in for a while and there were signs warning us not to stand. People were standing anyway but at least now you don’t have to be apologetic about it. Previously if there was someone near you who wasn’t standing you might feel you were in their way. Safe standing will help improve the atmosphere at games and the connection between fans and the team. If you’ve got an area that’s creating a noise throughout a match it does trickle out across the ground so I would think there’s a chance it could be extended. Everyone in the J Stand applied for a season ticket knowing that was the area where safe standing was going to be and I’m pretty sure those in the Red Army section near the tunnel would welcome it. Since the club started engaging with supporters on this there has been a definite improvement in the atmosphere, especially when you take in the quality of the football. Biren Shah, South Stand, Tottenham Hotspur Stadium When there’s a goal and you’re standing it’s brilliant because everyone joins in. It’s like a family thing. Everyone’s full of life and loving it. I started going to Spurs in 2007 as a seven-year-old so I don’t remember terraces. I’ve read a lot about how football used to be though. People could stand where they like so it seems a lot safer now, a lot more controlled. I think the demand for safe standing will grow because people will realise that fan support during games directly affects the performance of the team on the pitch. Once they see how much it improves the atmosphere in stadiums and the impact that has on the players I think eventually all ends of the ground could have safe standing.As a sleek, black car drove from the gates of the Hall &amp; Wilcox lawyers’ office on Collins Street and out into the heart of the Melbourne central business district, it was immediately surrounded by masses of people. The large Serbian community in Melbourne had been driven into action over the previous four nights by Novak Djokovic’s continued spell in immigration detention and, as they gathered, they perfectly reflected the turmoil of the moment. They cheered loudly at Djokovic’s release from detention, but false rumours of a rearrest had also quickly spread. Fans responded by chanting “free Nole”. Some jumped on the roof of the car and others banged on the window. They were stopped only by the tear gas sprayed by police as they dispersed them. After four nights of detention, Novak Djokovic’s remarkable week in detainment came to a quick, triumphant resolution. He is now free but not quite. He won his hearing on Monday on procedural grounds due to the treatment he received by border force officers in the early morning upon his arrival in Melbourne. His victory was a consequence of the judge, Anthony Kelly, deciding that the procedure for cancelling Djokovic’s visa was not correct. The government still reserves their right to cancel his visa another time and they are contemplating whether to do so. “The stakes have now risen rather than receded,” said Kelly. As Djokovic began his journey towards Melbourne a week ago, Scott Morrison, the prime minister, spoke of the need to ensure that Djokovic was treated like anyone attempting to enter Australia’s borders. In a sense, it was a mission well accomplished. As with the immigrants trapped indefinitely in the hotel Djokovic resided in, his border interview provided helpful insight into how people really are treated in such predicaments. Djokovic had arrived in Melbourne airport just before midnight and after numerous discussions, he was handed the “notice of intention” regarding the cancellation of his visa just before 4am. Faced with the prospect of immediate deportation, Djokovic was given just 20 minutes to explain why he should be allowed into the country. When he politely told the Australian Border Force that he needed to speak to his lawyers and Tennis Australia, he was first given until 8.30am to respond before being pushed to decide sooner. Believing that there was no chance of any other outcome but a cancelled visa, Djokovic relented. Djokovic is prominent and wealthy. There was always a chance that he would appeal the visa cancellation and expose the interview process. So many people in a similar uncomfortable position do not have the luxury of hiring a team of lawyers to dissect those procedural ills. It is an important insight and case study into how the immigration authorities are for regular people and how helpless most people are when at the mercy of the border force. As Djokovic’s hearing focused almost entirely on the procedural details during that first meeting with the border force, so much remains unresolved and the number of questions still to answer has only multiplied. After the court documents released over the weekend had indicated that Djokovic had taken a positive Covid-19 test on 16 December, Djokovic’s interview and PCR test certificate confirmed it. The reason Djokovic was able to acquire his exemption for Melbourne was due to the positive Covid-19 test result on 16 December, determined on the same day. Yet Djokovic was seen around Serbia at events in the days after that date. L’Equipe reports that they interviewed him and gave him a photoshoot on 18 December, two days after the date of his test. Djokovic either knew he was infected yet still continued to spread the virus, did not know about his result for two days after his positive test or there are questions to be asked about the test itself. When asked about his older brother’s public appearances during the Djokovic family press conference, Djordje Djokovic, Novak’s youngest brother, immediately cut the interview: “OK, so, uh, this press conference is adjourned,” he said. Either way, it seems likely that Djokovic had sought out a loophole that would allow him to compete in Australia without vaccination and, in the end, he found one. The initial deadline for players to submit their medical exemptions was one week earlier than Djokovic’s test but Djokovic was still able to acquire an exemption from Tennis Australia and the Victorian government. While Djokovic has made some questionable decisions, he has garnered sympathy for the predicament he found himself in with overzealous border force. Likewise, it should have been Tennis Australia’s job to make it clear how ill-advised it would be to travel to Australia without being vaccinated or having a genuine undisclosed medical issue. As Djokovic returns to training, he has generated a whole new fanbase after becoming a cause célèbre for anti-vaxxers and far-right figures, not least Nigel Farage, who flew off to Serbia and was beckoned into Djokovic’s restaurant by his brother. Djokovic will have the opportunity to embrace them or distance himself. By the end of a long day, Djokovic announced on social media that he had returned to practice for the first time in over a week and trained on Rod Laver Arena. “Despite all that has happened, I want to stay and try to compete at the Australian Open,” he said. “I remain focused on that. I flew here to play at one of the most important events we have in front of the amazing fans.” Although he looked ahead to the week to come, his status remains up in the air. It remains to be seen if the Australian federal government will have another bite at the cherry and exercise those powers to deport him, which could mean that he is not allowed to re-enter for three years. If he is able to compete, he will attempt to play. If he is able to stay in Melbourne for the duration, it seems likely that, even without an ideal amount of practice, he will channel his frustrations into competing for his 21st grand slam title and 10th Australian Open title. He could be extremely difficult to beat. It remains to be seen if he will still be in the country next Monday.The tragedy of the 2017 Grenfell Tower fire in west London has revealed a housebuilding industry corrupted by a profits-first and anti-regulation ideology. Property developers and speculators cannot be saddled with all the blame for this. It was a project of successive governments, and notably that led by David Cameron, to remove rules that they saw as making life unnecessarily difficult for construction businesses. The dysfunctional system that led to 72 people losing their lives included failures of housing management and safety culture as well as the inappropriate use of flammable cladding. As the public inquiry into the disaster continues its examination of the specifics, a parallel process has led to tens of thousands of flat dwellers in England trying to escape a nightmare of their own (the precise number of those affected is unknown). The same type of cladding used on Grenfell was found on 477 other buildings over 18 metres tall in the aftermath of the disaster, with a full audit of buildings between 11 metres and 18 metres tall that are in need of alterations still incomplete. It is the plight of these unlucky residents, many of them first-time buyers of leasehold properties, that the secretary of state for levelling up and housing, Michael Gove, on Monday pledged to resolve. Removing the threat of debt hanging over those living in buildings between 11 metres and 18 metres is the most significant shift, and a marked improvement on the dismal record of Mr Gove’s predecessor, Robert Jenrick. Under the unjust regime that has now been scrapped, leaseholders were liable for repair bills that sometimes stretched into hundreds of thousands of pounds. Freeholders, many of them hugely profitable developers, have now been told to pay instead. But while this is the right idea, it is not clear how it will work. For now, the Treasury has rejected the idea of a windfall tax on the industry, which continues to benefit from rising prices, but the likelihood is surely that Mr Gove will have to persuade Rishi Sunak to follow through on this threat. Plans to extend the period of liability during which leaseholders can seek damages from builders are another step in the right direction. The relaxation of subletting rules will make a difference to some of those stuck in flats that they can’t sell, who now at least will be able to rent them out. But campaigners are right to be angry that the issue of defects apart from cladding has been put to one side. And it remains to be seen whether banks and insurers will agree to abandon the risk-averse stance that they have adopted since the scale of the building safety scandal was revealed. A government indemnity scheme for assessors ought to alleviate some of the pressures resulting from increased demand for safety surveys. Once again, social tenants have been pushed to the back of the queue, with Mr Gove unable to give a timetable for long-promised laws to strengthen their rights. Four and a half years after Grenfell, and with housing inequality and shortages worsening in many areas, greatly exacerbated by lax controls on landlords (private as well as social), millions of people will continue to be harmed by a housing system that puts profits before human needs, while paying lip service to climate targets. How this story unfolds will depend in part on how far Mr Gove’s party is prepared to risk its relationship with the industry whose leading figures are among its most generous donors – and what comes of housebuilders’ attempt to shift the blame on to the manufacturers of dangerous cladding products. Whatever happens, the leaseholders and Grenfell survivors who have fought so hard together deserve credit for pushing the government this far.US and Russian diplomats have emerged from a day of negotiations in Geneva over the fate of Ukraine, describing the talks as “useful” and “very professional” – but also stressing they had not made progress towards resolving fundamental disagreements. The two sides largely spent the eight hours of talks presenting their points of view on the situation in Ukraine, currently hemmed in by some 100,000 Russian troops, and on European security in general, and deferred further debate on them to a meeting in Brussels on Wednesday between Russia and all Nato members. “We had useful discussions and exchanges today that will help inform our way forward,” Wendy Sherman, the deputy US secretary of state and leader of the delegation in Geneva, told reporters after the day of talks. Her Russian counterpart, Sergei Ryabkov, said: “The conversation was difficult, long, very professional, deep, concrete, without attempts to embellish or smooth over sharp corners. “We have been left with the impression that the American side approached the Russian proposals very seriously, studied them in depth,” Ryabkov said. Sherman also remarked on the Russians’ readiness to negotiate, saying they discussed “things that are not Russian priorities”. She said that the issues of reciprocal limits on military exercises and missile deployments were discussed, but the US ruled out as a matter of principle, the idea of a guarantee that Ukraine would never join Nato, restating that it was the country’s sovereign right to decide. “We were firm in pushing back on security proposals that are simply non-starters for the United States,” Sherman said. “We will not allow anyone to slam close Nato’s open door policy.” While conceding that the talks were “not hopeless” Ryabkov confirmed Russia had made no progress in achieving its key goals, which the Kremlin laid out in December in two proposed treaties with the US and Nato, which included a pledge by the US that Nato would no longer accept new members such as Ukraine or Georgia. In his remarks on Monday, Ryabkov said that a pledge from Nato not to expand further, to limit the deployment of weapons in countries bordering Russia, and to roll back military activity in new Nato countries were “requirements we cannot step back from”. Ryabkov said the two sides had continued to clash over what the agenda of future talks should be. While the US has sought to focus on technical arms control issues, Ryabkov described those as a secondary concern compared with the far thornier demand to limit Nato’s presence in central and eastern Europe. He also noted that elements of Russia’s demands, such as an effective veto on future Nato enlargement, appear to be non-starters for the US and its allies. Analysts have said that the aggressive demands made by Russia mean that the negotiations are headed for a dead-end. “Regrettably, there are also other aspects of the same sort where we disagree: something that is absolutely necessary to us is categorically unacceptable to the Americans,” Ryabkov told the press. He warned that Russia did not want negotiations to take months or years and insisted that Moscow would also stick to its demands for Nato to roll back its troops and infrastructure in eastern Europe to pre-1997 levels. The US presence on the alliance’s eastern flank was significantly reinforced after the Russian annexation of Crimea and covert military intervention in eastern Ukraine in 2014. “There needs to be a breakthrough, there needs to be a real step toward Russia – a step made by Nato,” Ryabkov said. “If this doesn’t happen ... we very much don’t want to have a situation where Nato countries led by the US make that kind of mistake and once again act to undermine their own security and the security of the whole European continent.” He said both sides were looking to the upcoming Nato-Russia Council on Wednesday as a testing ground for whether Russia can come to a new arrangement with the security alliance. Ryabkov repeated Russian assurances that Moscow was not planning to attack Ukraine. All Russian troop movements were taking place inside the country’s borders, he said, and “there is no basis to worry about an escalation in connection to this”. On being informed of his remarks, Sherman responded: “They can prove that, in fact, they have no intention [to invade] by de-escalating and returning troops to barracks.” Over the weekend, open source investigators had identified new signs that Russia’s military buildup on the border with Ukraine was probably continuing. Videos posted on social networks such as TikTok showed Russian armor and artillery being transported by rail through cities along the Trans-Siberian Railway, suggesting that reinforcements may be traveling toward Russia’s border with Ukraine from nearly 4,000 miles away. Those forces included main battle tanks, armored personnel carriers, and rocket artillery, all elements of what could form new battalion tactical groups (BTGs) that could launch an attack across the border. Russia has stationed more than 50 BTGs near Ukraine, a considerable portion of the Russian armed forces’ total. Sherman said Russia had a stark choice to make. “If Russia walks away from the diplomatic path, it may well be quite apparent that they were never serious about pursuing diplomacy,” she said. The Nato-Russia meeting in Brussels on Wednesday will be followed by a session of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, in Vienna, which will be the only one of the three diplomatic venues at which Ukraine will be directly represented in talks with Russia. European states who are not Nato members will also be represented, including Finland and Sweden who could reassess membership if Russia launches a new attack on Ukraine. Sherman said that Washington would assess the whole week’s diplomacy before deciding on the future direction of talks. “We will have discussions with our allies and partners in the days ahead and at the end of this week, informed by those discussions, the US and Russian governments will discuss the way forward,” she said. At the Geneva talks, Sherman repeated the US threat to impose unprecedented sanctions in the event of an invasion of Ukraine. “Certain threats, or at the very least warnings, were made to us,” Ryabkov confirmed, but suggested they were unnecessary because Russia had no intention of launching an invasion.In his old life, Jeremy Clarkson conceded he might have been prepared to pave over the British countryside – but the former petrolhead-in-chief has insisted he is a changed man. As a farmer, he was trying to do his bit to save the countryside by turning his recently built lambing shed into a restaurant serving locally produced food at his Diddly Squat farm in the Cotswolds, he told planning subcommittee officials in the small Oxfordshire town of Witney. The conversion, along with the 70-space car park, was merely “diversification of a farming business”, Clarkson told the planning officials. But they did not agree. After they pointed out that the restaurant on a prominent spot could cause case “great harm” to the designated area of outstanding natural beauty, councillors rejected the plan on Monday. It will probably not be the end of the matter. Outside the council building, Clarkson said it was “a bad day for farming” and vowed to appeal. The changed man jumped into a Range Rover and took a swipe at one of the council officials, comparing him to the comedian Eric Morecambe – “but not as funny”. Ultimately, win or lose, the saga will, no doubt, be lapped up by the audience of his Amazon Prime reality show, Clarkson’s Farm. The hugely popular show is seen as a mixed blessing in the area. It has brought in business, with fans lining up for hours for the chance to buy produce, or a souvenir, from his farm shop in the village of Chadlington. But it has also caused an unwelcome stir in this most picturesque and peaceful landscape, plus traffic chaos. Appearing before West Oxfordshire district council’s uplands area planning subcommittee, the former Top Gear presenter began by thanking the members for having him along and said he found the experience “nerve-racking.” He said the planners had made much of the fact that his scheme to convert the shed built in 2020 into a restaurant was in an area of outstanding natural beauty – and agreed that it was. But he told the committee: “The reason it is, is because farmers maintain it, farmers look after the woodlands, the hedges, the streams. They keep it beautiful. The farmers are not going to be able to do that for much longer because of the parlous state of their finances. We have been told as farmers to diversify and that is exactly what this proposal is; it’s a diversification of a farming business.” Clarkson said his farm would provide beef to the restaurant while others in the areas would supply other locally produced food. He said local farmers were delighted and that one had recently told him tearfully that she would have gone out of business were it not for the boost his farm shop had provided. The TV star took a swipe at spelling mistakes in the council officer’s report before admitting: “In my old job, I might have paved over the countryside, but I’ve moved on from that and I don’t want to do any such thing.” Clarkson was asked why he had stopped trying to use the lambing shed for sheep. He replied that he had “put a toe” in the water and found that sheep farming was not viable. He was merging his flock with a neighbour’s. There was some support for his cause. One councillor, Alex Postan, pointed out that a nearby caravan park was already a “blot on the landscape”, so another might not hurt so much. He agreed that farmers needed all the help they could, otherwise the world was heading for food and water wars. The local ward councillor, Dean Temple, said people in the area used to have two job choices: farm worker or working in service, “Downton Abbey-style”. But most of those jobs had gone and anything that helped employment was to be welcomed. But he said he had to vote against the plan with “heavy heart” because of the impact on a beautiful area. There were 56 letters of objection and 13 of support. Addressing the meeting on behalf of one resident, barrister Charles Streeten claimed the lambing shed had been a “Trojan horse” for the restaurant. He said Clarkson had a “general disregard” for the planning rules and claimed his conduct was “shameful”, adding: “It indicates a ‘give me an inch and I’ll take a mile’ attitude.”Joelle Taylor has won the TS Eliot poetry prize for her look at butch lesbian counterculture in the 1990s, C+nto &amp; Othered Poems, praised by judges as “a blazing book of rage and light”. A mix of memoir and conjecture, the collection, Taylor’s fourth, reveals the underground communities forged by women where they could reclaim their bodies as their own. It was announced on Monday night in London that C+nto had beaten collections by major names including Raymond Antrobus, Selima Hill and Michael Symmons Roberts to the £25,000 prize. The TS Eliot award is one of the most prestigious prizes in British poetry and has been won in the past by Ted Hughes, Carol Ann Duffy and, last year, Bhanu Kapil. “Every book on the shortlist had a strong claim on the award. We found it extremely hard to choose between 10 superb collections,” said chair of judges Glyn Maxwell, who selected the winner along with Caroline Bird and Zaffar Kunial. “The arguments towards the end were passionate and thoughtful, but the choice of the judging panel is Joelle Taylor’s C+nto and Othered Poems, a blazing book of rage and light, a grand opera of liberation from the shadows of indifference and oppression.” Maxwell said the winning collection was “pretty autobiographical, about her life as a butch lesbian, and the hostility she suffered as a kid in a conventional family”. “But then there’s also imaginative renderings of nightlife – of lesbian clubs, some of which are kind of hellish and some of which are heavenly,” he said. “It’s kind of enraged, but it’s this sort of rage which generates light, and it’s a really vivid read – it’s quite something.” Run by the TS Eliot Foundation, the award is the most valuable prize in British poetry, and the only one judged purely by established poets. Taylor is a former UK slam champion, who founded the UK’s youth slam championships, SLAMbassadors, in 2001. “Joelle originates in performance,” said Maxwell. “This collection proves that at the top level, there’s very little difference between that, and what’s on the page.” The collection, Taylor writes in her preface, is a delve into her own personal history, looking at her “exile as a consequence of my sexuality”, as well as an excavation of others’ pasts through interviews and archives. “It is important that we preserve our history,” she writes. “I interviewed other butch lesbians from that era, and together we began to construct a simple story: exile, friendship, grief, love, courage and threat.” The collection opens as Taylor imagines Soho and its bars as a museum, behind glass: “Everything, vitrine. / Glass cases line the old roads // materialising beside / cruising grounds &amp; cottages // squats &amp; roughs / fishbowl cenotaphs.” In O, Maryville, the narrative follows one night in a lesbian bar, revolving the story around four butch lesbians who observe and protect the space, holding their ground even when the bar is demolished. In “the body as battleground”, she writes of how “you fall miss your body entirely land somewhere / in enemy territory behind the lines your body a / foreign country you cannot get a visa for”. “There is no part of a butch lesbian that is welcome in this world. It was bad when I was a teenager. It is as bad today,” Taylor writes in her preface, revealing that as a young teenager “stepping tentatively out of the closet in the early 1980s”, she was “subjected to constant state-endorsed abuse”. Today, she says, war is “rag[ing] across social media”, and “we spend more time policing each other than protecting”. C+nto, she says, is intended “both to acknowledge the crimes against the LGBT community and reflect back to a time when we had a greater sense of unity, of self”. Published by the Westbourne Press, C+nto has been described as “visionary and powerful” by Hollie McNish, and as “one of the most astonishing and original poetry collections of recent years” by Bernardine Evaristo in the New Statesman. Taylor has also published three plays and a collection of short stories, The Night Alphabet.Peter Pike, the former Labour MP for Burnley, who has died aged 84, always believed in putting the interests of his constituents before the pursuit of any ambition to achieve personal distinction at Westminster. Such unfashionable altruism for a politician, coupled with diligence and evident decency, won him respect among his parliamentary colleagues and was also duly rewarded by a corresponding 20-fold increase in his majority during more than two decades in the House of Commons. When first elected by a narrow 770 majority in 1983, Pike did realise a personal ambition: to become the Labour MP for the town, an idea that he first articulated as a boy. Born and raised in the Home Counties, he had been evacuated to live with his maternal grandmother in Burnley during the second world war and promised himself that he would return and make it his home in adulthood. When he did so in 1963, he was already politically active in the Labour party and took a job as a full-time party official, first as agent for Burnley’s then Labour MP, Dan Jones, and then, from 1967 to 1973, as a regional organiser in nearby Manchester. He was born at Ware, Hertfordshire, the eldest of three children of Gladys (nee Cunliffe), who worked as a cleaner, and Leslie Pike, a heating engineer and an active trade unionist. The family lived in Surrey and Peter started his education at Morden Farm school, before transferring to Abel Street school in Burnley. He returned to Surrey and Morden Farm, where he attended the secondary school and then also Hinchley Wood county secondary (now Hinchley Wood school). At the age of 17 he started work as a clerk in the Midland Bank and studied for banking qualifications at evening school at Kingston-upon-Thames Technical College (now Kingston University). After two years’ national service in the Royal Marines (1956-58), he went back to the bank until 1962. Then he spent a year as a clerk with Twining’s Tea before moving to Burnley. Pike had joined the Labour party in 1956 and stood for election to Merton and Morden council in 1960 and 1961, before winning his first council seat in 1962, the year that he married Sheila Bull, who worked as a secretary. He resigned the following year when the couple moved to Burnley, and they swiftly became immersed in local politics there. He consolidated his claim as the eventual successor to Jones by taking a job at Mullards, the local glass factory, where in 1976 he became a trade union shop steward for the GMBATU (General, Municipal, Boilermakers and Allied Trades Union; now GMB) and in the same year securing election to Burnley borough council at his third attempt. He was a councillor for the Coal Clough area until 1984 and led the Labour group from 1980 until his election to parliament. There he proved an assiduous committee member. He was appointed first to the environment select committee (1984–90) and subsequently served on committees dealing with procedure (1995-97), modernisation (1997-2005), regulatory reform (1995–2005, of which he was chair from 1997 onwards); and ecclesiastical affairs (2002–05). He was a member of the Commons liaison committee (1997-2005) and the Speaker’s panel of chairmen and chairwomen. On the opposition frontbench he was a spokesman on rural affairs (1990-92) and thereafter on environment and housing, until Tony Blair’s election as leader in 1994. Pike was a Christian Socialist and was in the running for the prestigious post of Second Church Estates Commissioner; in the event, he was deemed too “Old Labour” and out of tune with the dashing modernism of the Blairite vision. Pike’s somewhat dishevelled appearance disguised a hard-working, well-informed and reliable MP. When MPs’ expenses began to be released in 2004 – ahead of the Freedom of Information Act coming into force the following year, and the scandal of 2009 – he was unabashed at being revealed to be the fourth-highest claimant on the list, with expenses of £153,989. He retorted that he worked 70 hours a week, had 1,000 constituency cases in hand and had no problem defending his expenditure. His particular interests, reflecting the concerns of his electorate, lay in housing, environmental protection, road safety and education. He was considerably ahead of his time in expressing anxiety about the need to protect water quality and the damage that he envisaged was threatened by the privatisation of the industry. In his maiden speech he proudly proclaimed himself a socialist, something that, he said, made it difficult for him to conform to the convention of not being controversial, given that the debate he was speaking in concerned the parliamentary programme of Margaret Thatcher’s government. He joined the leftwing Tribune group at Westminster and was a supporter of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and the Anti-Apartheid movement, an issue about which he felt particularly strongly. In his first decade as an MP Pike was an active participant in debates about the changes in Sunday trading laws, which led to the Sunday Trading Act 1994, primarily because of his worries about the impact on the community in towns like Burnley with a culture of corner-shop trading. A hugely enthusiastic supporter of Burnley Football Club, he chaired the supporters’ Clarets Trust when he stood down as an MP. He also helped to found the Emmaus Burnley charity for homeless people and was involved in a wide range of local enterprise, church and civic organisations. After just four years as an MP his majority increased tenfold and, at its highest point, when Tony Blair won the 1997 election, it stood at more than 17,000. Pike was succeeded as Labour MP in 2005 by Kitty Ussher. She held the seat for a single term with a majority of 5,778 over the Liberal Democrats, whose candidate then won in 2010. The seat reverted to Labour in 2015 and 2017 but in 2019 was won by Antony Higginbotham for the Conservatives, with a majority of 1,352. Sheila died in 2017, and he is survived by his two daughters, Carol and Jane. • Peter Leslie Pike, politician, born 26 June 1937; died 27 December 2021Boris Johnson has ordered officials to examine plans to cut Covid isolation to five days in England as scientists urged caution over the lack of evidence to support a change. The prime minister came out on Monday in favour of easing quarantine rules if backed by scientific advice. It is understood that the health secretary, Sajid Javid, is also open to the move if clinicians recommend it. The Cabinet Office has been charged with leading the isolation review with input from public health officials at the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) and Department of Health and Social Care. Two sources told the Guardian there may be a Covid-O meeting as soon as Thursday to examine any proposed changes. One of the options under consideration is for health and social care workers to have stricter conditions on release from isolation than the general population, it is understood. This would be designed to avoid Covid spreading to vulnerable people in hospitals or care homes and could involve keeping isolation periods at seven to 10 days for that group, requiring more testing or extra PPE. Political pressure has been building for a reduction in isolation after the US cut its quarantine period to five days, although the UK’s system is different in that it requires isolation from the point of symptoms if they occur before a positive test. Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, and Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, emerged as the first cabinet ministers to back a change if recommended by scientists, with others including Johnson and Javid following suit on Monday. Keir Starmer also said he would back a reduction in the time period if the evidence supported it. It is less than three weeks since isolation was cut from 10 days to seven in England if a person tests negative by lateral flow on days six and seven. It is likely that any move to shorten isolation periods again to five days would have caveats about testing negative and applying to those without symptoms. However, scientists still urged caution over the proposed move. Prof Peter Openshaw, a member of the government’s New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag), said that while it was “reasonable” to look at reducing the isolation period to five days he had not seen evidence to back such a change. Convincing data could come from experiments that looked at how well LFTs distinguished between people who were still shedding infectious virus and those who were not, even if they still tested positive on PCR tests, he said. Martin McKee, a professor of European public health at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine (LSHTM) and a member of the Independent Sage group, said he was willing to be convinced that it was safe to shorten the isolation period but evidence to support the move seemed “elusive”. “The limited available evidence, for example [a] small Japanese study, provides little reassurance, suggesting that a substantial proportion of people infected with Omicron are still infectious at five days,” he said. Openshaw said the study was too small to say that asymptomatic people were not infectious beyond five days. If the isolation time were reduced, McKee said the government was right to consider extra precautions for health and social care workers. The UKHSA estimates that 10-30% of people who self-isolate fafter a positive Covid test are still infectious on day six, dropping to about 5% after day 10. Their modelling suggests a similar risk of being infectious – about 5% – if people end isolation after two negative tests on days six and seven. The work underpins the existing guidance on Covid isolation, but the thinking may change as more data comes in on the Omicron variant. Recent LSHTM modelling showed that requiring two days of negative LFTs to leave isolation reduced the risk of transmission to almost nil as the likelihood of being infectious after a series of negative lateral flow tests was very low. “But if we find that most individuals test positive for a longer period, this may not address the staffing crisis as desired,” said Billy Quilty, an infectious disease epidemiologist who worked on the modelling. “We urgently need to know how long people are testing positive by lateral flow for on average, and how well this corresponds to the infectious period for Omicron.” Preliminary findings from Japan’s National Institute of Infectious Diseases hint that people who have asymptomatic Omicron infections may stop shedding the virus sooner than those who have symptoms. That asymptomatic infections are typically cleared faster is not unexpected, but the study includes only 21 cases, so the results are considered tentative.When the Woodstock Music and Art Fair was held in upstate New York in August 1969, it was billed as “Three days of peace, love and music”, though nobody could have predicted that it would attract half a million people and become an enduring monument to the 1960s counterculture. Starring the Who, Santana, Jimi Hendrix, Creedence Clearwater Revival, Janis Joplin and many more, Woodstock gave birth to the “Woodstock Nation”, an escapist alternative to the assassinations, racial conflict and Vietnam war casting shadows over the US. One of the key organisers of the festival was Michael Lang, who has died aged 77 of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. “Woodstock came at a really dark moment in America,” said Lang in a 2009 Rolling Stone interview. “An unpopular war, a government that was unresponsive, lots of human rights issues – things were starting to edge toward violence for people to make their points. And along came Woodstock, which was this moment of hope.” Not everyone agreed – the music writer David Dalton decried Woodstock as “an exercise in consummate narcissism” and “a hippy Disneyland” – but the festival’s significance as a benchmark of its era and a template for festivals to come lives on. Lang had been promoting concerts in Florida and in 1968 had produced the Miami pop festival, featuring Hendrix and Frank Zappa, before he relocated to Woodstock in early 1969. Woodstock had its own community of musicians that included Van Morrison and Richie Havens, and Lang frequently attended the low-key performances by the local artists known as “Saturday soundouts”. Lang became manager of a band called Train, and approached the Capitol Records executive Artie Kornfeld to try to get them a deal. Kornfeld did not bite, but the pair began throwing ideas around, including a proposal to build a recording studio in the town of Woodstock. They approached the entrepreneurs John Roberts and Joel Rosenman – who had advertised themselves in the Wall Street Journal as “Young Men with Unlimited Capital Looking for Interesting and Legitimate Business Ideas” – to participate in the project, but Roberts and Rosenman were more interested in Lang and Kornfeld’s other idea of a Woodstock music festival, whose profits would fund the studio. The foursome created Woodstock Ventures Inc, which would produce the event. However, the Woodstock authorities would not allow it in their town, and the burghers of nearby Wallkill were also loath to be swamped by the hippytide. A deal was then struck to rent Max Yasgur’s 600-acre dairy farm near Bethel for $75,000. Nobody was prepared for the unprecedented invasion of music fans and the local police’s failure to make any arrangements for traffic management created a logjam of abandoned vehicles blocking local highways for miles. Lang, who commissioned the Woodstock logo of a peace dove sitting on the neck of a guitar, said: “Our vision was to create a very positive, a very sort of comforting environment for the audience, not to present confrontation in any way.” He had devised a “Please Force” of unarmed officers to control security, but as the crowds expanded uncontrollably the army and the national guard had to fly in emergency water, food and medical supplies by helicopter. Lang and his partners had anticipated an attendance of about 200,000, a manageable number that would have guaranteed them a profit, but as attendees trampled over fences and swarmed on to the site, they abandoned the attempt to sell tickets. The loss of ticket revenue left Lang and his fellow organisers millions of dollars out of pocket, but they were subsequently rescued when Michael Wadleigh’s film of the festival (in which Lang appeared prominently) became a lucrative smash hit the following year, grossing $50m in the US. The live albums from the festival also sold strongly. The event was memorialised in the song Woodstock by Joni Mitchell (who did not perform there), and in May 1970 it reached number 11 on the US chart in a storming rendition by Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young (who did). Lang was born into a Jewish family in Brooklyn, New York. His father ran a construction and heating installation company, for which his mother was the bookkeeper. Michael attended New York University to study business and psychology, but dropped out in 1967 and moved to Coconut Grove in Miami, where he opened a “headshop” selling drug paraphernalia. After Woodstock, he became the manager of Joe Cocker, one of the festival’s featured artists, and their partnership lasted more than 20 years. He was also recruited at short notice to assist with relocating the Rolling Stones’ December 1969 free concert in California from Sears Point Raceway to the Altamont Speedway. The event is now regarded as the tragic anti-Woodstock because of the killing of the audience member Meredith Hunter during the Stones’ performance. Lang considered it “a missed opportunity and the result of a lack of planning … what could have been a great day of music degenerated into a horror show”. During the 70s Lang ran his own Just Sunshine Records label, releasing discs by artists including Karen Dalton, Mississippi Fred McDowell and Betty Davis (the former wife of Miles Davis), and in the 80s managed Rickie Lee Jones. However, he remained dedicated to sustaining the legacy of Woodstock, devoting much energy to staging anniversary editions and at one point proposing an annual Woodstock festival at different sites around the world. For its 25th anniversary, Lang co-produced Woodstock ’94 in Saugerties, New York, some 70 miles from the 1969 site. Artists included veterans of the original lineup, such as Crosby, Stills and Nash and Country Joe McDonald, alongside newer names including Nine Inch Nails and Green Day. As a venue for Woodstock ’99, Lang found a former air force base in Rome, New York, to which 400,000 fans flocked in July that year. However, the event was scarred by violence, looting, sexual assaults and over-priced food, while extreme temperatures and insufficient free water caused widespread distress. Disgusted punters referred to the event as “Greedstock”. In 2009 his memoir The Road to Woodstock (co-written with Holly George-Warren) was published, and also that year Lang was portrayed by Jonathan Groff in Ang Lee’s film Taking Woodstock. In 2019 he appeared in the two documentaries Woodstock: 3 Days That Changed Everything and Woodstock: Three Days That Defined a Generation. Lang battled hard to mount a 50th anniversary Woodstock festival in 2019, with the Watkins Glen race track in upstate New York the first proposed venue and funding to be supplied by the multinational media company Dentsu Aegis Network (now Dentsu International). However, Woodstock 50 was plagued by delays and cancellations (and was relocated to Maryland), with grandiose plans to present such icons as Bruce Springsteen, Paul McCartney and a reunited Led Zeppelin all turning to dust. The project collapsed in lawsuits and acrimony, but Lang was unbowed. “What we did in 1969 was in 1969 and that’s what has endured and will continue to endure. We’re not going away,” he told Rolling Stone. His first marriage, to Ann, ended in divorce. He is survived by his second wife, Tamara, their daughters, LariAnn, Shala and Molly, and sons, Laszlo and Harry. • Michael Lang, music business entrepreneur and producer, born 11 December 1944; died 8 January 2022To many, May 2020 may feel like a lifetime ago, so much has happened in the last 20 months of the Covid-19 pandemic. On 20 May 2020, when the prime minister’s private secretary was inviting colleagues to bring their own booze for socially distanced drinks in the No 10 garden to “make the most of this lovely weather”, the rest of the country was in a very different position. There was no mixing indoors, non-essential shops were shut, and pubs and other hospitality businesses remained closed. Such was the strangeness of the times, that people were ecstatically celebrating the reopening of McDonald’s drive-throughs as more than 30 branches trialled a gradual reopening of the fast-food chain. The prime minister had only recently announced a slight relaxing to the lockdown rules – from 13 May 2020, two people from separate households were permitted to meet outside in a public place, such as a park, provided they stayed 2 metres apart. Police forces were actively reminding the public to adhere to the rule, a challenge given 20 May 2020 was the hottest day of the year so far. Just two days later, on 22 May 2020, the Guardian published its first exclusive revealing police had spoken to the prime minister’s former adviser, Dominic Cummings, about breaching the government’s lockdown rules after he was seen in Durham, 264 miles from his London home, despite having had Covid-19 symptoms. The story prompted an outcry. Guidance allowing the “rule of six” outdoors was not brought in until June 2020 and large gatherings remained banned. All of this was reinforced by the then culture secretary, now Conservative party chair, Oliver Dowden, in the daily Downing Street press conference on 20 May. He said: “You can meet one person outside your household in an outdoor, public place provided that you stay 2 metres apart.” But alone, or with your household, “you can now spend time outdoors and exercise as often as you like”. He reminded viewers of the “step one” changes to the rules, which said those who could not work from home should now speak to their employer about going back to work. This was all against a backdrop of the ever-rising statistics many have come to know too well. On 20 May 2020, there were 9,953 people in hospital with coronavirus. A further 363 deaths were announced, bringing the total at that point to 35,704. Dowden announced the launch of the Covid Alert Level System, with its five levels each relating to the level of threat posed by the virus. At the time, the country was preparing to move to level 3 from 4. Twenty months later, we’re back in level 4 after the emergence of the highly transmissible Omicron variant of the virus. Dowden pushed the government’s latest slogan: “stay alert, control the virus, save lives”. He elaborated on how the public might “stay alert” by working from home if possible, limiting contact with other people, keeping 2 metres apart where possible, washing hands regularly and wearing a face covering in enclosed spaces. Elsewhere, the prime minister was enraging Britain’s foreign healthcare workforce with his refusal to exempt them from an NHS visa surcharge. The next day, in the first major U-turn of his premiership, he announced this would no longer apply, capitulating to mounting anger from campaigners and opposition from members of his own party.Fox News has promoted the controversial host Jesse Watters to a nightly primetime show, in an apparent cementing of the conservative network’s shift even further right. Watters faced calls to resign in December after he suggested people should “ambush” Anthony Fauci and “go in for the kill shot” by presenting the infectious diseases expert with conspiracy theories. Instead, he will host his own show at 7pm on weeknights, Fox News said on Monday. Jesse Watters Primetime permanently replaces what was once a relatively “straight” news show hosted by Martha MacCullum. As CNN reported, Fox News dropped MacCullum from 7pm after the 2020 election, replacing her with a slate of rotating rightwing personalities. Fox News appeared delighted with the Watters news, with its chief executive, Suzanne Scott, praising his “versatility and hosting acumen” and “deep connection to the audience”. But Watters has a history of controversial statements and poor-taste programming. He rose to prominence after he visited Chinatown in New York City for a segment on Bill O’Reilly’s show in 2016. The video, much of which was set to the song Kung Fu Fighting by Carl Douglas, featured Watters asking locals if he should bow to them before he visited a martial arts studio and played with a set of nunchuks. The video was interspersed with clips of Mr Miyagi, a fictional Japanese character in the movie The Karate Kid. “The vile, racist behavior of Fox’s Jesse Watters in Chinatown has no place in our city,” the then New York mayor, Bill de Blasio, said. Watters addressed the controversy on Twitter, writing: “My man-on-the-street interviews are meant to be taken as tongue-in-cheek and I regret if anyone found offense.” His ascent to primetime comes after the departure of Fox News’ most high-profile “straight news” journalist. Chris Wallace, who had been at Fox News for 18 years, frequently served as a counterpoint to the rightwing opinion that fills night-time schedules but finally left for CNN. NPR reported that Wallace had expressed concerns to management over a Tucker Carlson documentary, Patriot Purge, which attempted to rewrite the events of 6 January 2021 and aired on Fox Nation, Fox News’ streaming-only channel. Watters’ elevation was announced less than a month after Fauci called for him to be “fired on the spot”. Watters told an audience they should approach Fauci in public and present the 81-year-old a pre-prepared conspiracy theory. This, Watters said, would be “the kill shot, with an ambush. Deadly: ’cause he doesn’t see it coming”. Fauci has been subjected to death threats during the coronavirus pandemic. Watters said: “This is when you say: ‘Dr Fauci, you funded risky research at a sloppy Chinese lab, the same lab that sprung this pandemic on the world. You know why people don’t trust you, don’t you?’ “Boom, he is dead! He is dead! He’s done!” In a statement at the time, Fox News said: “Based on watching the full clip and reading the entire transcript, it’s more than clear that Jesse Watters was using a metaphor for asking hard-hitting questions to Dr Fauci about gain-of-function research and his words have been twisted completely out of context.” Watters also faced backlash after seeming to make sexually loaded comments about Ivanka Trump, an accusation he denied. Fox News remains the most popular US cable news channel by far, with an average of 1.3 million viewers and 2.4 million in the 8-11pm slot, when Sean Hannity, Carlson and Laura Ingraham appear. Over the past two decades, the 7pm hour has largely been reserved for news or analysis, rather than the commentary Watters will provide. Carlson did have a brief spell in the time slot. Fox News, media watchers say, has spent the year since Donald Trump’s defeat further engaging in themes attractive to the right, including hosts and guests advancing vaccine skepticism. Other hosts have told viewers they should consider getting a Covid-19 vaccine. Carlson, the most-watched host, has championed Kyle Rittenhouse, who was acquitted in November after killing two people at a protest. The network has been sued by two election technology companies, over election conspiracy theories. This article was amended on 11 January 2022 to clarify when Fox News issued a statement.Good morning. Novak Djokovic’s visa cancellation saga continues despite his return to centre court ahead of the Australian Open next week. But he’s not the only tennis star in doubt for the grand slam – Nick Kyrgios has tested positive for Covid. Tensions between Russia and Ukraine persist, but security talks between the Kremlin and the US are under way this week. Novak Djokovic has thanked Judge Anthony Kelly for overturning his visa cancellation, but still faces potential deportations from Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke. Hawke confirmed that he is considering the use of discretionary powers to deport Djokovic, which comes with a hefty three-year ban from re-entering Australia. His decision is expected this week. Meanwhile Djokovic’s family have criticised the Australian government and his mother said he was “subjected to torture and harassment” while in detention. But the family abruptly ended a press conference when questioned about why Djokovic, who is not vaccinated, was photographed in public last month without a mask after testing positive for Covid. The federal government was warned in November that widespread rapid antigen testing was needed to protect vulnerable people in aged care. There are currently Covid outbreaks in almost 500 aged care homes nationally, with 1,400 residents and 2,000 staff infected. Paul Sadler, chief executive of the peak body Aged &amp; Community Services Australia, said that he believed the numbers were under-reported, and that providers were “running real risks” without the assistance of a testing regime. He said if they had rapid antigen tests available it would “make a significant impact in reducing the spread within the aged care homes and keeping people safe.” US and Russian diplomats have recently emerged from a day of negotiations in Geneva over the fate of Ukraine, describing the talks as “useful” and “very professional”, but stressing they had not made progress towards resolving fundamental disagreements. The two sides largely spent the day’s talks presenting their points of view on the situation in Ukraine, currently hemmed in by 100,000 Russian troops, and on European security in general, and deferred further debate to a meeting in Brussels on Wednesday between Russia and all Nato members. Australia Leading Australian academics have criticised the federal government for the “political and shortsighted” decision to reject the Australian Research Council’s recommendations to fund six projects. An open letter and petition are calling on acting education minister, Stuart Robert, to reverse the decision. Labor has preselected Catherine Renshaw, a human rights lawyer, to run against Liberal moderate Trent Zimmerman in North Sydney. The seat is currently held by Zimmerman by a margin of 9.3%, making it one of the Liberals’ safest. Australia food producers are pleading for more government help to cope with Covid disruptions as farm workers are hit by the virus. But rule changes this week will offer some relief with asymptomatic and Covid-negative staff cleared to return to work in Victoria. The world The EU’s police agency, Europol, will be forced to delete a vast store of personal data that it has been found to have amassed unlawfully by the bloc’s data protection watchdog. One of Boris Johnson’s top officials invited staff to “socially distanced drinks in the No 10 garden” during May of the first lockdown, a leaked email shows. The last seven years were the world’s hottest on record, with the first analysis of global temperature in 2021 showing it was 1.2C above pre-industrial levels. Fears are growing among experts about the rise of rightwing extremism in the US military and the potential threat it could pose to American democracy. Recommended reads Our brains really like order, but often our pantries and fridges are a chaos of old herbs and expired condiments. Decluttering can reduce stress, and it need only be done one shelf at a time. “Just do one shelf in the fridge, then throw things out, clean it, put things back,” says Libby Sander, assistant professor of organisational behaviour at Bond Business School. “And then once you have done the whole fridge, or the whole pantry, then you can say, OK, well, maybe I’ll reorganise what shelf everything goes on now that I’ve got more room.” “The Drones’ worst show ever was in York in England on 24 April 2007,” says founding member Gareth Liddiard. “All our equipment broke down. The gig ended with just me, playing through my amp which had somehow survived. I wrapped it up, went off and we went out the back to where the van was, and every window in the van had been smashed. Everything had been stolen. So we were like, for fuck’s sake! How much worse can it get?!” Hate doing the laundry? A few changes in what you wear, when you wear it and what you do once you’ve worn something can help reduce your time spent toiling over dirty clothes. “Thinking in terms of prevention is a good strategy,” says Kate Fletcher, professor at the Centre for Sustainable Fashion. She advises always wearing an apron while cooking; tucking trouser legs into socks to keep hems free from mud when you’re out walking; and wearing a singlet or undershirt beneath shirts and blouses so you only need to wash the bottom layer, not the outer garment. Listen One of our favourite stories of 2021 looks at the career of Australian wheelchair racer Madison de Rozario, which started when she competed at the Beijing Paralympics at the age of 14. Now, the 27-year-old has cemented her place in the history books – breaking multiple records and winning three medals, including two gold, at the Tokyo Paralympics. De Rozario speaks to reporter Kieran Pender about her sometimes bumpy rise to wheelchair-racing fame and the power of the Paralympics as a vehicle for change. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Nick Kyrgios is in huge doubt for the Australian Open after contracting Covid-19 just a week out from the grand slam. The 26-year-old withdrew from the Melbourne Summer Set last week due to a mystery illness that sparked his asthma. Kyrgios was cleared of Covid-19 at the time, but on Monday confirmed he had contracted the virus. Media roundup Indigenous leaders in the Northern Territory are calling for more support as Covid cases rises in remote communities with low vaccination rates in Central Australia, reports the NT News. Firefighters in South Australia could be at risk as sophisticated data systems have been scrapped in favour of spreadsheets, says the Advertiser. Coming up Australian Bureau of Statistics will release its monthly and quarterly estimates of retail turnover for November 2021. And if you’ve read this far … Elon Musk’s satellite internet company, Starlink, has ambitious plans to bring internet access to people anywhere in the world. But it turns out the venture is providing another service: warming up cats. The Starlink antenna has proven a hit with cats who appear to enjoy its snow-melting feature, slowing down movie screening and affecting internet speed. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.On the day that one of the prime minister’s most senior aides cheerily emailed more than 100 staff to suggest drinks in the Downing Street garden, a cabinet minister was telling the public they could meet only one person outside their household in an outdoor public place, 2 metres apart. The starkly different advice from Oliver Dowden at the No 10 press conference was less than an hour before the email from Martin Reynolds was sent on 20 May 2020. And that disparity would seem to encapsulate better than perhaps any other alleged No 10 party – and there were many – the “one rule for them” approach that has been so damaging for Boris Johnson. It puts paid to the different explanations No 10 has offered for each new scandal, and it leaves the prime minister most personally exposed. After the news of the 2020 Christmas party story broke six weeks ago, Johnson himself said he had not attended and that he had been assured by aides the party did not take place. Many No 10 insiders believed that was to give himself scope to sack the senior aides who briefed him before his PMQs appearance before Christmas, should the heat become too great for him. When he was revealed to have attended a winter leaving do and a festive Zoom quiz, he argued the approaches were within the rules. That was the response also taken to the Guardian’s picture of Johnson in the Downing Street garden on 15 May 2020, relaxing with cheese and wine in the company of his wife, Carrie, and their newborn son, as well as Dominic Cummings and Reynolds, his principal private secretary. Despite the aides standing around with glasses, No 10 insisted it was work-related, backed up by Cummings this week – not one to normally cut the PM any slack. And however unbelievable that explanation seemed when compared with the atmosphere in the Guardian picture, the newly revealed Reynolds invitation makes it ever clearer: that explanation will not wash this time. Two defences no longer apply. Firstly, Johnson is said by multiple sources to have been in attendance at the 20 May drinks, meaning there is no distance between him and the lockdown-breaking, and no aides can be blamed for misinformation. Secondly, this gathering cannot be justified as an important work meeting. Reynolds’ jaunty tone makes that clear: “After what has been an incredibly busy period it would be nice to make the most of the lovely weather and have some socially distanced drinks in the No 10 garden this evening.” Socially distanced they may have been, but the sheer number involved is a clear breach of pandemic rules in place at the time. The tone will be particularly galling as Matt Hancock, the then health secretary, had warned in one of his addresses: “This weekend, with the good weather and the new rules … don’t take risks.” No 10 has a holding position it can take to avoid commenting before the inquiry by senior civil servant Sue Gray concludes. Reynolds has been widely rumoured to be on the way out, heading back to the diplomatic service having previously been ambassador to Libya for six months before Johnson asked him to return as his principal private secretary. One Whitehall source said he was hoping to return to the Middle East. Tory MPs had hoped after new year that the heat would die down on the parties scandal, with the public having been allowed to enjoy a more normal Christmas with loved ones. But the new revelations could prove even more damaging, leaving the prime minister with no shield for his own rule-breaking.A New York man upset with what he perceived as Donald Trump’s threat to democracy was criminally charged on Monday with threatening to kill the former president, who he once referred to as Hitler. According to an unsealed complaint, Thomas Welnicki, 72, from Rockaway Beach, expressed interest in killing the then president in an interview with US Capitol police in July 2020 and in several calls to the Secret Service the following year. Welnicki was charged with threatening to kill, kidnap and inflict bodily harm on Trump. “Mr Welnicki intended no harm to anyone,” said his lawyer, Deirdre von Dornum, attorney-in-charge of the federal defender’s office in Brooklyn. “He was expressing how distraught he was at what he saw as the threats to our democracy posed by former President Trump.” Lawyers and spokesmen for Trump did not respond to requests for comment. Trump was identified as “Individual-1” in the complaint, which was filed in Brooklyn federal court. A footnote said “Individual-1” was president from 20 January 2017 to 20 January 2021. Welnicki allegedly told Capitol police that if Trump lost the 2020 election and refused to leave office, he would “acquire weapons” and “take him down”. According to the complaint, in one voicemail left with the Secret Service, Welnicki said he would “do anything I can to take out” Trump. “Oh yeah, that’s a threat to come and arrest me,” he was quoted as saying. “I will do anything I can to take out [Trump] and his 12 monkeys … if I had the opportunity to do it in Manhattan, that would be awesome … tomorrow [Trump] will be in Georgia, maybe I will.” The complaint said the “12 monkeys” were unnamed members of Congress who Welnicki believed supported Trump. It also said Welnicki believed there would be a $350,000 reward for killing Trump. According to the complaint, the voicemail was recorded “on or about” 4 January 2021. Trump spoke in Georgia on 4 January, in support of two Republican senators in run-off elections and to advance his lie about electoral fraud in his defeat by Joe Biden. Two days later, on 6 January, Trump told supporters in Washington to “fight like hell” to overturn the election. Five people died in the ensuing attack on the US Capitol. More than 100 police officers were hurt. The complaint said Welnicki’s threats continued in the autumn of 2021, when he likened Trump to Adolf Hitler and referred to Trump’s children. On 2 December 2021, he allegedly told the Secret Service: “The new civil war could break out and taking up arms against the government is justified when ballots don’t matter.” Trump was given the codename “Mogul” by the Secret Service – and was the subject of security scares. In June 2016, for example, a British man was arrested at a rally in Las Vegas after trying to steal a police officer’s gun. The man told police his aim had been to kill Trump, then a candidate for president. In March 2017, an intruder who said he hoped to speak to Trump breached the White House walls via the US treasury.Another day, another initiative to stop hospitals becoming overwhelmed by a combination of the Omicron surge and normal winter pressures. NHS England has struck a deal with private healthcare providers under which their hospitals will be ready to start treating NHS patients who cannot get the Covid or non-Covid care they need because their local NHS hospital is under too much pressure. This follows the recent news that “mini-Nightingale” field hospitals are being built in the grounds of eight hospitals, that gyms and education centres in hospitals could be turned into overflow wards, and that thousands of Covid patients could be treated at home in “virtual wards”. Any or all of this could happen if the increase in Covid hospitalisations leads to a hospital trust or even entire region of the NHS deciding it needs “surge capacity”. Announcing the latest tie-up with the private sector on Monday, NHS England’s chief operating officer, Sir David Sloman, who is also the service’s Covid incident director, said: “This deal … means as many people as possible can continue to get the care they need. “It also places independent health providers on standby to provide further help should hospitals face unsustainable levels of hospitalisations or staff absences. Just like the Nightingale hubs being created across the country, we hope never to need their support. But it will be there if needed.” Sloman said the the new arrangement was “struck under direction from the secretary of state”. It is easy to see why Sajid Javid would look to private hospitals to ease the NHS’s burden. First, the waiting list for non-urgent hospital care in England is already at a record 5.83m and may break through the 6m barrier when the latest monthly performance figures come out on Thursday. Downing Street is open about the fact that getting that number down is a key priority. Second, the number of hospitals that have been forced to cancel elective surgery in the face of intense pressure will increase the headline total when the same statistics come out next month. Third, however one feels about privatisation of NHS care, it is unarguable that people who needed urgent surgery during the pandemic, for a range of serious conditions but especially for cancer, have been able to undergo a procedure in a private hospital that they would otherwise have had to wait an indeterminate length of time to receive on the NHS, because the pandemic disrupted so many non-Covid services, especially in the first wave. The health impact of that is still emerging. Will any part of the NHS need to in effect commandeer their local private hospital(s)? The deal is “another NHS insurance policy”, one health service boss says. The fact that at least 24 trusts in England have had to declare a major alert since New Year’s Day, because they could not cope with the level of demand they were facing, especially with so many staff off sick because of Omicron, suggests the arrangement may have to be triggered, especially with Covid admissions rising in many regions – up 7% in 24 hours on Monday in both the north-west and south-west, for example. But David Rowland, director of the Centre for Health and the Public Interest thinktank, cautioned that private hospitals’ reliance on NHS consultants means the plan “really doesn’t stack up as a way of adding capacity to the NHS”. He also asked whether private hospitals would be paid just the NHS “tariff” rate for any treatment they do provide – the fee they receive when performing a hip or knee replacement on an NHS patient – or whether the health service’s almost desperate need for extra capacity means they will receive a markup as part of the deal. NHS England said only that details about the pricing of the arrangements would follow in the next few days. The deal confirms that the sheer scale of the healthcare backlog means the NHS will be looking to private hospitals to undertake as many operations as they can for the foreseeable future. NHS England was budgeting to spend £10bn on them for that purpose over the next four years even before Javid ordered this tie-up. A report by the Commons health select committee last week said the private sector would play a key role in the NHS’s efforts to tackle the backlog and that reality was central to NHS England’s finished but still unpublished “elective recovery plan”. The many people offended by NHS billions being handed to private hospital groups will balk at what is likely to be a long-term marriage of convenience. But a decade of successive governments’ underfunding, and ignoring or exacerbating its staff shortages, has left the NHS with no choice.Fresh doubt has been cast on European fixtures involving English clubs playing in France this week amid fears strict travel rules could wreak more havoc on the Champions and Challenge Cups. Newcastle are due to play in France on Friday, as are Bath and Sale at the weekend, and while the organisers, European Professional Club Rugby, said last week that all fixtures will go ahead as planned, the key stumbling block is that clubs must isolate for 48 hours upon arrival before their matches, according to current travel rules. On Monday night officials were lobbying the French authorities through the Ligue Nationale de Rugby to relax that rule. But if the 48-hour isolation ruling remains, those fixtures would be cast into considerable doubt with the English clubs harbouring concerns over travelling. Newcastle’s encounter with Biarritz in the Challenge Cup being on Friday means the issue is all the more pressing for Dean Richards, who voiced his concerns after Saturday’s defeat by Northampton. Sale, meanwhile, have already raised the prospect of not travelling to Clermont for Sunday’s Champions Cup match with their director of rugby, Alex Sanderson, expressing fears that his South African players would not be granted the necessary visas in time. Bath, who face La Rochelle in the Champions Cup on Saturday, were similarly in limbo on Monday night. EPCR has stressed that clubs will be able to train during the 48-hour period, but there are fears among the English clubs over the need to produce a negative test to leave isolation, which in turn raises the possibility that members of the travelling party could be stranded in France. Newcastle’s situation is all the more complicated because they are also due to play away to Toulon on Saturday 22 January. EPCR had said all matches would go ahead as planned after revealing the French government had given teams permission to travel “in pursuit of economic activity”. That appeared to avoid a repeat of the seven cancelled in December but hopes of avoiding another decimated round of fixtures appear to hinge on whether the French government is willing to drop its 48-hour requirements. “We’re not sure where we stand with it all and to be honest I’m not sure if we can go,” said Richards. “There has so far been no relaxation from the French government regarding the 48-hour isolation requirement and it’s very much up in the air. We just don’t know where we stand.”