Elizabeth Holmes is slated to be sentenced on 26 September after being found guilty of defrauding Theranos investors, according to a court filing on Wednesday. A California jury found Holmes, 37, guilty on four of 11 charges, including three counts of fraud and one count of conspiring to defraud private investors in the blood-testing startup. She remains free on a $500,000 bond while awaiting sentencing. Holmes faces up to 20 years in prison for the charges but will probably receive far fewer, according to experts, given her lack of criminal history. Holmes’ sentencing was set for later in 2022 to allow for the trial of Sunny Balwani, her former personal and professional partner, whose trial for related fraud charges will begin in March. Holmes alleged during her trial she was abused by Balwani, who served for 10 years as co-president of the company. Balwani has strongly denied claims of mistreating Holmes. Holmes had risen to fame and power while claiming her Theranos machines could run common blood tests on a few drops from a finger prick. Once valued at $9bn, the company collapsed after the Wall Street Journal published a series of articles that suggested its devices were flawed and inaccurate. Holmes was acquitted on three charges, including conspiracy to defraud patients and two charges related to patients who received inaccurate test results. One charge was thrown out earlier in the trial and the jury did not come to a verdict on the remaining three charges. In a separate court filing, government attorneys said they plan to dismiss the three counts the jury did not reach a verdict on. Holmes plans to ask the judge overseeing her case to overturn her convictions, according to court filings. If he does not, she is likely to appeal and could seek to suspend her sentence until a final ruling. Her conviction sealed the extraordinary rise and fall of the company and could have wide-ranging consequences for the tech industry. It also marked an indictment of the hype machine that helped rocket Holmes to fame, as she graced the covers of major magazines, headlined conferences, and drew comparisons to Apple’s Steve Jobs. During the trial, which took place in San Jose, she reportedly lived on a 74-acre estate in a town neighboring the city with her partner, Billy Evans, and their infant son. Reuters contributed to this report.Back to the shambles, then. No, not the Ashes tour. This is from the other side of the England and Wales Cricket Board’s Rubik’s Cube of problems. Six weeks ago the ECB’s chief executive, Tom Harrison, was asked why any of the many people who have heard him and his predecessors talk over and again about their renewed efforts to address racism in the sport ought to take this latest ECB scheme seriously. What was it, exactly, that was going to make the new action plan any more effective than the Clean Bowl Racism campaign the ECB launched in 2000? Or the South Asian Action Plan in 2018? Why was this step forward for Yorkshire going to take them further than the ones the club promised when they launched anti-racism projects in 1992, 1999 or 2015? All Harrison was really able to offer was his own say-so. “I know that we are in the dock for words, words, words, blah, blah, blah, no action – that kind of thing,” Harrison said. “What we are trying to say here is that this is action-orientated.” Given the latest set of 12 actions includes a few that he had already promised the ECB would deliver under the 11-step-programme it set up four years ago, it wasn’t hugely reassuring. The game has never suffered a lack of good intentions, just a lack of good outcomes. Now we have a better answer. The digital, culture, media and sport committee’s new report on racism recommends that the government should tie any future public funding for the ECB to its making demonstrable progress in anti-racism, and that the select committee should help monitor that progress by asking the ECB to report back to it each quarter. Whether those recommendations are actually adopted is another question, but the report highlighted a promise from the sports minister, Nigel Huddleston, that the government “would be closely monitoring the ECB’s progress” and take “further measures” if needed. It’s true, the ECB really has ended up in a position where it has put this Tory party in a position of moral authority. Who knew there was high ground in the gutter? There are flaws in the committee’s plan. The ECB receives about £2.5m annually from Sport England. But most of that goes towards developing grassroots cricket, which means that cutting the funding would only exacerbate the problems it is asking the ECB to address. But the threat will certainly sharpen its thinking, and help hurry along some of the counties who pushed back against its more radical plans to deal with racism at the all-game meeting last November. Harrison said himself he was frustrated they hadn’t been able to go further. The ECB has also benefited from a lot of bailout money, most recently its share of the £300m given to “summer sports” last year. And a little more scrutiny on exactly how it’s being used would be a good thing. (You can find a more in-depth look at its accounts, if you’re interested, at the Side On View cricket blog). The latest set of financial statements from 2020-21 show that the ECB has blown through £68m in reserves, and now has only £2m left. Most of it apparently went on organising The Hundred, a tournament that a large number of people who actually pay to watch the game seem to hate, and which, because it has taken over the middle of the summer, now seems to be the single biggest obstacle to rearranging the first-class cricket schedule to better serve the needs of the ailing Test team. That £68m might have come in handy as a rainy-day fund if the sport had ever found itself facing a crisis beyond its control, like, oh I don’t know, a global pandemic. Instead the ECB found itself drawing on public money to help it along. Of course it took its own measures to mitigate the losses too. In 2020 it announced it was making staff cutbacks. And the statements show it did cut the number of development staff by almost a fifth, from 101 to 82. (The grassroots, which would be further threatened by those cuts in Sport England funding, are already suffering). Oddly, though, the overall headcount actually increased from 379 to 416. That was because of (yes, you guessed) The Hundred. It wasn’t just that it had to hire players and coaching staff, it also expanded the commercial, communications and events team (from 57 to 82). The upshot was that ECB’s payroll costs actually rose by £6.6m during the first year of the pandemic, which means wages and salaries are currently outstripping the total amount (£38m) the ECB spends on grassroots cricket. Again, a large part of that rise is down to the hires made for The Hundred. But not all of it. Aggregate boardroom pay rose by 11% and topped £1m for the first time. As a footnote in the accounts explains, however, these rising costs were offset by furlough funds received from HMRC. That 11% rise was despite Harrison’s own well-publicised pay cut, (from £580,000 to £512,000). Fortunately for him it seems that’s likely to be offset too, by his share of the £2.1m “long term incentive plan”, which becomes payable this year “provided the employee remains in full-time employment” at the due date. It has been widely reported that Harrison will step down at some time in the next few months, which is one reason why he has been able to hold on to his job during this rolling omnishambles. Anyone want to bet on which side of the due date he’ll make good on his promise?Mark Zuckerberg’s Meta is being sued for £2.3bn in a class action lawsuit that claims 44 million Facebook users in the UK had their data exploited after signing up to the social network. The case argues that Meta has broken the 1998 Competition Act by setting an “unfair price” for Facebook’s UK users when they are given access to the service. The lawsuit brought by the legal expert Dr Liza Lovdahl Gormsen argues that the price for getting on Facebook, which does not charge its users, is handing over personal data that generates most of the company’s income. Worldwide, Meta makes 98% of its income from advertisers, who are able to target specific demographics and consumers because the company has built up profiles of its users through their online activity. “They are exploiting users by taking their personal data without properly compensating them for taking that data,” said Lovdahl Gormsen, who added that Facebook had a “completely disproportionate” relationship with its users. “I don’t think the users are entirely clear when they click on the terms and conditions how unfair that deal is.” Lovdahl Gormsen, a competition law specialist at the British Institute of International and Comparative Law, is bringing the class action at the Competition Appeal Tribunal in London as an opt-out case. This means Facebook users covered by it do not need to actively join the case to receive damages and will be part of the claim unless they decide to opt out from it. The lawsuit covers the period from 1 October 2015 to 31 December 2019. If the case is successful, the amount of compensation per user will be settled by the judge. The £2.3bn compensation number cited by the cases’s backers represents an estimate of the damage caused to users. The lawsuit is being funded by Innsworth, a firm that pays for litigation in exchange for a share of any damages, and Lovdahl Gormsen is being represented by Quinn Emanuel Urquhart &amp; Sullivan, a law firm that describes itself as a specialist in “high-stakes commercial litigation”. Lovdhal Gormsen’s lawyers have written to Meta, which also owns the photo-sharing app Instagram and the WhatsApp messaging service, to notify it of the claim. The claim will then be heard by a judge at the tribunal, who will decide whether the case should go ahead. If it does go ahead, the case could take between 6 and 12 months. A Meta spokesperson said: “People access our service for free. They choose our services because we deliver value for them and they have meaningful control of what information they share on Meta’s platforms and who with. We have invested heavily to create tools that allow them to do so.” On Tuesday, a US federal judge ruled that the US competition watchdog could proceed with a breakup lawsuit against Meta. The Federal Trade Commission wants to force Meta to sell Instagram and WhatsApp, in one of the biggest challenges the government has brought against a tech company in decades. Its lawsuit accuses Meta of pursuing a “course of anti-competitive conduct” by buying or crushing rivals.1) Cucurella and Olise key to rivalry match Hostilities resume in the unlikely derby as Brighton seek their first league win against Crystal Palace in six attempts. In September’s reverse fixture, Brighton needed a Neal Maupay goal in the fifth minute of added time to rescue a point from a spicy encounter at Selhurst Park. Friday’s fixture at the Amex Stadium could be as much about who is present as who isn’t, with both sides missing key players on duty at the Africa Cup of Nations. Mali’s Yves Bissouma will be absent from the Brighton ranks, while Palace find themselves without Wilfried Zaha, Cheikhou Kouyaté and the in-form Jordan Ayew. The Ghanaian’s absence will herald another starting opportunity for Michael Olise, who was outstanding in the FA Cup victory against Millwall last weekend and in the league defeat against West Ham seven days previously. His battle against Brighton’s hugely impressive Spanish wing-back Marc Cucurella ought to be key in deciding the outcome of a potentially fiery match that looks extremely difficult to call. BG Brighton v Crystal Palace, Friday 8pm (all times GMT) 2) Arsenal a familiar nemesis for Conte At Chelsea, Antonio Conte had a miserable record against Arsenal: just one win from eight encounters – and at a time when the west Londoners were a much stronger outfit, with Arsène Wenger in the final, troubled stretch of his tenure. Defeats to Arsenal bookended Conte’s imperial period at Chelsea. Three goals down at the Emirates in September 2016, Conte switched to a back-three formation that provided the framework for Chelsea’s dominant title win that season. But the 2017 FA Cup final, a defeat to a motivated, excellent Arsenal to lift the final trophy of Wenger’s career, was the beginning of the end for Conte at Chelsea. It came ahead of a transfer window where bridges were burned between him and the club hierarchy. It appears too early for that yet in his Tottenham reign, but a somewhat submissive selection in Wednesday’s Carabao Cup semi defeat to Chelsea suggested he was sending a message of sincere dissatisfaction. Watch that space. JB Tottenham v Arsenal, Sunday 4.30pm 3) Tuchel wants laser-like Chelsea focus For all Chelsea’s midweek dominance against Tottenham –aside from one brief second-half spell, Thomas Tuchel seemed extremely displeased with his players even though they had comfortably booked their berth in next month’s Carabao Cup final. “We were almost punished for our lack of focus,” he said at the final whistle. “We played at 90% and that’s not our style – we shouldn’t do this.” With a Saturday lunchtime appointment at Manchester City looming, it was a timely broadside across the bows of players who simply must win at the Etihad to maintain any hope of reeling in the runaway leaders. Chelsea may not be good enough to beat a City side currently firing on all cylinders, but should they fail to do so, it probably won’t be down to any lack of concentration or application following their manager’s rocket up the collective backside. BG Manchester City v Chelsea, Saturday 12.30pm 4) How Burnley deal with their losses Burnley have more league matches remaining this season than any other team in the top flight, so that is one thing in their favour. Now all they need to do is find a way, and a player, to score enough goals for them to survive. With Chris Wood sold to Newcastle this week and Max Cornet away at the Africa Cup of Nations, Burnley will host Leicester with a strike force that boasts one league goal between them this season – and that is only if Matej Vydra has recovered from Covid and a nagging groin problem. Their attack will most likely be led by Jay Rodriguez, who at least scored in last week’s home FA Cup defeat to Huddersfield. Leicester have striker problems too – Jamie Vardy is injured, Kelechi Iheanacho is at the Cup of Nations and Patson Dakais an injury doubt – but Brendan Rodgers’ side do at least have midfielders who can weigh in with goals. Burnley’s chances of scoring on Saturday may hinge on Ben Mee, their top league scorer this season after Wood and Cornet, and a player capable of exploiting Leicester’s ongoing set-piece problems. PD Burnley v Leicester, Saturday 3pm 5) Villa falling short of Gerrard’s demands These are exciting times at Aston Villa. Philippe Coutinho will surely make his debut on Saturday with Lucas Digne likely to do so too. Steven Gerrard has clearly made Villa attractive to a better-heeled tranche of footballers, but results in the last month have been rather less impressive than their transfer business. Three defeats have followed the win at Norwich – losses to Chelsea and Manchester United either side of a more worrying display at Brentford, where Mads Roerslev’s late winner was perhaps most indicative. The all-action style Gerrard demands from his players appears to coincide with flagging energy levels towards the end of matches. At Old Trafford on Monday, Villa had a sagging, incoherent United on the ropes from the start of the second half, only for the FA Cup third-round tie to be closed out reasonably comfortably. It may take time – and a pre-season – for Villa to be able to meet their manager’s physical demands. JB Aston Villa v Manchester United, Saturday 5.30pm 6) A bad week to get worse for Everton? After seeing their team win just one game and draw three from their past 12 Premier League outings, Everton supporters are mutinous. This week’s sale of their talented French left-back Lucas Digne to Aston Villa, in the wake of his reported falling-out with Rafa Benítez, is likely to have further enraged a fanbase whose patience with their manager was already wearing cigarette paper-thin. “Sometimes it only takes one person from outside to destroy a beautiful love affair,” wrote Digne in his farewell message, in what has widely been perceived as a dig at his former manager. With Benítez’s side heading to Carrow Road to face an abominably bad Norwich City side on Saturday, anything less than emphatic victory would further damage the already fractious relationship between Everton fans and their manager. BG Norwich v Everton, Saturday 3pm 7) Salah’s stock rises further in his absence Liverpool’s current run of fixtures can also be viewed as an extension of Mohamed Salah’s contract negotiations. The team made a strong case for giving Salah everything he wants by performing prosaically against 10-man Arsenal in Thursday’s Carabao Cup semi-final first leg at Anfield. The hosts lacked sharpness and ingenuity without Salah and Sadio Mané, among others, while Salah’s ostensible deputy, Takumi Minamino, underlined the Egyptian’s importance – and the shallowness of Liverpool’s squad – by missing an open goal late on. A similar performance when they host Brentford in the league on Sunday could result in them falling even further behind in the title race. PD Liverpool v Brentford, Sunday 2pm 8) Wood shows Newcastle’s short-term aims Jackie Milburn, Malcolm Macdonald, Les Ferdinand, Alan Shearer … Chris Wood? The New Zealander filling a Callum Wilson-shaped hole in Newcastle’s attack, and the £25m paid for a striker with three goals all season, shows the difficulty of recruitment in the January transfer window. Wood, a decent, troublesome and unselfish forward, will have to do for now as Newcastle look less a superclub in waiting than Burnley-on-Tyne, with Wood joining ex-Claret Kieran Tripper in their ranks under a former Turf Moor manager in Eddie Howe. Harpooning the chances of a less wealthy relegation rival is the limit of Newcastle ambitions for now – and until the drop is avoided, the club can only operate on such a short-term footing. What fans might have said if Mike Ashley and Steve Bruce had turned to Wood as the answer is one for the birds. A first Wood goal in seven weeks and a defeat of Watford, another relegation rival, is desperately required. JB Newcastle v Watford, Saturday 3pm 9) Broja will test retooled Wolves back-line Bruno Lage was shrewd enough to stick with a back-three formation after taking charge of Wolves last summer, with the emergence of Max Kilman on the right helping the team continue using the shape with which most of the players were familiar. But with Romain Saïss at the Cup of Nations with Morocco, Lage has to find another player to deploy alongside Kilman and Conor Coady. Marçal did well on the left side of the back three in last weekend’s FA Cup win over Sheffield United until being forced off by injury at half-time, after which the midfielder Leander Dendoncker filled in competently. But Southampton will pose a tougher test on Saturday, especially with Armando Broja continuing to distinguish himself as an outstanding young attacking talent. Ralph Hassenhüttl hopes to convince Southampton’s new owner to find a way of making Broja’s loan move from Chelsea permanent in the summer. It will be up to Wolves’ makeshift defence to stop the 20-year-old from strengthening the argument for doing so. PD Wolves v Southampton, Saturday 3pm 10) Old-school values firing Hammers As Arsenal, Tottenham and Manchester United falter in their chase for a top-four place, West Ham have been taking care of business. The expectation is a thin squad will eventually run out of energy, as happened last season, but David Moyes’s team are currently in fourth place on merit. The improvement in the last 18 months of the likes of Jarrod Bowen, Manuel Lanzini and Declan Rice is a tribute to their manager, a rediscovery of the team-building expertise that first made his reputation at Preston and Everton. Rice is a reminder that stars can be made rather than bought in, while Bowen, who scored twice in Wednesday’s win over Norwich, is a reminder that stars can also be bought and made from the lower tiers. Such old-fashioned values are prevailing over the elite clubs chasing West Ham’s tail, and a repeat of last week’s 2-0 FA Cup defeat of Leeds would keep the Hammers ahead. JB West Ham v Leeds, Sunday 2pmI welcome the conclusions and recommendations of the digital, culture, media and sport committee as well as the clear and succinct language used in its report. It is not a long document, but it suggests the committee means business. I think everyone within cricket, hopefully of whatever race or background, will embrace it as an attempt to make the sport more equal and inclusive. The England and Wales Cricket Board is instructed to create a “set of key indicators by which they might measure their progress”. These are yet to be defined – last November the ECB published a 12-point action plan to address diversity in the sport, but the wording of the report suggests the committee expects a new list. What these indicators will be, and how the sport’s administrators choose to measure and recognise progress in this area, will determine whether the committee’s work has been successful. The ECB published a South Asian Action Plan in 2018, and nearly four years on a lot of people would ask whether that was a genuine attempt to improve inclusivity or just an attempt to tap into a new commercial market. When he gave evidence to the DCMS committee Azeem Rafiq described some previous attempts to improve diversity in cricket as “box-ticking” and “tokenism”, and when we look back in a few years’ time what emerges from this process must have been genuinely productive. The threat to withhold funding will certainly focus minds, and I particularly welcome the expectation that Yorkshire and the ECB will give quarterly reports on their progress – that’s enough time to make a positive impact, but not so much that they will feel able to waste any. Of course this problem is not confined to Yorkshire, and while I am sure that every county is thinking about their structure and their representation, perhaps they could all be expected to give regular progress updates. Ashley Giles, the managing director of England men’s cricket at the ECB, has spoken in the past about its reliance on the counties in sporting terms, and it is reliant again now. The ECB must work with and try to get the best out of the counties, but in the end if it is to be seen as successful it needs the counties to get their houses in order. For me there is a cloud that hangs over this report. The DCMS committee is chaired by Julian Knight, the Conservative MP for Solihull, and the majority of its members sit on the government benches. It is their party that created the hostile environment and was responsible for the Windrush scandal – an episode that resonates personally with me as my father came over in 1960. As of the end of last year only 5% of Windrush victims had received compensation. Knight stands behind a prime minister who writes about black people with “watermelon smiles” and Muslim women as “letterboxes”. His government is led by the same people who organised a deliberately divisive Brexit campaign, has presided over a period when race hate has gone through the roof, and continues to demonise and criminalise refugees who attempt the perilous journey across the Channel in inflatable dinghies. Knight comes across as sincere in his criticism of what has gone on in cricket, but what are his qualifications for sitting in judgment over the commitment of others to the reduction of racial injustice in this country? I feel there is an irony to him leading this committee at this time, and perhaps his party should also demonstrate their own commitment to the fight against racism, and the success or failure of any efforts they have made. I remember watching Rafiq giving evidence to the committee last year. It was uncomfortable to see, and there was great disappointment in how little progress we have made as a sport. I started in 1987 and here we were in 2021 watching a young man go through that experience. Hopefully it will result in substantive change, and this report will be part of that process. But I also recognise that cricket is part of society, that this is an issue across society, and that most of us, even the members of the DCMS committee, still have a lot of work to do.Victoria Beckham will return to the form-fitting dresses with which she launched her fashion career in a bid to bounce back from sales lost during the pandemic. “VB Body” dresses, in a dense compact knit designed to shape the body and accentuate curves, will be launched in April, marking a departure from the loose silhouettes which have become the signature at her loss-making high-fashion label. At a preview in her London studio, Beckham said the shift was influenced by spending time in Florida, where her husband, David Beckham, owns a stake in football team Inter Miami. “As I’ve gotten into fashion, the more layers of clothes I have worn. I’ve been burying myself under clothes. But in Miami, if you go out at night in a midi length skirt and a pussy-bow blouse, people think you’ve lost your mind. That is a normal outfit for me in London and I still love wearing it. But Miami has opened my eyes to the fact that looking feminine and curvy is so important to so many women.” Beckham’s luxury brand lost £8.6m in 2020. The results were an improvement on 2019’s £16.8m losses, due to a strong performing beauty line, but the brand is yet to turn a profit. Last year, average prices at the label were reduced by 40% by a shift toward casual wear and simpler fabrics, in a bid to broaden the customer base. Price tags for the VB Body range will start at £90. “This is not a vanity project and commercial is not a dirty word,” said Beckham, who praised the chief executive, Marie Leblanc, “for getting the business into the best shape it has ever been in”. Footfall at the brand’s Mayfair flagship remains well short of pre-pandemic levels, although virtual appointments conducted from the store via FaceTime with clients in their homes are bringing in sales. “I dress women to go out, to go to work, to travel – all things which have been limited over the past two years, so business has been a real challenge,” Beckham said. “I think it’s time to get back to normal, to start dressing properly and get back to the office again, if I’m perfectly honest. It’s great to see my office full again.” Financial restraint looks set to rule out a catwalk show during London fashion week. “Shows are really expensive, and if we were going to have one in February we’d need to commit to that now. For a small independent brand that’s a huge investment,” said Beckham. A planned show was cancelled due to lockdown in 2020 at a significant loss to the business. The designer joins a growing list of cancellations scaling back the approaching catwalk season, with Giorgio Armani, Ann Demeulemeester, Brunello Cucinelli and JW Anderson all postponing live events or pivoting to a digital format. Beckham’s high-fashion “pre-fall” collection, which will go on sale in April, brings her mantra of “bringing sexy back” to her signature demure silhouette. Curved seaming has been optimised on long skirts and dresses “to make the most of a great bum and a good waist, to celebrate being a woman. I don’t want to dress for comfort or hide under baggy clothes any more.” Bright citrus shades in the collection were inspired by the pistachio seating and marmalade coloured walls at the Sant Ambroeus restaurant in Palm Beach, Florida. “We were having dinner, and I had David [Beckham] take a picture of me so I could send it to the atelier,” the designer said. “A wink of bad taste makes the collection cooler.”The most deprived state schools in England have been hit much harder by staff absence with Covid, compared with those in better-off areas or private schools, according to a new survey of classroom teachers. The TeacherTapp daily online survey of teachers found that 29% of those working in schools with high numbers of pupils from deprived backgrounds said at least one in 10 of their colleagues were off or isolating with Covid. The survey done on 7 January revealed that nearly a third of all teachers said between 5% and 10% of their colleagues were off, across both primary and secondary schools. But at schools with more than 10% of staff off, there was a dramatic divergence. While 30% of teachers at secondary schools with the highest proportion of pupils on free school meals said that 10% or more of their colleagues were off, just 9% of teachers at schools with the fewest pupils on free school meals said the same. Similarly, while one in four teachers at state schools said they didn’t have enough staff to cover absences, just 9% of teachers at private schools reported the same. On the upside, 95% of teachers at state schools reported that they had sufficient supplies of lateral flow tests for their pupils. Sir Peter Lampl, chair and founder of the Sutton Trust, which published the findings, said poorer pupils should not be further disadvantaged as a result of the pandemic, adding: “The most important thing for the government to do is to strengthen existing education recovery and make sure sufficient funding is being provided to cover absent staff.” A Department for Education spokesperson said school staff were working “tirelessly” to ensure classrooms were safe. “We are supporting schools through encouraging former teachers to come back to classrooms and extending the Covid workforce fund for schools that are facing the greatest staffing and funding pressures,” the spokesperson said. “We’ve also asked schools to have contingency plans to maximise attendance and minimise disruption to learning, should they have high rates of staff absence, and are working with the sector to share case studies of flexible learning models to support the development of those plans.” The survey of nearly 6,500 teachers found that in some schools more than a third of pupils did not have access to laptops or tablets if required for remote learning. Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said it “beggars belief” that pupils were still without digital devices nearly two years into the pandemic. “The government made great play of its efforts to provide laptops to schools last year but it seems it did not see the job through. The use of technology in education has been one of the few positives to come from the pandemic but it is of little use if young people cannot access lessons when they are self-isolating,” Barton said.Google has announced a $1bn (£871m) deal to buy the London development Central Saint Giles, calling the move a show of confidence in the return to more office working. The US tech firm currently rents space in the brightly coloured development designed by the architect Renzo Piano, which is located in the centre of the capital, near Oxford Street. The building – with its distinctive red, green, orange and yellow facade – includes 408,000 sq ft (38,000 sq metres) of office space, as well as more than 100 residential apartments, and is home to restaurants and cafes on the ground floor. After the purchase, Google will have space for 10,000 employees in the UK, a significant increase on the 6,400 staff it currently has in the country, 700 of whom joined the company over the past year. The company has offices in London and Manchester. Google’s new London headquarters – a huge horizontal building known as “the landscraper” – is under construction next to the railway lines that run in and out of King’s Cross railway station. The glass building will stretch out by a total of 330 metres, longer than the 310-metre-tall Shard skyscraper. The main structural works are expected to be finished this year, and once completed it will stand 11 storeys tall, boasting a 25-metre swimming pool, indoor basketball court and massage rooms as well as a roof garden. Despite the rise of home working during the Covid pandemic, Google reaffirmed its commitment to the project in summer 2020. Google is also promising a multimillion-pound refurbishment of its Central Saint Giles offices to create a post-pandemic workplace that has “parity” to its King’s Cross base. Desks will be more spaced out, and the redeveloped building will include additional meeting rooms and covered outdoor working areas. The investment is also likely to be seen as a boost for Oxford Street, the capital’s busiest shopping street, which has seen a string of well-known retailers close their doors during the pandemic. Ruth Porat, the chief financial officer of Google and its parent company, Alphabet, said the purchase of Central Saint Giles reflected the company’s “continued commitment to [the UK’s] growth and success”. She added: “Our focus remains on creating flexible workspaces that foster innovation, creativity and inclusivity.” Post-Covid, Google will operate a hybrid workplace model, with staff splitting their time between the office and another location, and spending on average three days a week at their desks. Staff are also allowed to request working entirely remotely, although this will not be possible for all roles.The UK government has been urged to cut English cricket’s funding unless the England and Wales Cricket Board can prove it is serious about tackling the “deep-seated racism” that exists across the whole sport. That is the damning recommendation of a parliamentary inquiry into racism that concludes cricket’s problem is not only “endemic” but the governing body has known about it and failed to properly act. The 13-page report by the digital, culture, media and sport select committee also praises the former Yorkshire player Azeem Rafiq, who spoke so bravely about the shocking abuse he suffered in November, but says his testimony must now lead to real change. It has ordered the ECB to provide parliament with quarterly updates on its plans to tackle racism and says unless there is sustained progress the £2.2m the ECB receives each year from Sport England for the grassroots game could be at risk. “We recommend that the government ensures that any future public funds for cricket are dependent on continuous, demonstrable progress in getting rid of racism in both the dressing rooms and in the stands,” it states. “We recommend that the ECB board develop a set of key indicators by which they might measure their progress and then report to us on those indicators every quarter.” The report follows the staggering evidence given to the committee by Rafiq, who laid bare the racism, bullying and “inhuman” treatment he faced over a number of years at Yorkshire – along with the club’s and the ECB’s failure to adequately respond. The MPs describe Rafiq’s testimony as “convincing” and say they agree with his conviction “that this was not simply a personal issue but an endemic problem across the whole of cricket”. “The language used in correspondence received by members of our committee subsequent to the evidence session with Azeem, and the manner in which stories were run in the press to discredit Azeem, further establish, to us, that eradicating racism from the game will be a long and difficult road,” they add. The report was welcomed by Rafiq, who said it was “brilliant” that the ECB and Yorkshire were being held to account but agreed they needed to be given the chance to show they were making progress. “The DCMS committee has listened and taken sensible action,” he added. “This shows just how seriously politicians are taking an issue that too many people in cricket ignored for so long. The committee understands how important it is to clean up the game. The ECB and Yorkshire need to be given the chance to do the right thing and I’m encouraged by Lord Patel’s work since he was appointed chair at YCCC.” There has been surprise in some quarters about the report’s threat to cut funding given that much of it goes on helping children in deprived areas. However the ECB’s interim chair, Barry O’Brien, said the game’s governing body accepted the broad thrust of the report and promised to rebuild trust in the sport. “We embrace the ongoing scrutiny of the committee and all those that love the game of cricket who will be watching closely as we undertake the continuous, demonstrable progress in eradicating racism from the dressing room and from the stands,” he said. “We are determined to root out racism – and other forms of discrimination – from our sport. “We look forward to updating the committee on the progress the whole game is making in delivering the 12-point Action Plan agreed in November to bring about the meaningful change we all want to see,” he added. “We are deeply sorry for the pain people have suffered and recognise the courage it has taken to speak out.” That message was echoed by Lord Patel, now chair at Yorkshire. “Azeem Rafiq’s testimony was a watershed moment for the sport as a whole, and we are committed to ensuring that no one endures the unacceptable experience that he did at Yorkshire County Cricket Club,” he said. “In the last two months Yorkshire has made significant progress in our efforts to rebuild but we are only at the start of this long and important journey.” Meanwhile, a DCMS spokesman noted that there had been “encouraging progress” in recent weeks. But he also warned: “There is no place for discrimination in society and we want to see clear and sustained evidence of cultural change in the sport.” The CEO of Sport England, Tim Hollingsworth, struck a similar tone as he urged the ECB, the counties, and other cricketing stakeholders to reform and take “action to end structural racism in the sport”. “Sport England’s funding is explicitly linked to the development and implementation of robust diversity and inclusion policies,” he said. “We have made that clear to the ECB, who have responded positively and constructively. “Azeem Rafiq’s powerful and personal testimony to the committee shows us that ultimately, the litmus test of progress will be the lived experiences of diverse communities and their involvement in the game. Until experiences like Azeem’s are eradicated, the work to defeat racism in sport must continue.”California’s governor, Gavin Newsom, has denied parole for Sirhan Sirhan, the 77-year-old who has spent more than 50 years in prison for the assassination of Robert F Kennedy. Newsom has previously cited Kennedy as his “political hero” and wrote in his decision rejecting parole: “After decades in prison, [Sirhan] has failed to address the deficiencies that led him to assassinate Senator Kennedy. Mr Sirhan lacks the insight that would prevent him from making the same types of dangerous decisions he made in the past.” Sirhan was approved for release by the parole board last year after two of Kennedy’s sons argued in favor of his release and prosecutors did not object. The board ruled that he was not a danger to public safety in the wake of new laws that required the panel to consider that he committed the offense at a young age. Angela Berry, Sirhan’s attorney, said in a statement that his legal team would ask a judge to overturn the decision, adding: “While I appreciate that the release of Mr Sirhan presents Governor Newsom with a challenging political calculation, the legal decision for his release is clear and straightforward … Not an iota of evidence exists to suggest Mr Sirhan is still a danger to society.” She said the parole process had become “politicized” and criticized the governor for rejecting the decisions of the board, whose members are appointed by his office, adding: “Mr Sirhan has been a model prisoner for half a century … and the law requires his release.” Sirhan originally faced a death sentence for the 1968 killing of Kennedy, who was a Democratic US senator from New York and the former US attorney general. He was murdered at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles moments after declaring victory in the California presidential primary. Sirhan repeatedly testified that he did not recall shooting Kennedy and injuring five others, but in his recent parole hearing, he said he took responsibility for the killing. Douglas Kennedy, who was a toddler when his father was killed, attended last year’s hearing and urged for his release, saying he was moved to tears by Sirhan’s remorse, the AP reported: “I’m overwhelmed just by being able to view Mr Sirhan face-to-face. I think I’ve lived my life both in fear of him and his name in one way or another. And I am grateful today to see him as a human being worthy of compassion and love.” Robert F Kennedy Jr, another son, also recently urged that Newsom free Sirhan, noting that the state’s own psychiatrists deemed he was not a threat to society, and raising questions about the police’s original investigation. He met with Sirhan in 2018 and said he found him to be a “gentle, humble, kindhearted, frail and harmless”. Paul Schrade, a victim who survived the shooting, has also argued for his release. Six of his nine surviving children have argued against his release, including Rory Kennedy, who never met her father. Ethel Kennedy, Kennedy’s wife, also advocated that he remain in prison, saying, Sirhan “should not have the opportunity to terrorize again”. Members of the Kennedy family released a statement on Thursday thanking the governor and saying they were “deeply relieved by his decision”. Newsom’s decision comes as the governor has faced increasing pressure to release incarcerated people during the pandemic, especially elderly people convicted of crimes when they were young. California has adopted a range of reforms meant to reduce mass incarceration and to give people serving long or indefinite sentences more opportunities to come home. Sirhan, a Palestinian who immigrated from Jordan, was 24 when he killed Kennedy. Parole panels had previously denied his release more than a dozen times until last year’s decision. New laws meant that the panel had to consider that he was now elderly, and that he had endured childhood trauma stemming from conflicts in the Middle East. At last year’s hearing, Sirhan argued he would not be a danger to society, saying, “I will always look to safety and peace and non-violence.” Newsom, however, noted that the assassination was “among the most notorious crimes in American history” in announcing his rejection of parole on Thursday. The governor’s decision comes after prison psychologists have repeatedly rated him a low risk for future violence since 2010. The commissioners who granted him parole last year also noted that at age 77, he was “significantly incapacitated”. In 2020, Newsom similarly rejected parole for Leslie Van Houten, who was convicted for her role in the high-profile Charles Manson killings, despite parole panels ruling four times that she should be freed after decades in prison. The governor on Thursday also announced pardons for 24 people, and commutations for 18 others currently incarcerated. The list included a commutation for Rahsaan Thomas, a 51-year-old writer and co-host of the award-winning Ear Hustle podcast, which is recorded behind bars at San Quentin prison. “People grow – you have to give us a chance,” Thomas told the Guardian in an interview last year, adding, “I think the person I am today would really be an asset out there.” Eight of Newsom’s pardons were granted to people who would otherwise be at risk of deportation due to their convictions. The governor also pardoned people convicted of cannabis-related offenses. Some of the incarcerated people granted commutations, which reduce their sentences, were teenagers when they were convicted, including one who was 15 years old at the time of his arrest, the governor said. Newsom is again facing pressure to reduce the prison population and issue more commutations and releases as Omicron wreaks havoc across the prison system, and as only 69% of prison workers report being fully vaccinated. At some prisons, fewer than half of staff are fully vaccinated. • This article was amended on 13 January 2022 to correctly refer to “her” rather “his” in relation to Rory Kennedy.A declining number of Taiwanese people fear an imminent war with China, according to a new poll suggesting the rest of the world is far more worried than those at the centre of this potential geopolitical flashpoint. According to the poll, published on Thursday by Taiwan’s Commonwealth Magazine, 35.4% of respondents said they were worried about a military conflict breaking out over the Taiwan Strait within the next year, a decrease of nearly 15 percentage points on last year’s survey. The survey also found 59.7% of people do not think Beijing will ultimately use force to take Taiwan, while more than 35% believed it would. Beijing considers Taiwan to be a breakaway province of China and has pledged to take it by force if necessary. Some analysts see Xi Jinping’s “reunification” pledge as a key goal of his legacy, but the current democratically elected government in Taipei says the island is already a de-facto independent nation. In the year between the Commonwealth Magazine annual polls, China has markedly increased its rhetoric and actual intimidation of Taiwan, with record numbers of air force flights – part of Beijing’s warfare-adjacent “grey-zone” activity – into Taiwan’s air defence identification zone. The survey results also showed high levels of trust in the US coming to Taiwan’s aid in the event of hostilities, with 54% of respondents saying they thought the US military could effectively protect Taiwan. Separately, 58.8% said it was a possibility that the US would send troops to help Taiwan in the event of war. The US sells billions of dollars in weaponry of a defensive character to Taiwan. Washington officials have also made statements suggesting it was likely to come to Taiwan’s aid militarily in case of conflict. For decades the US has operated a policy of strategic ambiguity, neither confirming nor rejecting commitments to help, in order to deter provocative action by both Beijing and Taipei. Alexander Huang, the director of the opposition Kuomintang’s (KMT) international affairs department, suggested the results showed Taiwanese people were in denial of the reality. “China’s military threat is a fact Taiwanese are not willing to confront because it would incur real costs,” he told Commonwealth magazine. Huang Kwei-bo, a professor of diplomacy at the National Chengchi University and former KMT deputy director, told the Guardian Taiwanese were perhaps not aware of the reality, due to a lack of specific military knowledge, and political messaging that the US would come to Taiwan’s aid. “I think they have illusion about our capability and the US commitment to help Taiwan,” he said. Confidence in US assistance varied according to age, Commonwealth Magazine reported, with those under 40 holding a more favourable view of the US. Those older believed China was stronger than the US and were thus more concerned about the prospect of war. Marcin Jerzewski, a research fellow at Taiwan thinktank NextGen Foundation, said it was important to also recognise that Taiwan had made “considerable efforts to diversify its international relations”. “Consequently, while the Taiwanese public believes that the US would come to its rescue if need be, [it] is also seeking to mitigate the risks from putting all its eggs in one basket.” Various polls over recent years have measured Taiwan’s level or lack of fear over an attack or invasion, and countless opinions have sought to explain the findings. In May 2021 a survey of 1,000 residents found more than 57% did worry that war was a distinct possibility, shared across party lines and age demographics. Taipei-based Seton Hall University law professor Margaret Lewis said polls were dependent on the wording of the question, and particular local nuances and interpretations.“[But] a crucial question for Taiwan is how to build preparedness and resilience,” she said. “How do you find that sweet spot of having people clear-eyed about threats and diligently preparing to be resilient in the face of those threats should they actually occur? You want them to be prepared but also go about their lives.” As China’s military capabilities grow and its government becomes more isolated on the world stage, there is growing international concern of an attack or invasion attempt. Last year Taiwan’s defence minister said he believed China’s military would be fully capable by 2025. Other analysts are more circumspect, suggesting any potential attempt is much further away, but there is general consensus that the risk to Taiwan now is higher than in decades, particularly with more grey-zone military activity which has the potential to escalate. Huang Kwei-bo said he was “not as optimistic” as the 60% who did not fear imminent war, but did not think there was a high risk. “The probability of [a] war, I think, is low except those moments when our aircraft and PLA [People’s Liberation Army] aircraft approach each other,” he said. “During those 10 or 15 minutes the probability of war rises.”That’s it from me, Samantha Lock, for today’s Covid blog. Please join me on our latest live feed here where I’ll be focusing a little more on the coronavirus crisis across Asia, Australia and the Pacific. You can also keep up with the top headlines here. Here are the latest developments from across the world surrounding the coronavirus crisis: UK prime minister Boris Johnson is fighting for his political future after he belatedly apologised for attending a party during the coronavirus lockdown. Novak Djokovic’s deportation decision looms as Australian immigration minister Alex Hawke must decide whether to revoke his visa for a second time and throw him out of the country. France eases ban on UK allowing vaccinated people from Britain to visit from Friday providing they have a negative test, after the French authorities say they will ease curbs introduced last month due to the Omicron Covid variant. US president Joe Biden says the government will double its purchase of Covid-19 tests to one billion. Finland’s health authorities cut the recommended quarantine period for Covid-19 patients by up to half, as infections hit record levels. French teachers went on strike, with the biggest teachers’ union saying half of primary schools were closed as staff demand clarity from the government on coronavirus measures. Hungary says it will offer a fourth coronavirus vaccine dose to citizens. Spain agrees to cap the cost of Covid self-testing antigen kits at just under three euros and will make a fourth vaccine dose available to vulnerable citizens, including cancer patients. Greece’s government announces a 100-euro ($114) monthly fine on persons aged over 60 who refuse the anti-Covid vaccine. Poorer countries refused to take around 100m donated Covid-19 vaccine doses in December alone, chiefly due to their short shelf life, the United Nations says. Norway is to allow bars and restaurants to serve alcohol again from Friday, but only as part of table service and until 11pm. The most deprived state schools in England have been hit much harder by staff absence with Covid, compared with those in better-off areas or private schools, according to a new survey of classroom teachers. The TeacherTapp daily online survey of teachers found that 29% of those working in schools with high numbers of pupils from deprived backgrounds said at least one in 10 of their colleagues were off or isolating with Covid. The survey done on 7 January revealed that nearly a third of all teachers said between 5% and 10% of their colleagues were off, across both primary and secondary schools. Read the full story here. US president Joe Biden has said he will send more military health workers to hospitals in six US states and provide free masks and more free tests to help Americans tackle the fast-spreading Omicron variant. He announced the phased dispatch of 1,000 military health personnel beginning next week as US Covid-19 hospitalisations hit a record high and health facilities faced a staffing crunch. “I know we’re all frustrated as we enter this new year,” Biden said, reiterating his message that Covid-19 remains a “pandemic of the unvaccinated.” He said the military deployment would help hard-pressed hospitals nationwide. A day after dismissing the need for more restrictive measures to combat the coronavirus, the premier in the Canadian province of Saskatchewan has tested positive for Covid-19. “I’m feeling fine, but will be self-isolating and working from home for the next five days,” wrote Scott Moe on Twitter, alongside an image of a positive antigen test. The news came just a day after the province announced it has no plans to restrict gatherings even while the highly-transmissible Omicron variant continues its rapid spread. Read the full story here. Samantha Lock back with you on the blog as my colleague Harry Taylor calls it a night in London. I’ll be bringing you all the latest Covid news from Sydney. Here’s a quick snapshot of how Covid is unfolding across Australia. The state of NSW has recorded 29 Covid deaths and 63,018 cases with 2,525 Covid cases in hospital. Victoria reported 18 deaths and 34,836 cases with 3,500 in hospital. The federal government is also expected to rule on Novak Djokovic’s visa today. Wales could lift some Covid restrictions by the end of January. Limits are currently in place for the number of people who can attend sporting matches, and other curbs are in place on hospitality businesses. First minister Mark Drakeford will set out a two-week plan on Friday to ease restrictions that kicked in on Boxing Day. Covid curfews in Quebec, Canada will be lifted from Monday, the province’s premier has said. François Legault said the order could be ended because officials estimated hospitalisations would peak in the next few days. A 10pm to 5am curfew was reimposed on 31 December after being used for five months between January and May 2021. “The wave of hospitalization is expected to peak in the coming days. We’re going in the right direction but we have to remain very careful,” Legault said, according to AP reports. He also announced that the province’s vaccine passport would be extended to big box retail stores, except for grocery stores and pharmacies. Legault has previously said adult residents who refuse to get vaccinated should be charged a financial penalty. Earlier on Thursday, Quebec reported 45 more deaths and a rise of 117 coronavirus-related hospitalisations. A French court has suspended an order that makes masks wearing on Paris streets compulsory. The mandate, imposed by the Paris prefecture, the local arm of the interior ministry, had been in place since 31 December to curb Omicron cases. The ruling by the Paris Administrative Tribunal comes a day after another court in Versailles, near Paris, suspended a similar order in the Yvelines region, according to Reuters. The greater Paris region is France’s Omicron hotspot, although the variant is running rampant nationwide. Data showed an incidence rate of 3,899 infections per 100,000 residents over the past seven days. The Omicron variant of Covid-19 has become the dominant variant in Germany, according to its Robert Koch Institute for infectious diseases. In its weekly report, released on Thursday, it said it accounted for 73.3% of cases compared with 44.3% seven days ago. Delta, which was for a long time the more prevalent variant of the virus, now accounted for just 25.9% of cases, the RKI said, according to Reuters. “In the coming weeks we expect a strong increase in infections with the Omicron variant,” the report said. “First studies point to a lower share of hospitalizations in those who are fully vaccinated compared to infections with the Delta variant.” Around 72% of the population in Germany was now double vaccinated and 44% have had a booster shot, it said. On Thursday it reported a new record amount of daily cases, 80,430 and another 384 deaths. A fourth Covid-19 vaccine dose will be offered to vulnerable citizens in Spain, AFP reports. Those included are people with cancer, those who have had a transplant or are receiving dialysis, the health ministry said on Thursday. The latest dose will only be given five months after a third dose. For the population at large, a third dose will be available for people aged 18 and over. It is currently only available to those over 40. The time between doses will be cut from six months to five months. More than 90% of people in the country aged 12 and over have had two doses. The country has had 90,508 deaths and 7.7 million cases during the pandemic. Joe Biden will double the number of rapid Covid-19 tests to be distributed free to Americans, as well as N95 masks, as he redoubles efforts to stop an increase in Covid infections in the US. He announced that starting next month, 1,000 members of the armed forces will begin deploying across the country to help hospitals and medical clinics facing staff shortages due to Omicron. He said six additional military teams will be sent to Michigan, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Ohio and Rhode Island. Many medical facilities are struggling because of people isolating at home. The president also encouraged people to get vaccinated. Kits will be available from next week, with a new website being set up where people can request the free tests. London’s Metropolitan police will not investigate alleged parties held at Downing Street in apparent breach of lockdown rules unless an upcoming inquiry finds evidence of criminality. The force said it did not normally investigate breaches of coronavirus regulations “long after they are said to have taken place”. The senior civil servant Sue Gray is investigating allegations of parties held at Downing Street while the UK was in lockdown due to Covid-19. The force added that if this showed criminality took place then the police force would “reconsider” its stance. On Wednesday, the prime minister, Boris Johnson, admitted attending a gathering at 10 Downing Street on 20 May 2020, during the height of the first UK lockdown. An estimated 100 people were invited, with about 30 believed to have attended. Johnson said he was there for 25 minutes. Teachers in France went on strike on Thursday, as staff demanded clarity from the government over Covid measures. Half of primary schools were closed as tens of thousands took to the streets with the interior ministry saying nearly 78,000 teachers and other school staff protested nationally. Unions claim that teachers are not able to teach properly, are not adequately protected against infection and hear about changes to health precautions from the media rather than education bosses. “The government announces things, but no-one thinks about what it means for staff on the ground,” Olivier Flipo, the head of a Paris school, told AFP this week. The incoming government in the Czech Republic said that Covid was one of its priorities as it took power on Thursday. Peter Fiala, a 57-year-old, heads a government of five parties with a slim majority in its 200-seat parliament. He said the pandemic, along with rising energy costs and inflation would be a focus according to AFP. “Our citizens are no doubt facing the most difficult year since our country gained independence [in 1993], but we are ready to tackle the situation and handle it well,” the prime minister said. Teachers are being faced with half-empty classrooms in the US as pupils are off due to having Covid or their parents being concerned about infection. Associated Press reports: “This is really taking a toll on the learning. If you have three kids in your class one day and you’re supposed to have 12, you have to reteach everything two weeks later when those kids come back,” said Tabatha Rosproy, a teacher in Kansas, and the 2020 national Teacher of the Year. Some of the country’s biggest school systems report absentee rates around 20% or slightly more, with some individual schools seeing far higher percentages of missing students. In Seattle, attendance has averaged 81% since the return from winter break. Los Angeles schools marked about 30% of the district’s 600,000-plus students absent on Tuesday, the first day back after the break. Adnan Bhuiyan, 17, has at times been one of seven or eight students in classes that normally have 30 at the Bronx Latin School in New York. “Part of me was like, why are we sitting here doing nothing the whole day. Why can’t we just stay home” and learn remotely, he said. “The other part of me knows that the mayor wants to keep the school open for certain reasons, and I can understand that. But the more and more we went through it, I just kept thinking at this point it’s a waste of time for everyone because we’re not learning anything.” Greece’s public health organisation, EODY, announced 20,409 coronavirus cases this evening and 80 deaths, a reduction of almost 4,000 infections since Wednesday. Although by far the most cases are in Athens’ greater region of Attica, it is in northern Greece, where most anti-vaxxers reside, that authorities have rushed to reinforce the health system. With resources increasingly under strain in the region, the government ordered private sector physicians to weigh in earlier on Thursday. The state-run news agency, AMNA, reported lung specialists and GPs being mobilised to provide services at hospitals, saying a total of 90 doctors had been ordered to help out. Of the 664 patients on life support, more than 83% (554) were either partially vaccinated or not vaccinated at all, according to EODY. The 11-million strong nation has registered a total of 21,732 Covid-related fatalities since the start of the pandemic and 1,612,869 cases in total, according to the health body. The decline in cases in recent days has sparked cautious optimism among Greek epidemiologists, although health experts say the coming weeks are key. In a single day last week, officials registered a record 50,126 new Covid infections. Yesterday the Greek government extended restrictions by a week at restaurants and bars in an attempt to stem the spread of the Omicron variant, now dominant nationwide. In place since 30 December, the curbs have forced the entire hospitality sector to close by midnight and have banned music and customers from standing in bars. The Metropolitan police will not investigate gatherings held at Downing Street yet, despite the prime minister’s apology to the country for attending the garden event during the first lockdown in May 2020. In a statement posted on Twitter, Scotland Yard indicated it would wait until the conclusion of the Cabinet Office inquiry into all the partygate allegations, led by Sue Gray, before deciding whether to launch a criminal investigation. The Mirror has more on this story. Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today: The UK reported 109,133 new cases and a further 335 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data from the UK government’s coronavirus dashboard. That is down from 129,587 infections on Wednesday and almost 24% lower over the last 7 days compared to the week before, and compares to 398 fatalities reported on Wednesday. The French health minister, Olivier Véran, is self-isolating after testing positive for Covid-19. A health ministry spokesperson told AFP that Véran showed “mild symptoms”, adding that he had been vaccinated three times. “He will go into isolation and continue to work from his private quarters in the ministry,” they said. Finland’s health authorities cut the recommended quarantine period for Covid-positive people by up to half, as the prime minister faced criticism for stepping back from virus policy as infections hit record levels. The current 10-day quarantine period will in most cases be cut to five days, with people suffering symptoms advised to stay at home without seeking a laboratory test, public health body THL said. The change was in response to testing services becoming overwhelmed in many places, with home-testing kits also widely selling out due to the surging infections. [see 4.03pm.]. Covid restrictions in the Netherlands will begin to be eased from Saturday despite a wave of new infections due to the Omicron variant, Dutch media reported. Non-essential stores, hairdressers and gyms will be allowed to reopen for a limited number of customers, broadcasters NOS and RTL said, citing government sources. Students will be welcomed back to their colleges and universities. Bars, restaurants, theatres, museums and other public places will remain closed. The government will decide formally on the changes on Friday. The UK health secretary, Sajid Javid, confirmed that the minimum time people with Covid in England have to spend in self-isolation is to be cut to five full days. From Monday, people will be able to leave isolation on day six if they tested negative on days five and six, Javid told the Commons. Javid was updating MPs on Thursday, a day after Boris Johnson said a decision would be made on the issue “as fast as possible”. The government has been under pressure to bring the situation in England into line with the US, where the isolation period has been cut to five days. Story here. Senegal authorised Covid vaccines for children over 12 and booster shots for adults. The booster dose will initially be aimed at people identified as vulnerable to severe illness. [see 2.38pm.]. Rapid expiration dates and a lack of storage facilities left lower-income countries with no choice but to reject more than 100m vital doses of Covid vaccines distributed by the global Covax scheme last month, a Unicef official said. “More than a 100 million have been rejected just in December alone,” Etleva Kadilli, director of supply division at the UN agency, told lawmakers at the European parliament. The main reason for rejection was the delivery of doses with a short shelf-life, she said. Countries have also been forced to delay supplies because they are unable to store them properly, said Kadilli, citing a lack of fridges for vaccines. Unicef’s data on supplies and use of delivered vaccines show that 681m shipped doses are currently unused in about 90 lower-income nations across the world, according to Care, a charity, which extracted the figures from a public database. Germany’s Standing Committee on Vaccination (STIKO) recommended that all children between the ages of 12 and 17 receive a Covid booster shot, even though the EU’s drugs regulator has not given approval for this age group. The move makes Germany one of the first countries in the world to make the recommendation, with the United States, Israel and Hungary among the handful of countries to have already done so. The committee said that the third dose should be an mRNA shot from BioNTech/Pfizer and should be given at the earliest three months after the child had their second shot. [see 1.57pm.]. Hungary is to make a fourth Covid shot available to people who ask for it, after a consultation with a doctor, prime minister Viktor Orbán’s chief of staff, Gergely Gulyás, announced. The government has also decided to shorten the required quarantine period to 7 days from 10 days, Gulyás said, adding that people can leave quarantine after 5 days with a negative Covid test. [see 11.54am.]. There have been precious few positives during the Covid pandemic but British academics may have unearthed one: people look more attractive in protective masks. Researchers at Cardiff University were surprised to find that both men and women were judged to look better with a face covering obscuring the lower half of their faces. In what may be a blow for producers of fashionable coverings – and the environment – they also discovered that a face covered with a disposable-type surgical mask was likely to be deemed the most appealing. Dr Michael Lewis, a reader from Cardiff University’s school of psychology and an expert in faces, said research carried out before the pandemic had found that medical face masks reduced attractiveness because they were associated with disease or illness. “We wanted to test whether this had changed since face coverings became ubiquitous and understand whether the type of mask had any effect,” he said. “Our study suggests faces are considered most attractive when covered by medical face masks. This may be because we’re used to healthcare workers wearing blue masks and now we associate these with people in caring or medical professions. At a time when we feel vulnerable, we may find the wearing of medical masks reassuring and so feel more positive towards the wearer.” Get the full story here: Face masks make people look more attractive, study finds Boris Johnson is unlikely to be seen in public for the next week after a member of his immediate family tested positive for Covid, Downing Street has said. While self-isolation for contacts of coronavirus cases is no longer mandatory, Johnson’s spokesman said the prime minister would heed guidance to limit outside contacts as much as possible for seven days after the test. The spokesman declined to say whether it was Johnson’s wife, Carrie, or one of the couple’s two young children who had tested positive, saying only that it was an immediate family member with whom the PM lived. The period stuck inside No 10 comes at an arguably fortuitous time for Johnson, who faces intense scrutiny over his attendance at a social event in the No 10 garden during the first lockdown in May 2020. Here is the full story: Boris Johnson unlikely to be seen in public for a week, says Downing St The French health minister, Olivier Véran, is self-isolating after testing positive for Covid-19, he wrote on Twitter on Thursday. A health ministry spokesperson told AFP that Véran showed “mild symptoms,” adding that he had been vaccinated three times. They added: He will go into isolation and continue to work from his private quarters in the ministry. It comes as France registered its highest ever single-day tally of Covid cases on Tuesday, with 368,149 new infections recorded, and 361,719 new cases on Wednesday. A further 109,133 lab-confirmed Covid cases have been recorded in the UK as of 9am on Thursday, according to the latest data from the UK government’s coronavirus dashboard. That is down from 129,587 on Wednesday and almost 24% lower over the last 7 days compared to the week before. A further 335 people had died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19, bringing the government tally to 151,342. That is compared to 398 fatalities reported on Wednesday. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have been 176,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. Finland’s health authorities cut the recommended quarantine period for Covid-positive people by up to half on Thursday, as the prime minister faced criticism for stepping back from virus policy as infections hit record levels, Reuters reports. The current 10-day quarantine period will in most cases be cut to five days, with people suffering symptoms advised to stay at home without seeking a laboratory test, public health body THL said. The change was in response to testing services becoming overwhelmed in many places, with home-testing kits also widely selling out due to the surging infections. “The dynamics of infection are faster with the Omicron variant,” THL senior physician Otto Helve told a press conference. The change comes after the prime minister, Sanna Marin, came under fire for announcing late last week that she was stepping back from coronavirus policy, delegating decision-making to a group of ministers headed by the health minister, Krista Kiuru. “I have to make sure I also have time for other issues,” Marin told newspaper Helsingin Sanomat. On Tuesday, the prime minister’s move drew criticism from her principal coalition partner, finance minister Annika Saarikko. “I would be so bold as to say that at the moment the corona situation is the largest and most complicated of society’s problems with an impact on many things,” Saarikko told the Uutissuomalainen newspaper. The Nordic nation of 5.5 million has maintained some of the EU’s lowest incidence rates throughout the pandemic. But infections have surged by 105,000 over the last fortnight, nearly a third of its 360,000 total cases recorded since the start of the pandemic. On Thursday, health ministry officials called on the public to regularly use home-testing kits if they suspect infection or exposure. But at four to six euros per test, costs for users could quickly mount up, while tests have been widely sold out in recent weeks. Last week, Kiuru recommended twice-weekly testing for all schoolchildren, prompting the head of the country’s National Security Supply Agency to warn that procuring that number of tests would take “many weeks”. Covid restrictions in the Netherlands will begin to be eased from Saturday despite a wave of new infections due to the Omicron variant, Dutch media reported on Thursday. Non-essential stores, hairdressers and gyms will be allowed to reopen for a limited number of customers, broadcasters NOS and RTL said, citing government sources. Students will be welcomed back to their colleges and universities. Bars, restaurants, theatres, museums and other public places will remain closed. The government will decide formally on the changes on Friday. Public places, except essential stores, have been shut since mid-December as hospitals struggled to deal with a wave of patients with Covid, driven by the Delta variant. Hospital numbers have since improved, but are expected to rise again in the coming weeks. New infections have jumped to record levels since Omicron became the dominant variant. The improved situation in hospitals increased pressure on the government to ease restrictions, especially from shopkeepers in areas close to the German and Belgian borders, who said customers now went abroad for their shopping. Local authorities in the south and east of the Netherlands this week said they would not intervene if shops chose to ignore orders to close. With Omicron cases leading to more hospital admissions and staff sickness in England, my colleague Clea Skopeliti has spoken to five NHS workers about the pressures they are under, including understaffing, waiting times and bed-blocking. Here is the moment the UK health secretary, Sajid Javid, confirmed that the minimum time people with Covid in England have to spend in self-isolation is to be cut to five full days. From Monday, people will be able to leave isolation on day six if they tested negative on days five and six, Javid told the Commons. Later, in a heated exchange with Javid, the shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, said Boris Johnson was not fit to lick the boots of NHS staff. Senegal has authorised Covid vaccines for children over 12 and booster shots for adults, Reuters reports. The booster dose will initially be aimed at people identified as vulnerable to severe illness, the health ministry said in a Twitter post on Thursday that included a ministry letter dated 11 January. After struggling with lack of access to vaccines at the beginning of the global rollout, Senegal, like many countries across Africa, has had additional problems in recent months getting shots into arms. Factors including vaccine hesitancy and logistical problems have resulted in hundreds of thousands of doses expiring without being used late last year. So far the country has fully vaccinated about 8% of its 17 million population, according to health ministry figures. It has seen a surge in Covid cases since late December, after the highly contagious Omicron variant was detected. A handful of other countries on the continent, including Guinea, Namibia and South Africa, have already started vaccinating children 12 and up. The Omicron-fuelled fourth wave is flattening on most of the continent, but North and West Africa are still experiencing a rise in cases, the World Health Organization said on Thursday. Senegal has officially reported more than 81,000 Covid cases and 1,903 deaths since the pandemic began. Rapid expiration dates and a lack of storage facilities left lower-income countries with no choice but to reject more than 100m vital doses of Covid vaccines distributed by the global Covax scheme last month, a Unicef official has said. “More than a 100 million have been rejected just in December alone,” Etleva Kadilli, director of Supply Division at UN agency Unicef told lawmakers at the European Parliament. The main reason for rejection was the delivery of doses with a short shelf-life, she said. Countries have also been forced to delay supplies because they are unable to store them properly, said Kadilli, citing a lack of fridges for vaccines. Unicef’s data on supplies and use of delivered vaccines show that 681m shipped doses are currently unused in about 90 lower-income nations across the world, according to CARE, a charity, which extracted the figures from a public database. More than 30 countries including the Democratic Republic of Congo and Nigeria, have so far used fewer than half of the doses they have received, CARE said, citing Unicef data. Germany’s Standing Committee on Vaccination (STIKO) has recommended that all children between the ages of 12 and 17 receive a Covid booster shot, even though the EU’s drugs regulator has not given approval for this age group, Reuters reports. The move makes Germany one of the first countries in the world to make the recommendation, with the United States, Israel and Hungary among the handful of countries to have already done so. The committee said that the third dose should be an mRNA shot from BioNTech/Pfizer and should be given at the earliest three months after the child had their second shot. “The current situation, with a sharp increase in the number of cases due to the Omicron variant and the feared consequences for the health system in Germany, makes it necessary to extend the vaccination campaign,” said STIKO in a statement. While data on the effectiveness and safety of the booster vaccination for 12- to 17-year-olds was still limited, the risk of severe side effects was estimated to be very low, it added. As the European Medicines Agency (EMA) has not given regulatory approval, Germany would be responsible for any liabilities linked to the booster for this age group. The EMA said this week it was reviewing whether to extend the booster approval for Pfizer shots to adolescents aged 16 and 17, and expected drugmakers to apply for the 12-15 age group as well. Germany, struggling to slow the spread of the Omicron variant that a week ago accounted for about 44% of coronavirus infections, reported a record 81,417 daily cases on Thursday, bringing the seven-day incidence to 427.7 per 100,000 residents. More than 115,000 people have died with Covid and some 45.1% of the population has received a booster. The health minister, Karl Lauterbach, welcomed the move from STIKO, which has in the past drawn criticism for hesitating in making such recommendations. “These are important assessments with current everyday relevance. It’s a good thing that the vaccination commission reacted so quickly,” he said. Covid cases in Sweden could peak by the end of the month amid the rise in Omicron infections, said the country’s health agency. Sweden could see a substantial increase in coronavirus cases for two more weeks, with a peak at the end of January, Reuters reports. The health agency gave a statement today: The calculations in the health agency’s updated scenarios show a massively increasing infection spread for another two weeks, with a peak at the end of January. It added the worst-case scenario would see around 69,000 daily cases at the peak. A record 60,000 cases were detected last week, despite limited testing capabilities. This week, the country introduced more measures to curb the nationwide surge in cases that have piled pressure on the healthcare system. The latest restrictions include a work from home mandate, where possible, and a cap on the number of people allowed at large public events. The health agency’s previous scenarios, from 21 December, said Sweden could, in a worst-case scenario, see more than 15,000 new Covid-19 cases per day with a peak in mid-January. The Northern Ireland secretary, Brandon Lewis, has insisted the prime minister was “very, very sincere” when he apologised for attending an alcohol-fuelled gathering in the Downing Street garden, but did not believe he had broken the rules. Boris Johnson told MPs on Wednesday he thought he was at a “work event” when he dropped into what his own principal private secretary had called “socially distanced drinks”. Lewis told Sky News: The prime minister has outlined that he doesn’t believe that he has done anything outside the rules. If you look at what the investigation finds, people will be able to take their own view of that at the time. Johnson’s apology failed to assuage the concerns of many Conservatives, with the Scottish Tory leader, Douglas Ross, and the senior backbencher William Wragg calling for him to resign. My colleagues Caroline Davies and Heather Stewart report: Boris Johnson does not believe he broke Covid rules at party, says minister Air travel in the US remains rocky as Delta Air Lines announced a loss of $408m (£297m) in the fourth quarter of 2021 and one in ten of its workforce have been infected with Covid, reports AP. The major US carrier pointed to the Omicron surge late last year as the cause of the slump, and predicted on Thursday that it will suffer one more quarterly loss before travel perks up in spring and summer. Delta’s fourth-quarter loss compared with a profit of $1.1bn in the same quarter before the pandemic. As AP reports: Cancellations have dropped sharply in the past few days, but the spate of spiked flights cost the airline $75 million and the latest outbreak, caused by the omicron variant of the virus, is expected to push the industry’s recovery back by two months. CEO Ed Bastian said 8,000 employees (of about 74,000) have contracted Covid-19 over the last four weeks. Sick workers and winter storms have led to more than 2,200 cancelled flights since 24 December. “I don’t think we’re going to see a pickup in bookings or travel during January and probably the first part of February,” Bastian said in an interview. “It’s always the weakest part of the year, and it’s going to be that much weaker because of omicron. We need confidence in travel returning once the virus recedes.” As things have opened up in the US, the travel industry is having to confront new obstacles. AP’s David Koenig continues: Earlier this week, United Airlines CEO Scott Kirby sent a letter to employees saying that 3,000 employees had tested positive for COVID-19. On a single day at Newark, nearly a third of United’s staff called out sick and the airline has cut back on scheduled flights systemwide. Costs other than fuel will jump about 15% from 2019, and jet fuel is getting pricier too. The Omicron surge wreaked havoc on holiday travel – airlines cancelled more than 12,000 flights between Christmas Eve and New Year’s Day, and New York City suspended several subway lines due to staffing issues. The period of self-isolation for those who test positive is being reduced to five full days in England from Monday, health secretary Sajid Javid has announced. The change effectively shaves a day off the current rules as people will be required to isolate for five full days and be freed after negative lateral flow tests on days five and six. Javid said the move aims to “maximise activity in the economy and education” while also minimising the risk of infection from people leaving isolation. The health secretary said reducing the isolation time would help workplaces cope with staffing shortages, including the NHS. The announcement means England’s isolation period is now in line with the US, with the exception of the negative test. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention made the move in December to halve the isolation time to five days for people with asymptomatic Covid. Hello from London, I’m Georgina Quach – here to continue our live Covid coverage while Lucy Campbell dips out for a bit. Please get in touch with thoughts and comments, by emailing georgina.quach@theguardian.com or tweeting me @georginaquach. Sajid Javid, the UK health secretary is expected to confirm that the time Covid cases have to spend in self-isolation is to be cut, PA Media reports. Javid is currently updating MPs in the Commons, a day after Boris Johnson said a decision would be made on the issue “as fast as possible”. The government has been under pressure to bring the situation in England into line with the United States, where the isolation period has been cut to five days. The current UK Health Security Agency guidance is for cases to isolate for at least six full days from the point at which they have symptoms or get a positive test, whichever is first, with release from self-isolation after two negative lateral flow test results on days six and seven. People can leave self-isolation on day seven. The changes are expected to see people being allowed to leave self-isolation after completing five full days, with negative tests on days five and six. My colleague Andrew Sparrow is covering Javid’s statement over on the UK politics live blog: Hungary is to make a fourth Covid shot available to people who ask for it, after a consultation with a doctor, prime minister Viktor Orbán’s chief of staff, Gergely Gulyás, Reuters reports. Gulyás made the announcement just as the country of 10 million expects a substantial further increase in Covid cases over the coming weeks due to the rapid spread of the Omicron variant. “Anyone can get a fourth Covid-19 shot based on a consultation with a doctor, the [government] decree about this will be published this week,” Gulyás told a news conference on Thursday. On Wednesday, Denmark said it would offer a fourth coronavirus jab to the most vulnerable citizens. The European Union’s drug regulator has expressed doubts about the need for a fourth dose and said there was no data to support this approach as it seeks more information on the fast-spreading variant. Chile and Israel have already begun a rollout. Gulyás said the number of daily new infections would likely hit all-time peaks, adding however that the government did not expect a similar increase in hospitalisations and deaths. In Hungary, there are practically no restrictions in place and schools are operating as normal. Mask-wearing is mandatory in indoor places and on public transport. Hungary’s daily tally of new Covid infections rose to 9,216 on Thursday from 7,883 on Wednesday, but the number of patients treated in hospital declined. In Hungary 40,164 people have died of Covid. There are currently 2,647 patients in hospital with Covid, including 249 on ventilators. The government has also decided to shorten the required quarantine period to 7 days from 10 days, Gulyás said, adding that people can leave quarantine after 5 days with a negative Covid test. Other EU countries including Ireland, Spain, Portugal and Greece, as well as others like the US and UK, have made similar moves in cutting isolation times amid fears of staff shortages in key sectors. The World Health Organization, however, continues to recommend that people who test positive for Covid should isolate for 14 days. Just over six million Hungarians have received at least two shots, and 3.3 million have also received a third booster, but the country’s vaccination rate still lags most western European levels. Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd has said that transfer and transit services at Hong Kong International Airport will be banned to passengers coming from places deemed at high Covid risk from midnight on 16 January until 15 February, Reuters reports. Those high-risk places include the US, the UK, Australia, Canada, France, Germany and Japan. Passengers on flights arriving from cities in the Chinese mainland and Taiwan may continue to connect to onward flights, the airline said in a statement on its website, saying the measure is in response to the rising number of Omicron cases around the world. It comes after the airline hit back at Hong Kong’s leader, Carrie Lam, on Thursday after it was blamed for the city’s first Omicron outbreak, even as her government battles a scandal over a birthday party which saw senior officials and legislators sent into Covid quarantine. Lam has ordered an investigation into Cathay in connection with crew violating pandemic regulations and warned on Tuesday that the city’s flag carrier could face legal action. In a video to staff released on Tuesday, Cathay’s chair, Patrick Healy, said the “non-compliance of this tiny minority should not be allowed to overshadow the remarkable discipline and professionalism of the overwhelming majority of Cathay Pacific crew over so many months”. The FT (paywall) has that story. Africa’s top public health body is in talks with Pfizer about bringing in supplies of its antiviral Paxlovid treatment pills for Covid-19 to the continent, Reuters reports. Paxlovid was nearly 90% effective in preventing hospitalisations and deaths, and data suggested it retains its effectiveness against Omicron, Pfizer has said. “We are in really close discussions with Pfizer to see what can be done to make the drugs available on the continent and accessible on the continent, that is the Paxlovid drugs,” said John Nkengasong, director of the Africa Centres for Disease Control. Governments around the world are scrambling to buy Paxlovid, while Merck’s Molnupiravir has faced setbacks after disappointing trial data. Nkengasong said that obtaining supplies of Covid drugs was one of three key strategies for combating the pandemic in Africa in 2022, along with scaling up vaccinations and expanding testing. Drugs for treating Covid would be crucial in the eventuality of another highly transmissible variant emerging and public health systems becoming overwhelmed, he said. “The only way to relieve that will be if we have drugs like Paxlovid where people can take that drug and stay home and get relief, and that way the burden and the constraints on the health system will be limited,” Nkengasong told an online news briefing. “That’s why we are working on those three things this year very, very actively.” The continent has officially recorded just over 10 million cases of Covid-19 since the start of the pandemic, although the real number is likely much higher due to patchy testing. Several African countries are going through fourth or fifth waves of infections. Nkengasong said just 10% of Africans were fully vaccinated. South Korea will begin treating patients with Covid with Paxlovid on Friday, the first Asian country to do so. Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ France will lift its ban on UK holidaymakers from Friday morning, the country’s tourism minister, Jean-Baptiste Lemoyne, has announced. The requirement to isolate on arrival in France will also be scrapped. Teachers in France are on strike in protest at the imposition of Covid measures on the education sector. Unions have said they expect many schools to be closed for the day and large numbers of teachers - including about 75% in primary schools and 62% in high schools - to join the one-day strike. In the UK, prime minister Boris Johnson has pulled out of a first public appearance since offering a qualified apology in parliament for attending a lockdown party at Downing Street, having previously told parliament he had no knowledge of there being any parties at Number 10 at all. A statement said a Johnson “family member” had tested positive for Covid, leading to the prime minister ducking out of visiting Lancashire. Labour’s Lisa Nandy has said she thinks it is “insulting to the country” that Johnson continues to hold office. The deputy chief medical officer who has been at Johnson’s side in many Covid TV briefings, Jonathan Van-Tam, is to step down from his role at the end of March. Hungary has experienced another steep rise in daily confirmed Covid cases – up to 9,216 on Thursday from 7,883 reported on Wednesday. The government has said it expects a substantial further increase in Covid-19 cases over the coming weeks due to the rapid spread of the Omicron variant. Germany has broken a new daily Covid record for the second day in a row . Chancellor Olaf Scholz has argued Covid vaccinations should be mandatory for all adults. New Covid-19 infections in cities in India such as capital New Delhi and Mumbai could peak next week after rising rapidly, experts said, as the country reported the highest number of daily cases since late May. Two hospitals in China’s locked-down city of Xi’an, including one that refused to treat an eight-month pregnant woman who later miscarried, have been closed for three months while they “rectify” mistakes, authorities said. Beijing has begun operating its “closed loop” that will isolate athletes and delegates at the forthcoming Winter Olympics from the rest of the country. The Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) said it expects omicron to become the predominant coronavirus variant in the Americas in the coming weeks, where confirmed cases have reached record levels. Novak Djokovic has been confirmed in the official draw for the Australian Open, despite uncertainty over whether the government will cancel his visa for a second time. Djokovic could face a fine or even prison in Serbia after his admission that he broke isolation while he had Covid last month, lawyers have said, as the Serbian prime minister warned his behaviour appeared to be “a clear breach” of the rules. Andrew Sparrow is on live blog duties for another busy day of UK Covid politics. Lucy Campbell will be here shortly to carry on with our global coronavirus coverage for you. And I’m off to host our Thursday quiz. I will see you here tomorrow. “We had reached such a level of exasperation, tiredness, and anger that we didn’t have any other option but to organise a strike to send a strong message to the government,” said Elisabeth Allain-Moreno, national secretary of the SE-UNSA teachers union in France, where teachers are on strike today. Unions have said they expect many schools to be closed for the day and large numbers of teachers - including about 75% in primary schools and 62% in high schools - to join the one-day strike. Unions representing school directors, inspectors and other staff have also joined the strike. Schools in Paris and beyond offered a mixed picture on Thursday morning, with some entirely closed because of the strike, some partly open, others operating normally. Some were open only for children of health workers. Mirlene Pouvin, whose child is in a high school where some teachers were on strike and others present, told Reuters she sympathised with those who walked off the job. “I understand them, because the (Covid) protocol is impossible to apply - whether it’s in schools or in hospitals. I hold no grudge against them,” she said after an early morning school drop-off in Paris. Their arguments have cut little ice with ministers. “I know it’s tough, but a strike does not solve problems. One does not strike against a virus,” the education minister Jean-Michel Blanquer told BFM TV. Just a little bit more from Hungary here. Prime minister Viktor Orban’s chief of staff, Gergely Gulyas, has told reporters that the government expects a substantial further increase in Covid-19 cases over the coming weeks due to the rapid spread of the Omicron variant. However, Reuters report that he said they did not expect a similar increase in hospitalisations and deaths. Martin Quin Pollard and Pawel Kopczynski have been in Beijing for Reuters looking at preparations for the Winter Olympics. They report that arrivals for next month’s Winter Olympics are met by staff in white protective suits and undergo COVID-19 tests and swabs of luggage before being whisked in police-escorted buses to fenced-off hotels. The perimeters of Beijing’s “closed loop” are sealed and guarded. Once inside, people cannot leave until they either depart the country or complete several weeks of quarantine. This includes about 20,000 Chinese volunteers and staff at the venues who will enter the loop. Authorities are determined to create a physical barrier between participants and the general population. There will be no international spectators at the Beijing Games, and organisers have yet to say how many local spectators will attend. Everyone in the loop must have a daily PCR test administered by staff. Food delivery from restaurants outside the loop is not allowed. More than 2,000 international athletes are set to come to China for the Games, along with 25,000 other stakeholders, according to organisers, a large number from overseas. Organisers did not say how many would be in the closed loop. New Covid-19 infections in Indian cities such as capital New Delhi and Mumbai could peak next week after rising rapidly, experts said, as the country reported the highest number of daily cases since late May. “Our modelling, and those of others, suggests that the big Indian cities should see their peaks in cases close to 20 January, while the overall peak in India may be shifted a bit later, to early February,” said Gautam Menon, professor of physics and biology at Ashoka University near the capital. Reuters report the health ministry has said common pain relievers like paracetamol should be enough for people with mild fever due to Covid-19. It has warned, though, against complacency as infections have now started rising in as many as 300 districts from fewer than 80 a week ago. “The experience from other countries informs us that it is more practical to track and monitor hospitalisations rather than new cases,” said Rajib Dasgupta, head of the Centre of Social Medicine and Community Health at New Delhi’s Jawaharlal Nehru University. “Non-pharmaceutical interventions – lockdowns, etc – are increasingly losing their relevance with rapid and inexorable community transmission.” Ben Butler and Peter Hannam report for us that in Australia, small businesses and unions have condemned as inadequate Scott Morrison’s response to a burgeoning staffing crisis caused by the Omicron wave. The crisis has pushed supply chains to breaking point, emptied supermarket shelves and forced some retailers and hospitality operators to close. Under new rules announced by the prime minister after a national cabinet meeting on Thursday, workers in a swathe of industries including food distribution and transport will be allowed to go straight back to work after recording a negative rapid antigen test. However, Morrison again rebuffed calls from small businesses and unions for free rapid antigen tests in the workplace, and industries including general retail and hospitality have been excluded from the relaxed regime. Read more here: PM’s response to Omicron staffing crisis falls short, Australian businesses and unions say A quick snap from Reuters here that Swiss drugs regulator Swissmedic has said it had granted temporary approval to Regkirona, an antibody medicine that can be used for the treatment of Covid in adults. It can be used to treat adult Covid patients if oxygen therapy or hospitalisation is not required, and there is a high risk of developing a severe form of Covid-19. Two hospitals in China’s locked-down city of Xi’an, including one that refused to treat an eight-month pregnant woman who later miscarried, have been closed while they “rectify” mistakes, authorities said today. The city has been subject to strict home confinement for three weeks in line with Beijing’s “zero-Covid” strategy. Top health officials were forced to apologise last week after a distressing social media post - including photos and video of the woman sitting on a plastic stool outside Gaoxin Hospital in a pool of blood - prompted outrage over the megacity’s harsh imposition of the rules. She was refused treatment because her negative Covid-19 test fell slightly outside the 48-hour requirement. In a separate incident at the second hospital, a Xi’an resident said her father had died last week after he could not get medical treatment for a heart ailment due to “pandemic-related rules”. Both hospitals have been given warnings and made to “suspend operations for three months for rectification”, and will only be allowed to reopen after getting approval. The city’s health commission said in a statement Thursday that the two hospitals had “failed to perform their duties of saving lives and rescuing the wounded”. “This led to delays in the rescue, diagnosis and treatment of critically ill patients, arousing widespread public attention and having a bad social impact,” health authorities added. Andrew Sparrow has launched what I imagine will be another very busy day for his combined UK Covid and politics live blog. You can follow that here. I’ll be carrying on here with the latest global coronavirus news. France will lift its ban on UK holidaymakers from Friday morning, the country’s tourism minister, Jean-Baptiste Lemoyne, has announced. The requirement to isolate on arrival in France will also be scrapped. PA Media note that travellers will continue to need evidence of a negative coronavirus test taken within 24 hours of departure. On those two latest developments in the UK, ITV’s political correspondent Daniel Hewitt has tweeted more details about Boris Johnson pulling out of a trip today, quoting this from Downing Street: The prime minister will no longer be visiting Lancashire today due to a family member testing positive for coronavirus. He will follow the guidance for vaccinated close contacts, including daily testing and limiting contact with others. Meanwhile The Sun’s Harry Cole says his sources are “adamant” that the departure of Jonathan Van-Tam as deputy CMO has been “in pipeline for a long time”, but points out the timing of the announcement today is unlikely to go down well with a government trying to regain its balance after events of the last couple of days. Van-Tam will continue in his role until the end of March. The health secretary Sajid Javid has just tweeted to pay tribute to the work of deputy CMO Jonathan Van-Tam. It has been announced he is stepping down from the role. And this has just happened as well – reports that someone within the Boris Johnson family has tested positive for Covid, leading to the prime minister cancelling a planned excursion to a vaccination centre today, where he would have had to face the public for the first time since apologising in parliament for attending a lockdown party in Downing Street. This news is just breaking that Jonathan Van-Tam is to leave his post as Deputy Chief Medical Officer. He has been in the role since October 2017. There’s a very stark contrast in tone between the statements coming out of the Conservative Northern Ireland secretary Brandon Lewis and Labour’s Lisa Nandy on the airwaves in the UK this morning. On Sky News, Lewis said this: “The prime minister has outlined that in his view he hasn’t actually done anything outside of the rules.” By contrast, Nandy has just told ITV’s Good Morning Britain viewers: We’ve got a prime minister who has lied to the country. My inbox is full of stories of people who lost loved ones, who weren’t able to say goodbye, absolutely heart-breaking stories about what was happening to them on the day that this party took place. They are appalled, horrified and re-traumatised about the fact that we’ve got a prime minister who is still refusing to come clean about what other parties he attended, what parties the members of his cabinet attended, and how it could have been that we could have had senior ministers and the prime minister telling us about the impact the pandemic was having on the country, that we all must continue to do what they were telling us to do, and yet they weren’t doing it themselves. Hungary has experienced another steep rise in daily confirmed Covid cases – up to 9,216 on Thursday from 7,883 reported on Wednesday. The government said the Omicron variant “was spreading fast”, fuelling new infections, and urged people to take up booster vaccine shots. However, Reuters note that the number of patients being treated in hospital again declined. There are 2,647 coronavirus patients in hospital, including 249 on ventilators. Saffron Cordery, deputy chief executive of NHS Providers, has told Times Radio that data showed Covid-19 cases were coming down, but she warned “we are still seeing very high levels of hospital admissions and we are still seeing significant numbers of patients on mechanical ventilation”. She said the numbers in intensive care are not as high as the peak of the pandemic, but were still posing a challenge for the NHS. PA Media quote her saying: “I think there is considerable uncertainty still about how this will play out because levels come down in London, but they’re going up in the North West, they’re going up in the East of England, so we need to think really carefully about how it’s impacting, and impacting differentially across the country.” Asked if the NHS was in a “middle phase” between being overwhelmed and working at full capacity, she said: “I think we’re somewhere between the middle phase and going towards still being beyond full stretch, really, because what we have to remember is that the NHS isn’t an island, we have a huge impact of Covid across all of the different services that work alongside and with the NHS.” Cordery suggested it was “premature” to look at “living with Covid” as being in the next few months, adding there would be “a gradual return to a new kind of normality for the NHS”. In the UK, Labour’s Lisa Nandy is on Sky News, and has said of the prime minister’s apology “This just doesn’t wash. I think he’s taking the public for fools.” She said: I listened carefully to what the prime minister had to say in the House of Commons. He is clearly sorry, but he’s not sorry that he did it. I think he’s very sorry that he got caught. He told us over and over again that no rules have been broken. He expressed real anger at those aides who laughed about parties taking place. He’s said that people around him in his inner circle who broke the rules must go, and yet it seems to believe those rules don’t apply to himself. Even now he’s not coming clean about what he knew. About whether the email was sent out with his own authority and his knowledge to nearly 100 staff to invite them to bring their own booze to a party, while other people were being fined and cautioned because they were breaking rules that he himself was breaking. I just don’t think this is good enough, and I agree with the very small number of Tories who’ve had the courage and integrity to come out and say that he must go. He’s just not fit to hold office. I think it is insulting to the country that he continues to hold office. While he didn’t have much to say of any substance about the Downing Street parties themselves, the Northern Ireland secretary Brandon Lewis did give on Sky News in the UK one of the more ringing endorsements of Boris Johnson. He said: I personally think the prime minister is the right person to be prime minister. I think we will be able to go forward and win a general election. We have got work to do. We have got to deliver on exactly on what the prime minister set up, which is some of the biggest important reforms dealing with issues the country would have liked to have dealt with years ago, like health and social care, issues in Northern Ireland that haven’t been dealt with in decades. This is somebody who wants to deal with that and do it in a way that delivers for everybody in the UK, and that is why I think he will win the next election. Just a quick reminder that if you fancy something to get your ears around, then our Today in Focus podcast is Guardian columnist Jonathan Freedland discussing with Nosheen Iqbal whether Boris Johnson’s apology will be enough to save him. Back to the UK and Downing Street party scandal, Conservative MP Jake Berry has been on the BBC Today programme defending the prime minister. Meanwhile, Henry Zeffman, chief political correspondent at the Times, makes this point about Sue Gray. She must feel a little bit like she is being used as a human shield, the number of times her name has been invoked in the last 24 hours to avoid answering a tricky question. Rajeev Syal profiled her for us earlier this week: The Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) said it expects omicron to become the predominant coronavirus variant in the Americas in the coming weeks, where confirmed cases have reached record levels. The health agency added that although healthcare systems face challenges with rising hospitalisations, vaccination has meant that Covid-19 deaths have not increased at the same rate as infections. “While Delta is still causing new infections in the Americas, based on current trends, Omicron is on track to become the dominant strain in our region,” Carissa Etienne, director of the agency, said during an online news conference. PAHO said coronavirus virus infections across the Americas almost doubled to 6.1m on 8 January, from 3.4m cases on 1 January. The US is reporting the highest number of cases, while Canada is also registering a rebound. Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic have seen the highest increases in the Caribbean, while Belize and Panama have seen rises in Central America. In South America, Argentina and Paraguay have both reported a 300% increase in coronavirus cases over the past week, according to the health organisation. Associated Press report that almost 60% of the population of Latin America and the Caribbean has been fully vaccinated, but some 10 countries in the region — especially in the Caribbean — did not reach the goal of 40% set by the World Health Organization for the end of 2021. That goal is 70% for the middle of this year. In the UK, while the Conservatives’ Northern Ireland secretary Brandon Lewis has been busy saying nothing on Sky News, opposition party Labour’s shadow housing secretary Lisa Nandy hasn’t been mincing her words on BBC Breakfast. PA Media quote her saying: If you listen closely to what he said in the House of Commons yesterday, he was apologising for the perception of what had happened when he attended this drinks party during lockdown. He was apologising as well, it sounded like, because he was sorry he got caught. What he’s not done is come clean about all the parties that were attended not just by him but by other members of the cabinet – he told us over and over again that no rules had been broken. I think the MPs who have come out and said his position is completely untenable are absolutely right. The amount of hurt and anguish that this has caused for people is just unbelievable.” So far in his interview on Sky News, the Northern Ireland secretary Brandon Lewis has said that he can’t comment on “the hypotheticals of a report that hasn’t been released yet” regarding Boris Johnson’s admission that he was at a party in Downing Street during lockdown. He’s also said he wasn’t at parliament yesterday, so can’t comment on what the prime minister may have said behind the scenes before and after PMQs, and he wasn’t at any party at Downing Street so he can’t comment on what happened there. I’ll bring you the quotes if he says anything of any substance that we haven’t already heard. Our science editor Ian Sample has put together a Q&amp;A on what things might look like on the other side of an Omicron wave. It includes this: Mass vaccination, boosters, and the spectacular infection rates seen in the Omicron wave are building high levels of population immunity that will drive infection rates down. The wave will peak at different times from place to place, with adherence to Plan B and shifts in people’s behaviour before and after Christmas all playing into the timing and speed at which infections fall. The more likely scenario is that Omicron continues to circulate, with cases rising and falling in line with people’s mixing patterns and changes to measures that prevent transmission. When plan B is lifted and more people return to work, cases may well rise. But in the summer, as people spend more time outdoors, infections may fall again, then rise next winter. It will all come down to human behaviour. With Omicron spreading fast and causing less severe disease, some researchers believe it is time to rethink how Test and Trace is done. “I think we are already at the point where PCR testing is a waste of resources, and contact tracing is probably a waste of resources too,” said Tim Colbourn, professor of global health systems and epidemiology at UCL. One option is to rely more on lateral flow tests and for people to message their close contacts whenever they test positive. Read more of Ian Sample’s report: What lies on the other side of the UK’s Omicron wave? Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London. With all the politics surrounding Covid in the UK yesterday, you might have missed the latest numbers, so here’s an update. There were 129,587 new Covid cases recorded yesterday. Over the last seven days there have been 1,038,500 new coronavirus cases recorded in the UK. Cases have decreased by 19% week-on-week. There have been 1724 deaths recorded in the last week. Deaths have increased by 44% week-on-week. Hospital admissions have increased by 5% week-on-week. At the latest count on the UK government’s own dashboard, there were 19,735 people in hospital in total, of whom 793 are in ventilation beds. According to the government’s figures, the peak of hospitalisations during the pandemic was in January 2021, with 39,254 patients in hospital. I believe that Northern Ireland secretary Brandon Lewis is going to be the government minister facing the media this morning. I’ll have quotes from him in due course. You may recall, yesterday the government didn’t want to put anybody up on TV or radio before Boris Johnson’s appearance at PMQs. Just before I hand over the blog to my fantastic colleague Martin Belam over in London, here is a rundown of all the key developments from the past 24 hours. British prime minister Boris Johnson faces anger and derision after he admitted attending a drinks party during the first lockdown on 20 May 2020, claiming that he believed it to be a work event that did not break the rules. Teachers in France will walk off the job en masse on Thursday over what they say is the government’s failure to adopt a coherent policy for schools to manage the Covid-19 pandemic, or properly protect pupils and staff against infection. India reported a daily rise of almost 250,000 new coronavirus cases and 380 deaths on Thursday, the highest single-day rise since May. Novak Djokovic has been confirmed in the official draw for the Australian Open, despite uncertainty over whether the government will cancel his visa for a second time. Djokovic could face a fine or even prison in Serbia after his admission that he broke isolation while he had Covid last month, lawyers have said, as the Serbian prime minister warned his behaviour appeared to be “a clear breach” of the rules. The French Senate approved the government’s latest Covid measures, including a vaccine pass, on Thursday. South Korea will begin treating coronavirus patients with Pfizer’s antiviral pills on Friday, health officials said. Germany has broken a new daily Covid record for the second day in a row after reporting a daily rise of 81,417 coronavirus cases, according to the latest figures released by the Robert Koch Institute. Israel has also reported a new daily record of 43,815 Covid-19 cases on Wednesday, according to the ministry of health. In Africa, more than 85% of people are yet to receive a single dose of vaccine, WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told a press conference on Wednesday. The Omicron variant is especially dangerous for those who have not been vaccinated, the World Health Organization warned on Wednesday. Quebec’s proposal to tax unvaccinated people may be lawful but may also go against the spirit of Canada’s universal public health system, rights and medical experts say. German chancellor Olaf Scholz has argued Covid vaccinations should be mandatory for all adults as the European country reported a record of 80,430 coronavirus infections on Wednesday. India has reported a daily rise of almost 250,000 new coronavirus cases and 380 deaths on Thursday. The 246,912 new infections are a 27% jump on yesterday’s numbers, the Times of India reports citing health ministry data. It is the highest single-day rise since May. Daily cases in the country have now grown more than 10-fold in under two weeks, according to the Hindu Times. Thank you once again to astute reader Francisco Javier Torres Tobar for bringing these figures to my attention. Novak Djokovic has been confirmed in the official draw for the Australian Open, despite uncertainty over whether the government will cancel his visa for a second time. Australian immigration minister Alex Hawke is weighing exercising discretionary powers to revoke Djokovic’s visa, which could scuttle the Serb’s bid for a record 21st major title and 10th at Melbourne Park. After the draw was delayed by more than an hour on Thursday, Djokovic was drawn to play fellow Serb Miomir Kecmanović in the opening round of the year’s opening grand slam tournament. The French Senate approved the government’s latest Covid measures, including a vaccine pass, on Thursday. The pass has so far encountered some opposition among the public after president Emmanuel Macron’s harsh criticism of the unvaccinated. The Senate backed the Covid measures and legislation for a Covid vaccine pass by 249 in favour, versus 63 against, Reuters report. The legislation had already been approved earlier this month by France’s lower house of parliament. Macron stepped up his campaign this year against those not vaccinated against Covid, telling Le Parisien paper this month that he wanted to “piss off” unvaccinated people by making their lives more complicated. On Wednesday, France reported 361,719 new Covid cases in the last 24 hours, and a further 246 Covid deaths in hospitals. Djokovic has just been drawn in the first round of the Australian Open to face Serbian player Miomir Kecmanovic. The decision over whether to allow Novak Djokovic to stay in Australia to compete in the Australian Open later this month remains unanswered. Australian prime minister Scott Morrison was just asked a question about the decision during a press conference on Thursday afternoon (AEDT). Morrison referred to the most recent statement from the immigration minister, Alex Hawke –which said the decision was still being considered – and said he will not comment further. Guardian reporter Paul Karp asked a general question in very hypothetical terms, whether someone who is a non-citizen and unvaccinated should be able to stay in Australia. Morrison replied: All I will simply say is the reason we have had since 15 December where fully vaccinated eligible visa holders could travel to Australia without needing to apply for a travel exemption and enter those states allowing them to enter quarantine free, the individual has to show they are double vaccinated or must provide acceptable proof that they can’t be vaccinated for medical reasons. Morrison continued: That relates to people who are coming to Australia. These are noncitizens, nonresidents, are visa holders and may have acquired a visa recently, they may have acquired a visa some time ago, and be returning, when some of these issues weren’t even standing at the time. It’s important to distinguish between the visa and the condition to enter the border. They aren’t ... the same thing. You can ... be a citizen or resident returning ... and what happens after that will depend on vaccination status and so on, if you are a citizen or resident, of course you could come back into your own country but you would have to quarantine in those circumstances. If you’re not a citizen or resident, the health rules we have in place to protect our borders and our border protection policies have been central to the government’s achievements ... and Australia’s achievements generally in having one of the lowest death rates, strongest economies and highest vaccination rates in the country.” Read the full story here. South Korea will begin treating coronavirus patients with Pfizer’s antiviral pills on Friday, health officials said. At least 21,000 of the pills, called Paxlovid, will arrive on Thursday and be sent out to some 280 pharmacies and 90 residential treatment centres, the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KDCA) said. The medication will be used to treat more than 1,000 people a day, with priority groups including patients with a high chance of developing critical symptoms, those aged 65 or older and those with reduced immunity, the KDCA said. Another 10,000 of the pills are expected to arrive later in the month. Paxlovid was nearly 90% effective in preventing hospitalisations and deaths in patients at high risk of severe illness, and data suggested it retains its effectiveness against Omicron, Pfizer has said. South Korea has been exploring additional pharmaceutical tools to head off a surge of infections caused by the Omicron variant and approved the use of Novavax Inc’s vaccine on Wednesday. More on the developing story occurring in France as teachers prepare to strike on Thursday by walking off the job. Up to three-quarters of educators in the country plan to take action against the government, arguing there has not been a coherent policy for schools throughout the pandemic and pupils and staff have not been properly protected against infection. More recently, Covid and testing rules for classrooms changed three times in the space of a week. A total of 11 unions are to participate in Thursday’s walkout, in a rare show of unity that could make for the biggest strike in decades and threatens to close half of French schools. A statement from the unions reads: The exhaustion and exasperation of the entire educational community have reached an unprecedented level. The responsibility of the minister and the government in this chaotic situation is total because of incessant changes of footing, unworkable protocols and the lack of appropriate tools to guarantee (schools) can function properly.” The strike “demonstrates the growing despair in schools”, the largest teachers’ union Snuipp-FSU added. The unions argue that their members cannot adequately “ensure the safety of students, staff and their families” and are unable to teach properly. In a letter to parents, Snuipp-FSU said: The daily life of teachers and families [is] unclear or even unmanageable: repeated tests, not always accessible, late results, regular comings and goings of students, overnight adaptation to changes..” ... It is not the school that is open, it is a form of ‘daycare’. Under the current conditions, children cannot learn properly, the number of pupils fluctuate and hybrid teaching between face-to-face and distance education [is not] feasible.” The government this week eased rules on Covid checks for students who have been exposed to an infected person. Will Boris Johnson’s apology be enough to save him? The British prime minister faced anger and derision after he admitted attending a drinks party during the first lockdown on 20 May 2020, claiming that he believed it to be a work event that did not break the rules. Guardian columnist Jonathan Freedland tells Nosheen Iqbal that the prime minister faces a make-or-break moment in his premiership. With anger at Boris Johnson growing among his colleagues, his ability to shake off scandals and maintain popularity in the country appears to be waning fast. Douglas Ross, the Conservative party’s leader in Scotland, has joined Labour leader Keir Starmer in calling for Johnson to resign. But for the prime minister and his allies, the matter now rests with senior civil servant Sue Gray, whose inquiry into rule-breaking in Downing Street is ongoing. Listen to the latest Today in Focus episode here. More from Guardian reporter Justin McCurry on the situation unfolding in Japan. Media reports say the government is planning to speed up booster shots for the under-65s, while older people will be able to receive their third vaccination from next month. But the governor of Osaka, Hirofumi Yoshimura, said the reduction in intervals between the second and third jabs had come too late, telling reporters that “it has already become impossible to suppress the Omicron variant through booster shots,” according to the Kyodo news agency. Japan had initially hospitalised everyone who tested positive for Omicron, but has since said only those at risk of developing serious symptoms should go to hospital, in an attempt to ease pressure on health services. Staff at about 16,000 medical institutions will monitor patients recuperating at home, the health ministry said, while the government is considering shortening the current 14-day isolation period for people identified as close contacts of those diagnosed with Omicron. Japan, where 78.5%% of the 125 million population has been double-jabbed and mask-wearing is habitual, has fared better than Britain, the US and other comparable countries during the pandemic, with 1.79 million cases and 18,424 deaths. Japan plans to start offering vaccinations to children aged under 12 from March, according to Kyodo. Daily coronavirus cases in Japan have exceeded 13,000 for the first time in more than four months, as the country confronts a sixth wave of infections driven by the Omicron variant. It reported 13,244 new cases on Wednesday, including 2,198 in Tokyo and 1,711 in Osaka. The number of new infections in the Japanese capital was more than double that recorded the previous day and a fivefold increase from the same day the previous week. Authorities in the southern prefecture of Okinawa, where an outbreak at US military bases last month has spread to the local civilian population, reported 1,644 cases on Wednesday. The island, which hosts tens of thousands of US service personnel, and two other prefectures have been under quasi-state of emergency measures since Sunday, including restrictions on bar and restaurant opening hours. The Omicron variant appears to have taken hold in some parts of the country, weeks after the government imposed a travel ban on all arrivals except Japanese citizens and returning foreign residents. Germany has broken a new daily Covid record for the second day in a row after reporting a daily rise of 81,417 coronavirus cases, according to the latest figures released by the Robert Koch Institute, the country’s national disease control agency. The figure is a new daily record for the European nation after recording 80,430 new cases on Wednesday.A further 316 deaths were also recorded. Although Omicron variant is dominating in parts of the country, hospitalisations rates remain relatively low. A vaccine mandate – so-called Impfpflicht – is being hotly discussed across the political parties. Novak Djokovic could face a fine or even prison in Serbia after his admission that he broke isolation while he had Covid last month, lawyers have said, as the Serbian prime minister warned his behaviour appeared to be “a clear breach” of the rules. The 34-year-old Belgrade-born tennis player on Wednesday acknowledged that he knew he had tested positive when he attended a newspaper interview and photoshoot in the Serbian capital on 18 December, saying in a statement on social media he had made an “error of judgment”. The player also blamed “human error” by his support team for a mistake in his immigration paperwork, saying they had failed to declare that he had travelled outside Serbia – to Spain – in the two-week period before entering Australia. Lawyers in Serbia told local reporters that breaking the country’s strict isolation rules was an offence under article 248 of the criminal code, and subject to a fine or prison sentence of up to three years – although community service was more likely. Read the full story here. In Africa, more than 85% of people are yet to receive a single dose of vaccine, WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told a press conference on Wednesday. “We cannot end the acute phase of the pandemic unless we close this gap,” Tedros added. The Covid-19 Vaccines Global Access (COVAX) programme has shipped much-needed vaccines to the region, with the one billionth vaccine dose expected to be delivered in coming days. The worldwide initiative directed by the GAVI vaccine alliance, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations, and the World Health Organization aims to provide equitable access to Covid-19 vaccines. “We are making progress,” Tedros said. “In December, COVAX shipped more than double the number of doses it shipped in November, and in the coming days, we expect COVAX to ship its 1 billionth vaccine dose.” However, the WHO chief acknowledged there was still a long way to go to reach the target of vaccinating 70% of the population of every country by the middle of this year. Some 90 countries have still not reached the 40% target, and 36 of those countries have vaccinated less than 10% of their populations. The Omicron variant is especially dangerous for those who have not been vaccinated, the World Health Organization warned on Wednesday. The WHO said the global surge in cases was being driven by Omicron, which is more transmissible than the previously dominant Delta variant. More than 15 million cases were reported to the WHO last week - with millions more cases thought to have gone unrecorded. WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told a press conference: While Omicron causes less severe disease than Delta, it remains a dangerous virus - particularly for those who are unvaccinated. We mustn’t allow this virus a free ride or wave the white flag, especially when so many people around the world remain unvaccinated. The overwhelming majority of people admitted to hospitals around the world are unvaccinated.” While vaccines remain very effective at preventing death and severe Covid-19 disease, they do not fully prevent transmission, Tedros said. More transmission means more hospitalisations, more deaths, more people off work - including teachers and health workers - and more risk of another variant emerging that is even more transmissible and more deadly than Omicron.” Tedros said that the numbers of deaths worldwide had stabilised at around 50,000 per week. “Learning to live with this virus does not mean we can, or should, accept this number of deaths,” he said. Israel has also reported a new daily record of 43,815 Covid-19 cases on Wednesday, according to the ministry of health. Citing official figures released Wednesday, the Times of Israel said that out of 360,038 virus tests carried out, 12.09% returned positive, the highest value since September 29, 2020, when it was 15.29%. The number of seriously ill patients was 254, one fewer than the day before, and of those, 84 are considered critical. Norway has surpassed 10,000 daily Covid cases for the first time, breaking a new record for a second day in a row on Wednesday. A total of 11,825 new infections were reported in the last 24 hours after 9,622 new cases of infection were registered on Tuesday, local media reports. The figure is an increase of 4,960 on the previous seven-day average of 6,865. Teachers in France will walk off the job en masse on Thursday over what they say is the government’s failure to adopt a coherent policy for schools to manage the Covid-19 pandemic, or properly protect pupils and staff against infection. Teachers, parents and school administrators have struggled to keep up with new testing rules, announced before the end of Christmas holidays but changed twice since following criticism, Reuters reports. The government, having reversed an earlier policy of quickly shutting down classes with positive coronavirus cases, says some degree of complication is the price to pay for keeping schools open. But a new-year surge in infections to record daily levels close to 370,000 in France has led to cases soaring within schools too. That has meant many schools have been hard pressed to keep teaching anyway, partly because of infections among pupils and staff but also because each positive case has resulted in dozens being sent to labs and pharmacies for testing. Eleven unions said in a joint statement: The exhaustion and exasperation of the entire educational community have reached an unprecedented level. The responsibility of the minister and the government in this chaotic situation is total because of incessant changes of footing, unworkable protocols and the lack of appropriate tools to guarantee (schools) can function properly.” Unions said they expected many schools to be closed on Thursday and very large numbers of teachers - including about 75% in primary schools - to join the one-day strike. Urging teachers not to walk off the job, Education Minister Jean-Michel Blanquer told BFM TV: “One does not strike against a virus.” In response, unions said they had called the strike not against a virus but over disorganisation caused by the test and contact-tracing rules, heightened contagion risk and a shortage of face masks for staff. Quebec’s proposal to tax unvaccinated people may be lawful but may also go against the spirit of Canada’s universal public health system, rights and medical experts say. Premier François Legault announced the new “contribution” for the unvaccinated on Tuesday, though his government would not say how the tax would be levied, when or against whom. Canada’s Civil Liberties Association said it could violate Canadians’ fundamental rights, while health advocates expressed concern about its broader implications. Danyaal Raza, a doctor with Unity Health in Toronto and former chair of Canadian Doctors for Medicare, told Reuters: I’ve not seen anything like this in Canada before. I’m worried about the precedent it would set.” Dr Yv Bonnier-Viger, public health director of the Gaspé region, asked Quebec to “think seriously” about the repercussions of such a measure, saying: “these are not measures that correspond to public health values” in an interview with Montreal’s CTV news. I think that we would be completely forgetting our system of coverage and universal health insurance. We know that about 40 per cent of illnesses are preventable. If we start taxing all the sick people for the bad decisions they made at some point in their lives, we’re going off the rails.” Cara Zwibel, acting general counsel for the Canadian Civil Liberties Association, said it might however violate Canada’s Charter of Rights and Freedoms if viewed as “a way of compelling people to get vaccinated”. McGill University biomedical ethicist Phoebe Friesen was also concerned the logic of taxing unvaccinated people could be extrapolated to other behaviours seen as driving health spending such as obesity, but that are tied to marginalisation. If you want to be consistent and logical, you should charge all sorts of people for their hospitalisation if it’s based on behaviour that they’re ‘responsible’ for,” she said “... And it’s incredibly tricky to figure out what that looks like.” Quebec, Canada’s second-most populous province, is struggling with surging Covid hospitalisations. The province’s public health director stepped down earlier this week citing an “erosion” of public trust in anti-pandemic measures. Guardian reader and Montreal resident, Chris Batory, said the fact that more than 7,000 people lined up to receive their first vaccination in Quebec on Wednesday shows the strategy has worked, “for one day anyway!” he added. “Our highest in several days,” Quebec’s health minister Christian Dubé tweeted, noting that 5,000 appointments were also made on Monday. “This is encouraging.” Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog, ready to take you through all the Covid news this Thursday. Let’s start off with news from the United States where Covid hospitalisations increased by 33% and deaths are up by 40% from a week earlier, the head of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said on Wednesday. CDC Director Rochelle Walensky said US Covid cases are expected to peak in the coming weeks. “The magnitude of this increase is largely related to the Omicron variant, which now represents about 90% of the Covid-19 cases in the country,” she told reporters. German chancellor Olaf Scholz has argued Covid vaccinations should be mandatory for all adults as the European country reported a record of 80,430 coronavirus infections on Wednesday. “With the decision not to get vaccinated, one ultimately is not just making a decision for oneself but also for 80 million others,” Scholz said. Scholz credited his new government’s measures to tighten curbs on public life and step up booster doses for preventing an even worse onslaught. Here’s a comprehensive snapshot of how the coronavirus is unfolding across the world. Europe: Switzerland will halve its quarantine time to five days. France is poised to lift blanket ban on UK travellers ‘by end of the week’. Denmark is to offer a fourth coronavirus vaccination to vulnerable citizens as it faces record infection numbers from the Omicron variant. Sweden will cut the recommended time interval between the second and third Covid vaccine shot to five months from six. Greece will extend restrictions by a week at restaurants and bars to help curb the Omicron variant. Doctors in Spain will be awarded up to €49,000 (£40,882) each in compensation for working without proper personal protection gear in the first few months of the pandemic. Boris Johnson has admitted and apologised for attending a No 10 garden drinks event in May 2020. Johnson said he went to thank staff before going back into his office 25 minutes later. The UK government’s operation of a “VIP lane” for suppliers of personal protective equipment during the coronavirus pandemic was illegal, a judge has ruled. Germany has reported 80,430 coronavirus cases - a new daily record - and 384 deaths, according to figures from the Robert Koch Institute. Austria also set a new record of 18,427 daily Covid cases. Russia’s deputy prime minister Tatiana Golikova said that the government will prepare new measures to combat Covid by the end of the week. More than half of people in Europe could contract the Omicron in the next two months if infections continue at current rates, the WHO said. Asia: China is battling coronavirus outbreaks in several cities, severely testing the country’s strict “zero-Covid” strategy just weeks before Beijing hosts the Winter Olympics. The northern city of Tianjin has ordered a second round of Covid testing on all 14 million residents after the discovery of 97 cases of the Omicron variant during initial screenings that began Sunday. A Chinese woman became an overnight sensation after she posted video diaries documenting her life after being stuck at a blind date’s house when the city was put under lockdown. Story here. In Australia, state and territory leaders will consider relaxing isolation requirements for the trucking and logistics sector, as the prime minister, Scott Morrison, calls for patience over the country’s disrupted supply chains. Novak Djokovic has blamed his agent for an “administrative mistake” when declaring he had not travelled in the two weeks before his flight to Australia and acknowledged an “error of judgment” by not isolating after he tested positive for Covid. Americas: Quebec, Canada’s second-most populous province, has announced plans to impose a ‘health tax’ on residents who refuse to get the Covid-19 vaccination for non-medical reasons. World Health Organization experts have warned that repeating booster doses of the original Covid vaccines is not a viable strategy against emerging variants.The New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, says he was “incredibly disappointed” to see footage of young Hillsong members dancing and singing to music, and the church could be fined if found to have breached the state’s Covid public health order. “These rules aren’t there for the sake of it,” Perrottet said on Friday morning. “These rules are in place to keep people safe and for the 99.95% of people who are doing the right thing, I think everyone would feel completely frustrated and shocked by what they saw last night. We don’t want to see that happen again. To see that last night … I was incredibly disappointed.” NSW police are investigating Hillsong’s annual youth summer camp being held in Newcastle. If found to have breached the health order, Hillsong could be fined up to $55,000. Perrottet said his “expectation” was that if there was a breach by Hillsong “a fine should be issued”. On Thursday night, the church was ordered by NSW Health to immediately stop singing and dancing at the youth camp after footage of young attendees dancing to music sparked widespread anger over certain exemptions for religious groups. Photos and videos posted on Hillsong’s social media accounts over the past two days showed crowds of people singing without masks during services and dancing to pop music that was non-devotional. The camp, which is aimed at 15- to 17-year-olds, was due to finish on Saturday. “Singing and dancing at a major recreational facility is in breach of the public health order,” the NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, said in a statement on Thursday evening. “While the order does not apply to religious services, it does apply to major recreation facilities and this event is clearly in breach of both the spirit and intent of the order, which is in place to help keep the community safe.” NSW police on Thursday issued a statement saying it would “liaise with organisers” to “ensure future compliance with the public health orders after NSW Health deemed the location to be a major recreational facility”. When contacted by Guardian Australia for comment on Thursday, a Hillsong spokesperson denied the event was essentially a music festival. “These events are our annual high school-aged youth camps, and are not similar to a music festival in any way,” the spokesperson said. “Outdoor Christian services are held during the camp but these are only a small part of the program … and any singing is only a small part of each service (a video circulating on social media today reflects a few minutes of this part of the program).” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning When pressed on how large groups of young people dancing to songs such as Turn Down For What by DJ Snake and Lil Jon constituted a religious service, the Hillsong spokesperson did not respond. The NSW government announced last week that the public health order would be amended to ban dancing and singing in all indoor and outdoor settings until 27 January. The new restriction saw a spate of cancellations and postponements from several music events, including Grapevine Gathering festival, Tamworth’s Country Music festival and national tours by Belinda Carlisle and Rod Stewart. But churches and places of worship were considered exempt from the restrictions, with a NSW Health spokesperson telling the Australian on Tuesday: “Singing and dancing in hospitality venues and nightclubs is deemed high risk due to increased movement and mingling within and across these venues, the influence of alcohol consumption, and the removal of masks in these settings to consume food and drink. People attending religious services generally remain in fixed positions and masks are mandatory for these indoor gatherings.” Leading Australian musicians and industry professionals voiced their anger at the Hillsong footage on Thursday, complaining that there appeared to be one rule for religious groups, while musicians were banned from performing. The live music industry has borne the brunt of Covid restrictions for two years, due to near-constant restrictions on crowd size and public behaviour. Rock band the Jungle Giants, who were due to headline at Grapevine Gathering festival, tweeted: “Thinking about starting a church in NSW so we can play some gigs. Who’s in?” “You can postpone all our festivals and gigs, you can say no dancing in clubs for the next 50 years, and you can make singing and shouting in public illegal except in sermons and the cricket for some reason,” the rapper Illy wrote on Instagram. “But no matter how bullshit you make the rules, you will STILL never, ever, get me to join Hillsong.” One music industry professional who wished to remain anonymous told Junkee they were “literally crying with anger” at the footage. Earlier in the week, a live-streamed Hillsong service from the church’s Hills Convention Centre in Sydney’s Norwest also provoked anger when the masked congregation was shown on their feet while watching the church’s band, Hillsong Worship, perform.Joe Biden acknowledged the Senate will not likely be able to pass a voting rights bill, after Kyrsten Sinema and Joe Manchin said they would not support changing filibuster rules to pass the legislation. “I hope we can get this done. The honest to God answer is, I don’t know whether we can get this done,” the president told reporters after meeting with Senate Democrats on Capitol Hill today. Biden’s comments came hours after the House passed a sweeping voting rights bill, in a party-line vote of 220 to 203. That bill will now languish in the Senate unless Democrats can convince Sinema and Manchin to change their minds about a filibuster carveout for voting rights. The supreme court blocked the Biden administration’s coronavirus vaccine mandate for companies with at least 100 employees. However, the justices allowed the administration’s vaccine requirement for health care workers to remain in place. In response to the court’s ruling, Biden called on individual states and companies to establish their own mandates to protect citizens and employees against the virus. Biden announced his administration will order an additional 500m at-home coronavirus tests to combat the surge in cases caused by the Omicron variant. The announcement brings the total number of tests ordered by the administration to 1bn, but the original batch of tests has not yet been distributed. Biden said the White House will launch a website next week to allow people to order tests to be shipped to their homes. Stewart Rhodes, leader of the far-right group Oath Keepers, was arrested and charged with seditious conspiracy in connection to his role in the Capitol insurrection. The arrest marks the first time that the justice department has brought a seditious conspiracy charge against someone involved in the January 6 attack. – Joan E Greve Facing diminishing odds of ushering through voting rights legislation before the midterms this year, Joe Biden is planning to continue pressing holdouts Kyrsten Sinema and Joe Manchin to consider filibuster reform, Reuters and CNN have confirmed. “I hope we can get this done, but I’m not sure,” Biden said. “But one thing for certain: With every other major civil rights bill that came along, if we missed the first time, we can come back and try it a second time.” As my colleague Sam Levine writes, Biden faces long odds: Sinema publicly and bluntly reaffirmed she would not support any change to the filibuster rules. She took to the Senate floor around noon on Thursday and said she would not support any changes to the filibuster, the Senate rule that requires 60 votes to advance legislation. “While I continue to support these [voting rights] bills, I will not support separate actions that worsen the underlying disease of division infecting our country,” said Sinema. Manchin also released his own statement on Thursday afternoon confirming he would not vote to change the filibuster. Read more: A new report has revealed that a record number of Americans are now alarmed about the climate crisis. The study, published by the Yale Program on Climate Change Communication, found that Americans overall are becoming increasingly worried about global heating, more engaged with the issue and more supportive of finding solutions to the issue. The six distinct groups are: the Alarmed, who are the most engaged and very worried about global warming; the Concerned, who think global warming is a significant threat but prioritize it less and are less likely to take action; the Cautious, who are aware of climate change but are uncertain about its causes and are not very worried; the Disengaged, who are largely unaware of global warming; the Doubtful, who doubt it is happening or human-caused and the Dismissive, who firmly reject its reality and oppose most climate change policies. The study revealed that the largest group, Alarmed (33%) greatly outnumber the dismissive (9%) by more than three to one. Approximately six in 10 Americans (59%) are either Alarmed or Concerned while only approximately two in 10 (19%) are Doubtful or Dismissive. Over the last five years, the Alarmed group has nearly doubled in size, growing 15 percentage points in total. From just March 2021 to September 2021 alone, the Alarmed segment increased by 9 percentage points. Meanwhile, the Dismissive group shrank from 11% to 9% in the past five years, with only about one in 10 Americans now firmly rejecting the reality of human-caused global warming. When the group first began its surveys in 2008, the Concerned was the largest segment. Two years later, the group decreased slightly while the Cautious grew and became roughly equally as large. On the contrary, the Alarmed was the second smallest group as recently as early 2015. The Cautious, Doubtful and Dismissive groups have all shrunk in recent years. Read more: A judge in Waukesha County has ruled that absentee ballot drop boxes cannot be used in Wisconsin, after Republicans brought a lawsuit seeking to prohibit voters from submitting ballots anywhere other than the local clerk’s office. This is yet another victory for conservatives who are trying to roll back voting access ahead of the midterm elections. Republicans in Wisconsin are also seeking to limit ballot boxes and restrict their location. The ruling from Waukesha county circuit judge Mark Bohren comes amid a stalemate in the Senate over passing voting reforms. Ballot drop boxes have long been used in Wisconsin, especially during the 2020 elections, when voters sought safer ways to vote amid the pandemic. Joe Biden narrowly defeated Donald Trump in Wisconsin during the 2020 presidential election. A Republican-led investigation into the result is ongoing despite multiple probes and recounts confirming Biden’s victory. California’s governor, Gavin Newsom, has denied parole for Sirhan Sirhan, the 77-year-old who has spent more than 50 years in prison for the assassination of Robert F Kennedy. Newsom has previously cited Kennedy as his “political hero” and wrote in his decision rejecting parole: “After decades in prison, he has failed to address the deficiencies that led him to assassinate Senator Kennedy. Mr Sirhan lacks the insight that would prevent him from making the same types of dangerous decisions he made in the past.” Sirhan was approved for release by the parole board last year after two of Kennedy’s sons argued in favor of his release and prosecutors did not object. The board ruled that he was not a danger to public safety in the wake of new laws that required the panel to consider that he committed the offense at a young age. Sirhan originally faced a death sentence for the 1968 killing of Kennedy, who was a Democratic US senator from New York and the former US attorney general. He was murdered at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles moments after declaring victory in the California presidential primary. Sirhan repeatedly testified that he did not recall shooting Kennedy and injuring five others, but in his recent parole hearing, he said he took responsibility for the killing. Read more: The Republican party has signaled plans to withdraw from traditional US presidential debates, which it claims are biased against it. The New York Times first reported the move, citing a letter sent on Thursday by the Republican National Committee (RNC) to the Commission on Presidential Debates (CPD). The commission was set up in 1987, as a non-partisan body “to ensure, for the benefit of the American electorate, that general election debates between or among the leading candidates for the offices of president and vice-president … are a permanent part of the electoral process”. In the most recent election, in 2020, Donald Trump made headlines with an aggressive performance in the first debate, in Cleveland, Ohio. The second debate was cancelled after Trump was hospitalized with Covid-19 and the CPD sought to move the event online. Trump and Republicans protested that doing so would help Joe Biden. The final debate took place in Nashville, Tennessee as planned, with Biden widely adjudged the winner. A vice-presidential debate between Mike Pence and Kamala Harris also went ahead, in Salt Lake City. In December this year, the Guardian first revealed the stunning news that Trump tested positive for Covid before the first debate but concealed the result, potentially putting Biden’s life in danger. Trump said that was fake news. So did his former chief of staff Mark Meadows – who wrote the book which contained the bombshell. The Times said the Republican move against the CPD was born of longstanding complaints that it favors Democrats, “mirroring increasing rancor from conservatives toward Washington-based institutions”. Among Republican complaints in 2020 was that the first debate took place on 29 September, more than a month before election day but after nearly a million votes had been cast. Trump and Republicans also complained about supposed bias among debate moderators – even from Chris Wallace, then of the conservative Fox News network, in the first debate. Read more: Mitch McConnell has been attacked by a key Trump ally and told to repair his relationship with the former president or face failure as Senate Republican leader. The move by Lindsey Graham comes amid a rumbling dispute between McConnell and Donald Trump, whose grip on the GOP remains near-total despite his impeachment for inciting the deadly Capitol attack in service of his lie that his defeat by Joe Biden was caused by electoral fraud. In the most recent round of the contest, McConnell sided with Mike Rounds, a South Dakota senator who said Biden won the election. “If you want to be a Republican leader in the House or the Senate, you have to have a working relationship with Donald Trump,” Graham, of South Carolina, told Fox News on Wednesday night. Acquitted in his second impeachment trial, Trump remains free to run for office. “He’s the most consequential Republican since Ronald Reagan,” Graham said. “It is his nomination if he wants it, and I think he’ll get re-elected in 2024. “I like Senator McConnell, he worked well with President Trump to get a bunch of judges including three supreme court justices on the bench, they got the tax cuts passed working together. “But here’s the question: can Senator McConnell effectively work with the leader the Republican party, Donald Trump? “I’m not gonna vote for anybody that can’t have a working relationship with President Trump, to be a team to come up with an America First agenda, to show the difference between us and liberal Democrats, to prosecute the case for Trump policies … because if you can’t do that, you will fail. I will tell you that.” Graham’s comments duly prompted criticism, one columnist calling it “a spineless cop-out”. The rightwing media personality Glenn Beck has Covid – again – but says this time it has spread to his lungs. Beck has said he has not been vaccinated. Speaking to fellow shock jock Mark Levin on Wednesday, he said: “I am great … despite having Covid and seeing the destruction of our country.” The virus, he said, was “starting to go into my lungs today and a little disturbing. I’m on all the medications and treatments and everything else, so.” “It’s all good,” he added, with a cough. Announcing his second bout with Covid on Instagram last week, Beck said: “So far it is way different than the first time I had it in Dec ’20. That time it wiped me out for almost three weeks. This time it is just the worst ‘cold’ I have ever had.” His interview with Levin was punctuated by coughs. Beck said he was taking Ivermectin – an anti-parasitic with human uses but mostly applied to livestock, which experts say has no use against Covid and can be dangerous – and said: “I have had [Covid] for about a week. “I’m not going downhill. I mean, I think I’m feeling better. It’s just getting into my lungs. You will want to avoid that.” Beck insisted he was “not concerned about it. I’m really not. I just am so done with this whole Covid thing. I know it is real.” He also said that as he was “a fatty-fat-fatso”, getting Covid was “probably not the best thing, and I got some other issues”. People with other health issues can be at risk from Covid even if they are vaccinated. Over the past two years, deaths from Covid of rightwing figures who have campaigned against vaccines and other public health measures have made headlines across the US. That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden acknowledged the Senate will not likely be able to pass a voting rights bill, after Kyrsten Sinema and Joe Manchin said they would not support changing filibuster rules to pass the legislation. “I hope we can get this done. The honest to God answer is, I don’t know whether we can get this done,” the president told reporters after meeting with Senate Democrats on Capitol Hill today. Biden’s comments came hours after the House passed a sweeping voting rights bill, in a party-line vote of 220 to 203. That bill will now languish in the Senate unless Democrats can convince Sinema and Manchin to change their minds about a filibuster carveout for voting rights. The supreme court blocked the Biden administration’s coronavirus vaccine mandate for companies with at least 100 employees. However, the justices allowed the administration’s vaccine requirement for health care workers to remain in place. In response to the court’s ruling, Biden called on individual states and companies to establish their own mandates to protect citizens and employees against the virus. Biden announced his administration will order an additional 500m at-home coronavirus tests to combat the surge in cases caused by the Omicron variant. The announcement brings the total number of tests ordered by the administration to 1bn, but the original batch of tests has not yet been distributed. Biden said the White House will launch a website next week to allow people to order tests to be shipped to their homes. Stewart Rhodes, leader of the far-right group Oath Keepers, was arrested and charged with seditious conspiracy in connection to his role in the Capitol insurrection. The arrest marks the first time that the justice department has brought a seditious conspiracy charge against someone involved in the January 6 attack. Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack subpoenaed Twitter, Meta, Alphabet and Reddit on Thursday for records related to the 6 January insurrection, as it seeks to review data that could potentially incriminate the Trump White House. Facebook is part of Meta and Google is part of Alphabet. The move by the select committee suggests the panel is ramping up its examination of social media posts and messages that could provide evidentiary evidence as to who might have been in contact with the Trump White House around 6 January, one source said. Congressman Bennie Thompson, the chairman of the select committee, said in a statement that he authorized the four subpoenas since those platforms were used to communicate plans about the Capitol attack, and yet the social media companies ignored earlier requests. Read the Guardian’s full report: White House press secretary Jen Psaki was asked whether Joe Biden has resigned himself to the fact that the Senate will not be able to pass voting rights legislation, after Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema reiterated their opposition to filibuster reform. “I think we’re going to keep fighting until the votes are had,” Psaki said at her daily briefing with reporters. Another reporter asked Psaki whether the administration believes things overall are going well for them right now, given that the president has suffered significant defeats in recent weeks. To name just a few: Biden’s Build Back Better bill has stalled in the Senate because of Manchin’s criticism of the spending package. Now the Senate cannot pass voting rights bills because of Manchin and Sinema’s opposition. Simultaneously, the supreme court has blocked Biden’s coronavirus vaccine mandate for large companies. And there is the small matter of a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine. “You do hard things in White Houses,” Psaki replied. “We could certainly propose legislation to see if people support bunny rabbits and ice cream, but that wouldn’t be very rewarding to the American people.” This day could not get much worse for Joe Biden. Joe Manchin has now reiterated that he is opposed to changing filibuster rules to pass voting rights bills. “As I have said many times before, I will not vote to eliminate or weaken the filibuster,” Manchin said in a new statement, released shortly after Senate Democrats met with Biden on Capitol Hill. “The filibuster plays an important role in protecting our democracy from the transitory passions of the majority and respecting the input of the minority in the Senate.” Manchin argued the filibuster, which effectively requires a 60-vote supermajority to pass most Senate bills, had “protected us from the volatile political swings we have endured over the last 233 years”. “The role of the minority is what ensures the policies of our nation have input from all corners of the country. We must never forget that the Senate governs for all 50 states, not just red or blue states,” Manchin said. Given the 50-50 split in the Senate, majority leader Chuck Schumer needs to have every member of the Democratic caucus on board before he can get any rule changes approved. Both Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema have now indicated they are against filibuster reform, leaving Democrats with no path for passing their voting rights bills. Joe Biden expressed disappointment in the supreme court’s decision to block his coronavirus vaccine mandate for companies with at least 100 employees, while celebrating the justices’ ruling to keep the requirement for health care workers in place. “Today’s decision by the Supreme Court to uphold the requirement for health care workers will save lives: the lives of patients who seek care in medical facilities, as well as the lives of doctors, nurses, and others who work there,” the president said in a new statement. “At the same time, I am disappointed that the Supreme Court has chosen to block common-sense life-saving requirements for employees at large businesses that were grounded squarely in both science and the law.” With the federal government’s mandate blocked, Biden argued that individual states and employers now have an obligation to protect their citizens and employees by enacting vaccine requirements of their own. “I call on business leaders to immediately join those who have already stepped up – including one third of Fortune 100 companies – and institute vaccination requirements to protect their workers, customers, and communities,” Biden said. “We have to keep working together if we want to save lives, keep people working, and put this pandemic behind us.” The supreme court’s conservative majority has blocked the Biden administration’s coronavirus vaccine mandate for companies with at least 100 employees. The AP reports: The Supreme Court has stopped the Biden administration from enforcing a requirement that employees at large businesses be vaccinated against COVID-19 or undergo weekly testing and wear a mask on the job. At the same time, the court is allowing the administration to proceed with a vaccine mandate for most health care workers in the U.S. ... The court’s conservative majority concluded the administration overstepped its authority by seeking to impose the Occupational Safety and Health Administration’s vaccine-or-test rule on U.S. businesses with at least 100 employees. More than 80 million people would have been affected. The ruling comes as the US is dealing with a surge in coronavirus cases caused by the Omicron variant, which has led to record-high levels of hospitalizations. Senator Raphael Warnock, a Democrat of Georgia, argued that the party has a moral obligation to enact voting rights legislation and protect Americans’ access to the ballot box. “The state of Georgia is ground zero for these voter suppression bills that we’re seeing emerge all across the country,” Warnock said after Senate Democrats’ meeting with Joe Biden. “This is a defining moral moment. It is the most important thing we can do this Congress.” Georgia, where Biden won by just 0.3 points in 2020, is one of 19 states that have enacted voting restrictions since the presidential election. Later this year, the state will hold high-profile races for the governorship and the US Senate, as Warnock faces reelection. Joe Manchin said Joe Biden did an “excellent job” during Senate Democrats’ meeting today to discuss voting rights and filibuster reform. But the West Virginia senator did not answer reporters’ questions about whether he was swayed by the president’s argument for the need to change the filibuster to pass voting rights bills. Manchin has previously said he wants any Senate rule changes to attract bipartisan support, which will be virtually impossible given Republicans’ unified opposition to filibuster reform. Joe Biden acknowledged it will be difficult to get a voting rights bill through the Senate, after the president met with Democratic senators on Capitol Hill this afternoon. “I hope we can get this done. The honest to God answer is, I don’t know whether we can get this done,” the president told reporters. Biden noted that past civil rights bills have required multiple attempts to get them passed, and he expressed hope that Democrats will have another opportunity to enact their proposals. “We missed this time,” Biden said. “As long as I have a breath in me, as long as I’m in the White House, as long as I am engaged at all, I’m going to be fighting to change the way these legislatures have been moving.” The president’s comments came hours after Senator Kyrsten Sinema voiced opposition to changing filibuster rules, effectively killing any hope of swiftly passing a voting rights bill. Republicans have repeatedly used the filibuster to block Democrats’ voting rights proposals. Given the 50-50 split in the Senate, majority leader Chuck Schumer needs the support of every Democratic member to get rule changes approved. A federal grand jury returned an indictment yesterday against Oath Keeper leader Stewart Rhodes, charging him with seditious conspiracy, and it was unsealed today. In its press release about the newly announced charges, the justice department noted that Rhodes had been arrested this morning in Little Elm, Texas. The justice department also said: According to the seditious conspiracy indictment, the defendants conspired through a variety of manners and means, including: organizing into teams that were prepared and willing to use force and to transport firearms and ammunition into Washington, D.C.; recruiting members and affiliates to participate in the conspiracy; organizing trainings to teach and learn paramilitary combat tactics; bringing and contributing paramilitary gear, weapons and supplies – including knives, batons, camouflaged combat uniforms, tactical vests with plates, helmets, eye protection and radio equipment – to the Capitol grounds; breaching and attempting to take control of the Capitol grounds and building on Jan. 6, 2021, in an effort to prevent, hinder and delay the certification of the electoral college vote; using force against law enforcement officers while inside the Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021; continuing to plot, after Jan. 6, 2021, to oppose by force the lawful transfer of presidential power, and using websites, social media, text messaging and encrypted messaging applications to communicate with co-conspirators and others. Stewart Rhodes, leader of the far-right group Oath Keepers, has been arrested and charged with seditious conspiracy in connection to his role in the Capitol insurrection. The AP reports: Rhodes is the highest-ranking member of an extremist group to be arrested in the deadly siege and it is the first time the Justice Department has brought a seditious conspiracy charge in connection with the attack on the Capitol. Rhodes is charged along with more than a dozen other members and associates of the Oath Keepers, who authorities say came to Washington intent on stopping the certification of President Joe Biden’s victory. Rhodes did not enter the Capitol building on Jan. 6 but is accused of helping put into motion the violence that disrupted the certification of the vote. The House select committee investigating the insurrection also subpoenaed Rhodes in November, seeking information about the role that he and other Oath Keeper leaders played in planning the attack. Civil rights leaders and voting rights groups fumed on Thursday after Arizona Senator Kyrsten Sinema publicly killed any chance of voting rights legislation passing, taking to the senate floor to say she would not support changes to the filibuster. “History will remember Senator Sinema unkindly. While Sen. Sinema remains stubborn in her ‘optimism’, Black and Brown Americans are losing their right to vote,” said Martin Luther King III, the son of civil rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr. “Arizonans value leaders who can compromise and work across the aisle, but let me be clear: the filibuster is non-negotiable. Indivisibles, like myself, worked tooth-and-nail to get Sinema elected in 2018 -- we made calls, registered voters, and knocked on doors in the 120-degree weather,” said Signa Oliver, an activist with the Arizona chapter of Indivisible, a grassroots group. “We know the weight of this trifecta, and we will not sit idly by as Sinema lets our hard work and the prospect of a better country for all wither so she can be branded as a ‘bipartisan’ leader.” Sinema gave her speech just before Joe Biden was set to travel to Capitol Hill to try and persuade senators to support the bill. The White House said it had no comment in reaction to the speech. Joe Biden has just arrived on Capitol Hill for Senate Democrats’ caucus lunch to discuss voting rights legislation and filibuster reform. But there may not be much to discuss, after Kyrsten Sinema made clear that she will not support amending the filibuster to allow voting rights bills to advance. Given the 50-50 split in the Senate, majority leader Chuck Schumer needs all 50 Democratic caucus members on board before he can get any rule changes approved. Sinema’s remarks will almost certainly disappoint Biden, who delivered an impassioned pitch for filibuster reform in Atlanta, Georgia, earlier this week. “Let the majority prevail,” Biden said on Tuesday. “And if that bare minimum is blocked, we have no option but to change the Senate rules, including getting rid of the filibuster for this.” Here’s where the day stands so far: The House passed a sweeping voting rights bill in a party-line vote of 220 to 203. The bill now heads to the evenly divided Senate, where Democrats will need to change filibuster rules to get the legislation passed. Joe Biden is traveling to Capitol Hill this afternoon to meet with Senate Democrats and discuss the path forward for the bill. But Senator Kyrsten Sinema killed any hopes of the bill’s swift passage after she spoke out against changing filibuster rules. Sinema, one of the two key holdouts in Democrats’ negotiations over the filibuster, said in a floor speech, “While I continue to support these bills, I will not support separate actions that worsen the underlying disease of division infecting our country.” Biden announced his administration will order another 500 million at-home coronavirus tests to combat the surge in cases caused by the Omicron variant. The announcement brings the total number of tests ordered by the administration to 1 billion, but the original batch of tests has not yet been distributed. Biden said the White House will launch a website next week to allow people to order tests to be shipped to their homes. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Kyrsten Sinema has indicated – or simply confirmed – that Democrats’ push to change Senate rules to allow for the passage of voting rights legislation is indeed doomed. In a speech on the Senate floor delivered shortly before Joe Biden was scheduled to arrive on Capitol Hill to attempt to force the issue, the Arizona senator said: “While I continue to support these bills, I will not support separate actions that worsen the underlying disease of division infecting our country.” Those separate actions would involve abolishing or modifying the filibuster, the rule which empowers the minority by setting a 60-vote threshold for most legislation. The Senate is split 50-50 and controlled by Democrats via the vice-president, Kamala Harris. Democratic senators represent vastly more voters than Republican senators, a point often made by supporters of filibuster reform. Democrats who favour change also point out that federal legislation is needed to counter Republican attempts to restrict voting among minorities which tend to favour Democrats, by means of restrictive laws at the state level. Voter suppression laws are also at issue, as Republicans who support Donald Trump’s big lie about electoral fraud seek to instal allies in key posts and to make it easier to overturn election results. Nonetheless, Sinema and her fellow moderate Joe Manchin, of West Virginia, have remained steadfastly against filibuster reform – even though both support some form of federal voting rights protection. They fear the ramifications of filibuster reform if and when Republicans take back the chamber, which could well happen later this year. Some observers suggest that is naive, as Republicans under Mitch McConnell, a man who has made constitutional hardball an art form, may well dynamite the filibuster themselves. Either way, without Sinema and Manchin, all efforts on the issue by Biden and the majority leader, Chuck Schumer of New York, are doomed to fail. US Capitol police have announced the arrest of a woman from Michigan who “wanted to talk about information she had about 6 January 2021” but was found to be carrying four guns and ammunition, including a “long gun” or semi-automatic rifle. “At approximately 1.40pm” on Wednesday, a statement said, “a woman parked a 2001 Chevrolet Silverado in the ‘No Parking’ zone in front of US Capitol Police headquarters. The woman was identified as Kery Lynn McAttee. “McAttee told our officers she drove here from Michigan and wanted to talk about information she had about 6 January 2021.” That was the day supporters of Donald Trump attacked the Capitol in attempt to stop certification of Joe Biden’s election win. Five people died around the riot, including a Capitol officer and a rioter shot dead by law enforcement, and more than 100 officers were injured. Capitol police said that as officers spoke to McAttee, one “spotted a gun case and the butt of a long gun in the Silverado” and McAttee “confirmed there were firearms in her vehicle”. “At this time,” the statement said, “there is no evidence the 58-year-old suspect was coming here to do anything except speak with our officers. We cannot provide the details of that conversation because they are now part of an open investigation. She was not on file with the USCP. The statement detailed the guns in McAttee’s car, and said she faced charges including unlawful possession of a weapon and unlawful possession/transportation of a semi-automatic rifle. Following the House passage of Democrats’ voting rights bill, Michael Waldman, president of the Brennan Center for Justice, called on senators to follow their colleagues’ example. “The House’s bold action is exactly what this moment requires,” Waldman said. “Now the Senate must act. In the long fight for voting rights, this is a critical moment. Every senator must choose, and every senator must vote.” But again, in order to pass the bill, the Senate will need to amend the filibuster, and Democrats don’t have the votes for that at the moment. Stay tuned. House Democrats have passed their voting rights bill, sending it to the Senate, where the legislation will face many challenges. The House vote was 220 to 203, and it fell along party lines as expected, with every Republican opposing the measure. As of now, the bill has no path to passage in the evenly divided Senate, as centrists Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema remain opposed to amending the filibuster to pass voting rights legislation. Joe Biden will attend Senate Democrats’ caucus lunch this afternoon, giving the president and majority leader Chuck Schumer another opportunity to convince the holdout senators. The US House is currently voting on a bill that combines two sweeping voting rights measures. They’re expected to pass it shortly and send it over to the US Senate, where there will be a showdown over the filibuster. The procedure is a little arcane, but Democrats combined their two major pieces of voting rights legislation into a single bill Wednesday evening in order to expedite it over to the senate. Chuck Schumer, the senate majority leader, has pledged to hold a vote on the measure and potential rule changes to the filibuster by Monday. But as that deadline fast approaches, Democrats still don’t have the votes to change the filibuster. Senators Joe Manchin of West Virginia and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona both still reportedly don’t support changing the procedure. Joe Biden is set to travel to Capitol Hill Thursday to meet with senate Democrats to try and persuade them to pass the bill. Democrats’ procedural maneuvering has ensured that they will have a debate on the bill in the senate, but still require 60 votes to end debate and move to a vote. Joe Biden also confirmed that US military personnel will be deployed to six states to help overwhelmed hospitals deal with the surge in coronavirus cases caused by the Omicron variant. The medical personnel will be sent to New York, New Jersey, Ohio, Rhode Island, Michigan and New Mexico over the coming weeks, Biden said. After Biden concluded his prepared remarks on the pandemic, he did not take any questions from reporters. One reporter then suggested Biden should soon hold a press conference, as he has held fewer press conferences than his recent predecessors. The president replied that he would look forward to that, per NBC News: Joe Biden acknowledged many Americans’ disappointment that masks are still necessary, nearly two years into the coronavirus pandemic. “I know we all wish that we could finally be done with wearing masks. I get it. But they’re a really important tool to stop the spread, especially of a highly transmittable Omicron variant,” Biden said. “So please, please wear the mask.” The president said he will announce next week how his administration plans to make “high-quality masks available to the American people for free”. Joe Biden confirmed that his administration will order another 500m at-home coronavirus tests to address the surge in cases caused by the Omicron variant. That brings the total number of tests ordered by the administration to 1bn but the first batch of 500m tests has not yet been distributed to Americans. Biden said the White House will be launching a website next week to allow Americans to order at-home tests that will be shipped to their homes. The president added that he will also outline plans next week to make high-quality masks available for free, as some progressives, like Bernie Sanders, have called for. Joe Biden is now delivering remarks on his administration’s response to the surge in coronavirus cases caused by the Omicron variant. The president is joined by the secretary of defense, Lloyd Austin, and Fema administrator Deanne Criswell, who will likely address plans to deploy military staff to several states to help deal with the surge in cases. Biden began his remarks by reiterating that this remains “a pandemic of the unvaccinated”. While many vaccinated people have contracted the Omicron variant of coronavirus, they are far less likely to be hospitalized or die from their illness, Biden noted. Joe Biden will announce today that his administration is ordering another 500m at-home coronavirus tests to combat the surge in cases caused by the Omicron variant. “Today, as a part of the president’s remarks and briefing, he will announce that in addition to the 500m tests that we are in the process of acquiring, he is directing his team to procure 500m more tests to meet future demand,” a White House official told the press pool. The announcement will bring the total number of tests ordered by the administration to 1bn, but it may still take some time for Americans to begin receiving those tests. The 500m tests that Biden ordered last month have not yet been distributed, and some health experts are skeptical about the tests arriving in time to make a difference for this surge in cases. Dr Michael Mina, an epidemiologist and former Harvard professor, told the New York Times that he expected the first batch of tests to be distributed over the next couple of months. “Had this been started a long time ago, maybe things would be a bit different,” Mina said late last month. “But this is where we are now, and we kind of have to deal with it.” Kamala Harris was pressed on when Americans will begin to receive the 500m free at-home coronavirus tests that the Biden administration has promised to deliver. The vice-president told Craig Melvin of the Today show that the at-home tests will start to be distributed “shortly”. “I think it’s going to be by next week but soon, absolutely soon, and it is a matter of urgency for us,” Harris said. Melvin then asked Harris twice whether she believed that the administration should have taken that action sooner, as some health experts have argued. Harris dodged the question, saying: “We are doing it.” Data from the UK indicates that the country may have already passed its peak in Omicron cases, giving hope to the US as it weathers its own surge. The Wall Street Journal reports: The seven-day average of new daily cases of Covid-19 in the U.K. has been falling for a week and on Tuesday dropped below the 14-day average for the first time since November, according to a Wall Street Journal analysis of official data. Both are signs that caseloads are diminishing. The rate of increase in the number of new Covid-19 hospitalizations has also slowed and in England—and especially London, which experienced the Omicron wave sooner than other regions—new hospital admissions with Covid-19 are falling. The first cases of Omicron were detected in the U.K. on Nov. 27. Scientists caution, however, that caseloads and hospital admissions may yet reverse course as social mixing increases with the end of the holiday season and the start of the new school term. As the Guardian’s Ian Sample notes, it’s quite possible that Omicron cases in the UK will continue to raise and fall over the coming weeks depending on people’s behavior and the government’s strategy to mitigate spread. Federal health authorities in America have said the Omicron Covid-19 variant is so contagious it is likely most people in the US will be infected, and compared the pandemic to a “natural disaster”. Authorities said even as Omicron shatters records for new cases, they are hopeful the surge will quickly subside, and said the US needs to focus on ensuring hospital systems do not collapse amid the surge. “I think it’s hard to process what’s actually happening right now, which is [that] most people are going to get Covid, all right?” said Janet Woodcock, the acting head of the Food and Drug Administration. “What we need to do is make sure the hospitals can still function … [that] transportation, other essential services are not disrupted while this happens.” Woodcock made the comments at a Senate hearing on Wednesday where senators, especially Republicans, harshly questioned administration officials tasked with responding to the pandemic, including Woodcock, the head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Rochelle Walensky, and the president’s chief medical adviser, Anthony Fauci. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Joe Biden is scheduled to deliver a speech this morning on his administration’s response to the coronavirus pandemic, as the Omicron variant continues to spread across the US. Biden will be joined by the secretary of defense, Lloyd Austin, and Fema administrator Deanne Criswell, who will likely address plans to deploy military staff to several states to help deal with the surge in cases. The highly Omicron transmissible variant has caused record-high levels of hospitalization and price-gouging of at-home coronavirus tests. The situation has sparked accusations that the Biden administration did not adequately prepare for the arrival of the Omicron variant, and the president will likely address that criticism today. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.Jim Goldsmith has had no visitors in the long-stay section at Coonamble Multi-Purpose Service since the Thursday before Christmas. It was the day he turned 79 and his wife Pam’s Covid-19 test came back positive. At the end of 10 days of Covid-19 illness, Pam received medical clearance from NSW Health. But she still needed to show a negative PCR test result to see her critically ill husband of 52 years. Eight days after she took the PCR test on 5 January, Pam still had not received the results. Enquiring after her results a week after she took the first test, Pam was told to come and do another PCR test at the Coonamble MPS on 10 January and the results would be fast-tracked. She had not received the second test results by Friday either. This is the reality of a sluggish health system in regional and rural Australia, where Covid-19 PCR and rapid antigen tests are hard to access and there are long delays receiving results. It is separating families and exacerbating issues within stretched health services. Their daughter Kim Goldsmith wants to know who is responsible because she fears many vulnerable people like her father have been hung out to dry. “Despite Omicron being rampant in Coonamble, Dad still hasn’t had his booster. I’d love to know who’s responsible for this. It’s hanging vulnerable people out to dry,” Kim said. Jim contracted necrotising fasciitis, a flesh-eating bacterial infection, in his neck on 4 December 2020, which required multiple surgeries over several months to remove all the affected muscle, and subsequently 24-hour care. Kim Goldsmith says her mother has been going to the MPS every day for several hours because the service was so short-staffed they relied on her to feed him through a Picc line (peripherally inserted central catheter). “The nurses at the hospital had become so reliant on Mum being there to feed him and take care of him that when she didn’t turn up, she’d turn up later and discover he hadn’t been fed for two hours beyond the allocated time,” Kim Goldsmith says. The late feeds, according to Kim, cause complications in his digestion. Because of Jim’s diabetes, he also has failing eyesight and can’t read and struggles to see things on TV. “It’s a pretty lonely existence,” Kim says. Before the Omicron outbreak, Jim was allowed day releases on a semi-regular basis where family members could take him home for the afternoon or out for a drive, allowing him to get out and see the country, occasionally run into somebody and have a yarn. “It was like getting close to what the old life had been. And he absolutely hated going back to the hospital every afternoon.” Since the latest Covid-19 outbreak Jim is no longer allowed day release, and families can only nominate one approved visitor. “Now it’s only Mum and even she can’t get in,” Kim says. The family is especially concerned, she says, as her father has struggled with mental illness ever since he became ill. In the last few days Jim has developed an infection on top of his critical illness, which Kim Goldsmith says is the second time her father’s condition has deteriorated with an infection as a result of an extended period of isolation. During the winter lockdown in western NSW, Pam was unable to see Jim for six weeks until the lung infection he developed saw him moved to palliative care. Kim says they told her mother “he hasn’t got long … you’ll be able to come and visit.” “Mum was able to suit up and come and go in and spend two hours with him and then all of a sudden he got better and they put him back into long-stay and back to no visitors,” Kim Goldsmith says. “You’ve literally got to be dying to have any social stimulation in the situation,” she says. Following Guardian Australia’s media enquiry, Pam Goldsmith has been given permission to see her husband regardless of the outcome of the PCR test as long as she follows normal Covid-safe protocols going through the hospital on Friday 14 January. Kim Goldsmith says her mother isn’t sure if the drugs kicking in had helped or the knowledge of her visit the next day, but Jim’s voice sounded better than it previously has. In a statement to Guardian Australia, a Western NSW Local Health District (WNSWLHD) spokesperson says the safety of patients and people living in residential care is at the centre of infection and control guidelines. Currently, visitor access is restricted at Multi-Purpose Services in Western NSW Local Health District to one visitor per visit. “PCR testing and proof of a negative result is not a requirement to visit aged-care residents at Multi-Purpose Services. Visitors are screened and risk-assessed on entry. Confirmed cases of Covid-19 or anyone who has been identified as a close contact in the previous 14 days are not permitted entry to facilities,” the spokesperson said. “WNSWLHD is looking into the circumstances with staff and the Goldsmith family, and we sincerely apologise for any inconvenience caused.” The spokesperson said WNSWLHD healthcare teams were dedicated to providing the best care possible for patients and aged-care residents and staff were doing everything possible to maintain social and family connectivity, while also protecting the safety of patients, residents and staff. “The furloughing of staff to comply with isolation requirements, annual leave across the holiday period, and the impact of Covid-19 on vacation and childcare arrangements have all placed pressure on staffing availability, however the WNSWLHD has maintained continuous service delivery at all facilities across the District. “Pathology providers are working tirelessly around the clock to ensure Covid-19 tests results are returned as soon as possible. Testing capacity across NSW remains under enormous pressure. The high rate of positive PCR tests has required a more time consuming approach to the way the laboratories confirm the test samples. We thank the community for their patience,” the spokesperson said.The Queen’s humiliating removal of Prince Andrew from military and royal roles over his sexual assault case dominates the front pages today. Using a photograph of a grim-looking Duke of York being driven to Windsor Castle to face his defenestration, the Telegraph headline says “Queen freezes out Andrew”. The Mail also goes with the same haunting picture and the headline “Driven out” after the showdown meeting at Windsor Castle, and claims that it was his older brother Prince Charles “who demanded his exile over US sex case”. Prince Andrew strongly denies the assault accusations brought by Virginia Giuffre. The Guardian says “Queen strips Andrew of military and royal roles” alongside a large picture of the prince in full military garb. The Times goes with “Andrew humiliated as Queen strips his titles” under a picture of the prince and his mother at a state occasion in happier times. In a drama that seems tailor-made for an episode of The Crown, the Express reckons that the Queen has acted to safeguard the wider interests of the royal family. “Queen casts Andrew adrift… for sake of the monarchy”, proclaims its headline. Never ones to see the chance for a good pun wasted, the Sun’s splash head is “Throne out”, and says that the Queen’s “favourite son” is now merely a private citizen. The Metro can’t resist the play on words either … The main head in the Scotsman is “Queen strips Prince of his titles as sex case looms”, while the i has “Prince Andrew cast out by the Queen”. The Mirror does not lead with the Andrew story, relegating it to a picture tease on the front . However, its main story does have a royal angle, claiming “No 10 ‘parties on eve of Philip funeral’” while the Queen mourned the death of her husband alone last year.Joe Biden was in crisis talks with Senate Democratic rebels Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema at the White House on Thursday night after they thwarted his high-stakes efforts to push voting rights legislation through Congress, according to several reports. Even before the US president arrived on Capitol Hill on Thursday afternoon to join Democratic senators for their regular lunch gathering, in a diplomatic public offensive, Sinema of Arizona bluntly reiterated that she would not support any change to filibuster rules to get voting rights passed. Her surprise last-minute move with a speech effectively killed her party’s hope of passing the most sweeping voting rights protections in a generation. And in a stark joint demonstration of their opposition, Manchin of West Virginia later praised Sinema and released his own statement confirming he also would not vote to change the filibuster. A clearly-exasperated Biden concluded after his Senate lunch meeting: “I hope we can get this done, but I’m not sure.” Not long after, he suffered another blow when the supreme court blocked his administration from enforcing a requirement that employees at large businesses be vaccinated against Covid-19 or undergo weekly testing and wear a mask on the job. By the evening, however, Biden was huddled back at the White House in last-ditch talks with Sinema and Manchin, CNN and Reuters reported, citing unnamed sources. Sinema had taken to the Senate floor around noon opposing any changes to the filibuster, the Senate rule that requires 60 votes to advance legislation, while Democrats currently hold a bare majority in the 100-seat chamber and two voting rights bills are stalled. “While I continue to support these [voting rights] bills, I will not support separate actions that worsen the underlying disease of division infecting our country,” she said. She added: “We must address the disease itself, the disease of division, to protect our democracy, and it cannot be achieved by one party alone. It cannot be achieved solely by the federal government. The response requires something greater and, yes, more difficult than what the Senate is discussing today.” Sinema’s speech came at an extremely perilous moment for US democracy. Republican lawmakers in 19 states have enacted 34 new laws, according to the Brennan Center for Justice, that impose new voting restrictions. They have also passed a slew of bills that seek to inject more partisan control into election administration and the counting of votes, an unprecedented trend experts are deeply concerned about and call election subversion. Many of those measures have been passed in state legislatures on simple majority, party-line votes. For months, Sinema and Manchin have staunchly defended the filibuster, which stands as the major hurdle to voting rights reform. No Republicans support either the voting rights bills or changing the rules of the filibuster, so Democrats cannot do anything unless both senators are on board. Chuck Schumer, the Democratic leader in the Senate, has pledged a vote on the measure and rule changes by Monday, a public holiday to celebrate the civil rights leader Martin Luther King. The opposition damages Biden, who gave a speech in Atlanta on Tuesday calling on Democrats to support the bill. On Thursday he said: “Like every other major civil rights bill that came along, if we miss the first time, we can come back and try it a second time. We missed this time. We missed this time,” he added. Raphael Warnock, a first term Democratic senator of Georgia, whose victory last January helped Democrats win control of the Senate, said: “The state of Georgia is ground zero for these voter suppression bills that we’re seeing emerge all across the country.” He added: “This is a defining moral moment. It is the most important thing we can do this Congress.” Civil rights leaders quickly denounced Sinema after her speech on Thursday. “History will remember Senator Sinema unkindly. While she remains stubborn in her ‘optimism’, Black and brown Americans are losing their right to vote,” said Martin Luther King III, the son of the civil rights leader, who had met with Biden and vice president Kamala Harris on their high-profile joint visit to Georgia. “She’s siding with the legacy of Bull Connor and George Wallace instead of the legacy of my father and all those who fought to make real our democracy,” he said, citing the notorious segregationists. Signa Oliver, an activist with the Arizona chapter of Indivisible, a grassroots group, said: “Arizonans value leaders who can compromise and work across the aisle, but let me be clear: the filibuster is non-negotiable. Indivisibles, like myself, worked tooth-and-nail to get Sinema elected in 2018 – we made calls, registered voters and knocked on doors in the 120F weather.” Jared Huffman, a Democratic congressman from California, tweeted at Sinema and Manchin: “Shame on you.” Mitch McConnell, the Republican Senate minority leader, praised Sinema’s speech as an act of “political courage” that could “save the Senate as an institution”, according to the Associated Press. For months, Democrats have championed two bills, the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. The former measure would overhaul federal election rules to set baseline requirements for voter access. It would require 15 days of early voting, as well as same-day and automatic registration. It also includes provisions that make it harder to remove election officials without justification, and would make it easier for voters to go to court to ensure their votes aren’t thrown out. The latter bill would require states where there is repeated evidence of recent voting discrimination to get changes approved by the federal government before they go into effect. It updates and restores a provision of the 1965 Voting Rights Act, that was struck down by the supreme court in 2013. The US House passed a mega-bill on Thursday morning that combined both of those measures into a single bill. It was a procedural move designed to allow the Senate to quickly hear and debate the measure.The European Commission has proposed suspending a visa-free travel arrangement with Vanuatu due to concerns about the Pacific nation’s controversial “golden passports” scheme. The proposed suspension, which still needs to be voted on by EU states, would prevent all holders of passports issued as of 25 May 2015 – when Vanuatu started issuing a substantial number of passports in exchange for investment – from travelling to the EU without a visa. The citizenship-by-investment (CBI) programs allow foreign nationals to purchase Vanuatu citizenship for US$130,000 in a process that typically takes just over a month, without ever setting foot in the country. One of the most appealing elements of the passport scheme is that it grants unfettered, visa-free access to 130 countries including the UK and EU nations, allowing passport holders to travel there for 90 days without a visa. Vanuatu also operates as a tax haven, with no income, corporate or wealth tax. The commission – the executive branch of the EU – believed Vanuatu’s investor citizenship schemes “present serious deficiencies and security failures”, including “the granting of citizenship to applicants listed in Interpol’s databases”, “an average application processing time too short to allow for thorough screening”, “a very low rejection rate” and some applicants coming from countries that are typically excluded from citizenship schemes. Last year, the Guardian revealed that among the more than 2,000 people Vanuatu had sold citizenship to in 2020 were disgraced businesspeople and individuals sought by police in countries all over the world. The list included a Syrian businessman with US sanctions against his businesses – whose application for citizenship was revoked after the Guardian’s reporting – a suspected North Korean politician, an Italian businessman accused of extorting the Vatican, a former member of a notorious Australian motorcycle gang, and South African brothers accused of a $3.6bn cryptocurrency heist. Vanuatu’s opposition leader, Ralph Regenvanu, said the commission proposal was “inevitable”. “We have been warning the government to implement the recommended reforms to the program for almost two years now, but nothing has been done.” Glen Craig, a Vanuatu-New Zealand citizen who developed Vanuatu’s CBI program in 2012, said the impact of the announcement would have “massive negative” effects on the economy. Vanuatu is one of the poorest countries in the world, with the World Bank putting GDP per capita at US$2,780. The sale of passports is the largest source of revenue for the Vanuatu government, with analysis by Investment Migration Insider finding it accounted for 42% of all government revenue in 2020. “The economy is pretty much sustained by the program,” Craig said. “I’m sad, to be honest. There’s going to be a lot of people that probably won’t have teachers, there won’t be money to pay them, the hospital system is already pretty stretched and there’ll be no money for that. It’s tough to watch.” Craig acknowledged the CBI program had room for improvement but questioned the fairness of the visa decision, when wealthier nations that run CBI programs and have raised serious questions have not had the same visa-waiver suspension imposed on them. “Vanuatu’s been the shot across the bow,” he said. “I think we’ve been seen as an easy target … We are no better and no worse than any program we’ve seen recently, but you have to ask, for the EU to effectively economically cripple a country overnight, is that a fair punishment?” The Vanuatu Citizenship Office and Commission has been contacted for comment.Nan and her family had just one hour to gather their belongings and prepare to flee their home. A charity had offered to drive them away from Loikaw, the capital of eastern Myanmar’s Kayah state, to relative safety. She considered staying behind, with the plants, dogs and pigs that she had raised, but knew she had to leave. Since last week, Loikaw has seen intense fighting between groups opposed to last year’s military coup and the armed forces, which have launched airstrikes and fired artillery. An artillery shell had dropped near Nan’s fence, terrifying her cousin’s children, who ran to hide under their bed. “It was so loud,” she said. “My grandma was shocked and sweating, we had to give her medication to calm her down.” Other homes in Nan’s neighbourhood have been hit. The UN estimates that half the population of Loikaw have been forced to leave their homes, and that almost 90,000 people from Kayah state, formerly known as Karenni state, are displaced. Estimates by local media and a rights group are far higher, suggesting up to 170,000 people in Kayah, more than half of its population, have left their homes. Almost one year since the military seized power in Myanmar, the junta faces widespread and defiant opposition to its rule, and to the heinous violence it has inflicted on the public. Alongside a peaceful protest movement, people across the country have resorted to taking up arms, sometimes with support from established ethnic armed organisations. The military is now battling armed groups on multiple fronts. This includes in Kayah state, where it has been met with strong opposition, and has in turn launched brutal crackdowns. In December, more than 30 people, including children, were killed and their bodies burned in a massacre on Christmas Eve. On 7 January, a day after fighting intensified, Nan, 26, left her home along with her grandmother – who was in ill health – her parents, cousins and their children. The drive to Shan state, where they sought refuge, would normally take three and a half hours. Instead, it took the family three days. Fighting forced them to stop and take shelter on the way, only for the attacks to then become so close that there was no option to move again. “They continuously launched behind us as we moved forward,” she said. Ba Nyar, a spokesperson from Karenni Human Rights Group, said the situation was the most severe he had seen in the state and that 170,000 people are displaced. Many had sought refuge in Buddhist temple compounds, schools and community halls, he said. But people were struggling to access food or basics such as blankets or makeshift roofs to provide shelter at night, he added. After the recent escalation in fighting, the military has stopped all trucks coming in and out of Loikaw, cutting off supplies, said a volunteer at a refugee camp where about 100 families are sheltering. According to a report by the independent outlet Myanmar Now, the military has also cut off electricity to several areas of Loikaw, halting water supplies and wifi coverage. More than 650 houses and other civilian properties, including churches, monasteries and schools have been burned down or destroyed in Kayah state since May 2021, according to reports cited by the UN. This week, the UN special rapporteur for Myanmar, Tom Andrews, called on the junta chief, Min Aung Hlaing, to “immediately halt the air and ground attacks that junta forces have unleashed on Loikaw”, to lift the blockade of those seeking to escape and allow access for those seeking to provide aid and shelter. The UN’s children’s agency, Unicef, said it was gravely concerned by the escalating conflict and condemned the killing of at least four children across the country, and the maiming of others over the past week. Among those injured are a 12-year-old girl and 16-year-old boy from Loikaw, who were hit by heavy weaponry “following intense airstrikes and mortar attacks”, according to Unicef. Phil Robertson, the deputy director of Human Rights Watch’s Asia division, said the military had “clearly decided to make an example of Loikaw, hitting it with indiscriminate artillery and aerial bombardment that puts civilians at serious risk of grievous harm”. “Humanitarian assistance is urgently needed, and NGOs, UN agencies and donors should bend over backwards to get assistance to displaced persons who require it,” he said. Few remain in Loikaw. One resident who is still in the city said there was shooting on Wednesday evening until 9pm, and that three military helicopters were seen in the sky. “I have to stay very quiet inside my house for my safety and eat what I have,” he said. “I gave everything else to my family.” He stayed in the city to watch over the family home, but will leave if fighting worsens. “I think we can still leave, but there are many military soldiers hiding on the roads,” he said. Nan’s family were stopped twice at checkpoints before they eventually reached relative safety in Shan state. Her grandmother, who had heart problems, died before they arrived. Nan believes it was the shock and trauma caused by the sound of the firing of artillery shells. Even as the family tried to pause their journey to hold a funeral for her at a nearby town, they were again forced to leave immediately due to worsening violence. Residents from the area were also forced to flee. Nan has considered returning home. As she drove past the mountains at the back of a truck, she longed to go back. “If my parents are safe, I’d like to go back there even if I have to move from one place to another when fighting takes place in the town,” she said. “I miss home so much.”Health officials in New South Wales say they are increasingly confident new cases of Covid-19 will begin to plateau next week, as Dominic Perrottet declares that schools will only close as a “last resort” in the case of outbreaks once classes resume. NSW reported another record day of deaths from the virus on Friday, the third time the peak has been broken this week, with 29 people succumbing. A further 63,018 new cases of Covid-19 were also recorded, 37,938 of those from rapid tests. But despite conceding that the health system is under significant strain as a result of the surging Omicron outbreak, with a fall in the number of overall hospitalisations in the state due in part to the suspension of non-urgent elective surgery until February, the government is increasingly confident it has avoided disaster. There are 2,341 people with Covid-19 in hospital, below the modelling for a best-case scenario released last week by the government. ICU numbers also continue to track below the best-case scenarios. While the government did not include updated projections in its modelling, the NSW deputy health secretary Susan Pearce said it was “very pleasing” to see the modelling falling into what she called the “most optimistic” range. “I want to be clear though about that, please don’t take that as meaning our health system is not under pressure,” she said. “Modelling ultimately is modelling and behind every line and dot on that page are people … we expect that pressure on our hospitals to continue for at least the next few weeks, although what we are starting to become increasingly confident of is that we will see a plateau next week. “That is pleasing, but that plateau is obviously still at a relatively high level of Covid patients in our hospitals and our ICUs. The relationship between hospitalisations and cases and what we’re projecting is turning up quite well and does give us a degree of confidence about where we’re headed into the next couple of weeks.” Perrottet also conceded the health system is “under pressure”, saying it would be a “difficult few weeks ahead”. But the premier said the modelling was “encouraging, reassuring, and pleasing”. He confirmed that the government had agreed to a national cabinet resolution to extend isolation exemptions for a swathe of workers, which has been attacked by unions who say the plan forces essential workers “to put themselves in harm’s way” to keep the economy running. With the beginning of the school year less than three weeks away, Perrottet said NSW was working with Victoria to finalise a plan to be taken to national cabinet next Thursday. He did not rule out extending the critical worker exemptions to teachers deemed close contacts but who have no symptoms and return negative rapid antigen tests, saying he would not provide a “running commentary” on the plan. “What I will say is we will have kids back in school on day one term one in an environment that is safe for teachers and students,” he said. School closures would be a “last resort” under the plan, and said there was a “strong possibility” rapid antigen tests would be used in classrooms as part of the return-to-school plan. The chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, said she expected that up to 50% of the state’s population could become infected with Covid-19 during the first wave of the Omicron variant. “Not all of those will have symptomatic infection or even know that they’ve been infected,” she said. “There still will be people that have not experienced or been exposed to Omicron.”The Victorian government has established two medi-hotels to house Covid patients in a bid to alleviate the strain on the state’s hospitals. From Monday, two of Victoria’s quarantine hotels will be converted to facilities for Covid-19 patients, in partnership with the Melbourne Health and Northern Health services. Victorian health authorities say the Pullman Melbourne and the Mantra Epping will eventually accommodate up to 300 patients once fully operational. At a press conference on Friday, the acting health minister, James Merlino, said all patients would be medically assessed by the hospitals before transfer to ensure they were well enough to be relocated. “They’ll remain under the care of the hospital and still be considered an inpatient even while they’re in the medi-hotel.” Adam Horsburgh, deputy state controller of health system operations, said the medi-hotels would “free up hospital beds for those who most need them”. The announcement comes as the surging Omicron variant continues to place severe strain on the state’s health system. On Monday, Ambulance Victoria issued its second “code red” in a week as a result of the pressures from the pandemic. There are currently 976 people being treated in Victorian hospitals, including 112 in intensive care. On Friday, the state reported 34,836 new Covid cases, bringing the total number of active cases in Victoria to 239,396. There were 18 deaths in the last 24 hours. Horsburgh said: “These hotels will be able to accommodate patients who are both Covid-positive or who may be recovering from Covid and are likely … self-caring, but may need some ongoing clinical monitoring or support and care provided by allied health professionals.” “During the early stages, patients will be referred either from the Northern hospital or the Royal Melbourne into these two hotels. But as the program develops, they will be able to accept referrals from hospitals across the system in Victoria.” Medi-hotel patients will receive care from hospital-in-the-home teams. “Those teams will be able to work much more efficiently than they would normally by not having to move between patients’ homes,” Horsburgh said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Emma Cassar, the head of Victoria’s quarantine program, said the medi-hotels were distinct from the state’s quarantine hotels. “We still have to maintain our capacity within the quarantine program for unvaccinated international arrivals and for members of the public and frontline workers who can’t self-isolate at home,” she said. Cassar said the Pullman Melbourne and the Mantra Epping performed highly on ventilation assessments, with each room fitted with an air purifier. “They are the highest standard of ventilation for the hotels that we can have.” The announcement was welcomed by the Victorian branch of the Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation. ANMF Victoria’s acting secretary, Paul Gilbert, said the services would free up beds and ease the pressure on nurses caring for Covid patients. “Every nurse and midwife in our hospitals and health services is working above and beyond anything experienced before trying to care for an increasing number of patients with fewer staff because they are Covid positive or are close contacts,” Gilbert said in a statement. “The furloughing of thousands of staff, causing the last-resort move to surge workforce models, is taking a toll on exhausted nurses and midwives who’ve worked through this pandemic in varying degrees of crisis-mode for almost two years.” On Friday the New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, ruled out a similar program in the state, pointing to updated modelling released by the state’s health department which showed hospitalisations were tracking below best-case scenarios released last week. “The tracking today is very reassuring, please don’t take that to mean the health system isn’t under pressure, we’re in a pandemic, all hospital systems are under pressure right around the world,” he said. “What you can see today is that we should have confidence that we have the capacity within our system.”A new Chinese ambassador who has previously worked on the country’s controversial belt and road initiative (BRI) has arrived in New Zealand, prompting speculation Beijing is planning to focus on deepening economic ties with New Zealand as the two countries navigate growing diplomatic challenges. Wang Xiaolong, who replaced former ambassador Wu Xi, previously served as director-general of the Chinese Foreign Ministry’s department of international economic affairs. In that role, Wang helped oversee the BRI – which seeks to deepen economic ties between China and other countries and is a key focus of President Xi Jinping. The initiative has prompted some scepticism from world governments, particularly those in the west, about Beijing’s motives, with claims the BRI is largely an influence operation. In December the EU announced Global Gateway, a €300bn infrastructure spending project aimed at countering the BRI. Wang appears to be more of a peace-maker figure than the crop of “wolf warrior” diplomats in other foreign postings. In October he said that some decoupling between the US and China was inevitable, particularly over technology. He called for China to recognise not just the challenge posed by the US but also its own growing strength and “the rise of our influence and power to shape the global narrative”. Given Wang’s background, discussions about New Zealand involvement in the BRI could grow, according to Dr Jason Young, director of the Contemporary China Research Centre at Victoria University, who noted that the economic relationship between the two had “held up really well compared to some other countries”. There was some New Zealand interest in the BRI under former prime minister John Key’s centre-right National government. In 2017, China and New Zealand signed a “memorandum of agreement” to develop a plan for New Zealand involvement. However that engagement stalled following the 2017 election of a Labour-New Zealand First coalition, which took a more sceptical view of the BRI amid reports that it involved “debt-trap diplomacy”, with some poorer countries unable to repay Chinese loans for BRI projects. Last year, Wellington indicated a willingness to work with China on “mutually beneficial” BRI projects with an environmental emphasis. It remains unclear what that would involve. Young said the New Zealand-China relationship has also come under pressure due to China’s “far more illiberal” tendencies in recent years, including economic coercion of Australia and repressive policies in Hong Kong and Xinjiang. These challenges prompted New Zealand to criticise China more vocally than previously. It has occasionally signed on to criticisms of China issued by more hawkish Anglosphere countries Australia, the United States, Canada and the UK. The government has expressed concern this could lead to trade repercussions. In an interview with the Guardian in 2021, foreign minister Nanaia Mahuta warned exporters to prepare for a potential “storm” of anger from China. New Zealand officials have also become more cautious about the implications of growing Chinese aggression for the Indo-Pacific and New Zealand itself. A recent report by New Zealand’s Ministry of Defence warned that the country faces “a substantially more challenging environment” due, in part, to China’s “increasingly strong nationalist narrative”. Despite these challenges, New Zealand’s relationship with China remains relatively stable, said Young. “If I were a guessing man, I would suggest [Wang’s] focus will be on maintaining the relationship, in the sense of not having a deterioration like that [which] we saw in Australia”. Across the Tasman, government actions around Chinese political and economic interference sparked diplomatic conflict between the two countries, with China placing significant tariffs on some Australian exports. Recent Australian polling indicates 60% of Australians view China as a security threat. China’s embassy in New Zealand has been approached for comment. Additional reporting by Helen DavidsonIt was a moment thought nearly impossible after a decade of impunity: a senior Syrian intelligence officer jailed for life for helping direct the horrors of one of modern history’s most brutal wars. But as Anwar Raslan, a former colonel in Bashar al-Assad’s forces, bowed to his fate, survivors of the barbarous regime of torture that he helped run finally had something to cling to. The clinical calm of a German courtroom could not have been more at odds with Raslan’s former realm, the terrifying dungeons of Syria, which harboured industrial-scale death and suffering throughout a conflict still feared for its unrestrained savagery. But as the verdict was read, victims and family members sensed a rare moment of justice – a concept so elusive in Syria, it had almost become redundant. The ruling marks the first time a senior member of Assad’s security state has been convicted for wartime atrocities and follows a litany of failed efforts to do so by family members of tens of thousands of disappeared and an international community unable, or unwilling, to take on more prominent targets. For victims and their families, the symbolism was potent, as was the precedent. Though Assad and his inner sanctum remain far from the reach of international justice, the verdict complicates the Syrian leader’s creep towards normalisation with a world that had largely ostracised him. Assad and his henchmen have so far deflected a multitude of crimes: using poison gas on their people, imposing starvation sieges and the forced displacement of millions, among other allegations of war crimes. Throughout it all, Syria’s infamous prisons became central to systemised suffering and even extermination. But Raslan’s conviction, as well as that a year ago of a man considered to be a security functionary, Eyad al-Gharib, paves the way for greater accountability. It also adds to a weight of evidence being painstakingly built by international bodies, and non-government organisations, which refuse to let the brutality of Syria recede without redress. Long a pariah, regional states Jordan and the UAE have made recent moves to bring Assad back into the fold. This week came a fresh suggestion that Syria should be readmitted into the Arab world – a thought that heavyweights Saudi Arabia and Egypt are known not to oppose. Raslan was tried under the legal principle of universal jurisdiction, which allows the prosecution of crimes in one country even if they happened elsewhere. That the trial took place in Germany was no coincidence; Raslan had sought asylum there after fleeing Syria through Jordan. Germany, unlike many other western states, has shown rare enthusiasm in putting on trial alleged perpetrators of international crimes against humanity on its soil, including cases against members of the Islamic State who committed genocide against Yazidis , as well as cases in the aftermath of massacres in the Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda. But standing between the ambitions of prosecutors and family members who would like to reach Assad’s inner sanctum are the cold realities of global politics. Syria is not a party to the international criminal court, and its allies, Moscow and Tehran, have given Assad blanket cover before the UN security council, preventing him being referred to The Hague. With Syria in ruins and both Russia and Iran looking to capitalise on the enormous sums they invested in safeguarding Assad, neither appear likely to cut him loose, or to expose senior officials to global justice, for now. A fundamental shift in either Vladimir Putin, or Iranian supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei’s position would be necessary to force Assad from power, and even then his fate would more likely be a life in exile under protection, rather than a European court. However, among the hundreds of thousands of refugees that fled to Europe as the Syrian state collapsed and Islamic State overran parts of the country, are other protagonists and keepers of the regime’s darkest secrets. A Syrian doctor and regime official will soon also go on trial in Germany. Other officials continue to be interrogated. This chink in Assad’s armour of impunity may not be the last.Covid hospitalisations are expected to peak next week, according to NSW Health, and an analysis of health data shows the growth in the number of hospital patients with Covid is slowing down. In a press conference on Friday morning, the deputy secretary of NSW Health, Susan Pearce, said: “What we are starting to become increasingly confident of is that we will see a plateauing next week, and that is pleasing, but that plateauing is obviously still at a relatively high level of Covid patients in our hospitals and in our ICUs.” NSW Health also released an update to its previously released modelling, which shows how hospitalisation figures have been tracking against different possible scenarios. Currently, the actual numbers are below the best-case scenario included in the modelling document: Pearce emphasised that despite the encouraging numbers, hospitals would still be under significant pressure for the near future. “Behind every line and every dot on that page are people,” she said. Analysis of the growth rate in the number of people hospitalised supports the suggestion that while numbers continue to rise, a peak is approaching. Dr Edward Jegasothy, a biostatistician at the University of Sydney’s School of Public Health, shared an analysis of the change in hospitalisation numbers on Twitter, which we have reproduced here. It’s important to note that the chart shows the rate of change, and that whenever the line is above zero numbers are increasing: Jegasothy said the graph indicated a “deceleration” of growth in Covid cases in hospital, while adding the caveat that there were a lot of unknowns with the spread of the virus, testing and other aspects which add a degree of uncertainty. “It seems that over the past 10 days, we’ve seen a fairly consistent decline in the metric of percentage change,” he said. “If we were seeing an exponential growth in cases, the growth rate should increase. But since that growth rate is decreasing, it suggests that we’re approaching a plateau.” All of the above analysis focuses on hospitalisation numbers, rather than case numbers, which have had significant issues with testing delays, changing criteria, and people’s inability to find a rapid antigen test all contributing. Prof Adrian Esterman, writing in the Conversation on when the Covid wave might be over, said “it is unclear whether changes to testing rules have been factored into the modelling”. “However, it’s understood, even if the detection rate changes significantly, it doesn’t affect any projection of when the peak will be reached that much,” Esterman wrote. “Modelling is therefore still likely to be reasonably accurate despite the changes to Covid testing. This is good news for other states and territories that rely on modelling results for planning.”Hillsong church will not be fined by police over a New South Wales youth camp where congregants were filmed singing and dancing, despite the state’s health minister saying the event was “clearly in breach of both the spirit and intent” of public health orders. The church apologised on Friday for “giving any perception that we were not playing our part to keep New South Wales safe” after footage of its annual youth summer camp near Newcastle provoked widespread outrage amid the state’s Covid case numbers. They faced paying fines up to $55,000. NSW police said officers had attended the event and spoken with organisers, but would not issue a fine. “Following discussions with organisers and after consultation with NSW Health, no infringement will be issued,” acting assistant commissioner Peter Glynn said in a statement on Friday. The church confirmed it had been instructed by NSW Health to “cease congregant and student singing and dancing” at the camp, and had immediately done so. However, the church continued to deny that the camp, which runs until Sunday, had any similarity to music festivals, which are explicitly banned both indoors and outdoors until 27 January under an amendment to the NSW public health order. Religious services are exempt, but footage of maskless congregants dancing to pop music at the camp has angered many at a time when festivals and concerts are being cancelled. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “It is important to clarify that the current youth camps we are holding are not music festivals,” Hillsong said, claiming the camp was “low risk as described under current guidelines”, because it was held outdoors, with sports activities and no alcohol, and the roughly 200 students attending were all “part of the same social network”. “These camps have a Christian focus and include worship services. Over a three-day duration, the percentage of time spent singing is minor. However, we regret giving any perception that we were not playing our part to keep NSW safe and we sincerely apologise to the community at large,” the statement said. Earlier, the NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, said that the event was “clearly in breach of both the spirit and intent” of the public health order. The premier, Dominic Perrottet, said he was “incredibly disappointed” by the scenes and said the church should be fined if it was found to have breached the order. The independent Tasmanian senator Jacqui Lambie said it was “a music festival, no doubt”. “No doubt it will also top off with a super-spreader [event],” Lambie told Channel Nine’s Today show on Friday morning. “Newcastle had a super-spreader [event in December] go around from a nightclub. What is the difference? Because they don’t have a drink in their hand? Are you kidding me?” Earlier on Friday, Perrottet said that the state government would tighten regulations if Hillsong escaped a fine due to a “loophole”. “But I don’t want to do that because that means that it will capture a whole lot of other organisations that are doing the right thing … I’ll take the advice in relation to the legal teams at NSW Health and if they are in breach, which is what the information I’ve received from the health minister is, then a fine should be issued,” he said. Musicians have been particularly outspoken about the footage, with several big names forming a protest supergroup called Thrillsong. After the Hillsong footage was widely shared, artists including the Jungle Giants, What So Not, Art vs Science, CC:DISCO!, Illy, Lime Cordiale, Montaigne and Peking Duk came together to protest against the ban on live music while religious services and sporting events are allowed to continue. “We firmly support measures to protect our fans and communities and to safeguard our healthcare workers. We simply ask that if rules are made, they apply to everyone equally,” they said in a joint statement. “We need to be in this together.” Electronic artist Chris Emerson, who performs as What So Not, said he was actively seeking out religious and sporting venues for Thrillsong to perform in, to highlight the double standards. “We are very seriously looking with legal teams into whether we have a cause for discrimination against the NSW government,” he said. “We’ve also got a lot of time on our hands, and a lot of spirit, so we’ll willingly get together and perform some sort of religious ceremony as Thrillsong if that is the only way we can play. “I’d love everyone to be singing and dancing, it is just so frustrating when people not in the music industry are given permission to run these events when people in the industry are complying with really expensive regulations and doing everything right. Music festivals have been targeted, while a church gets to put on a music festival.” Sam Hales, guitarist of the Jungle Giants, said they just wanted one rule for all live events. “No one wants to cancel cricket or the Australian Open or religious events. We just want to be at the table; we want to be considered alongside sport and the church,” he said. “It’s really hard to see tens of thousands of people at a sporting event, all yelling, no social distancing. A band can play to them, but three doors down at a venue, the same band would have their gig cancelled. That’s the new discourse – music doesn’t happen any more, sports and religion does. “We need to start spotlighting all these double standards. It doesn’t make any sense and it is getting silly.”The Philippine government has defended a controversial ban that prevents unvaccinated people from using public transport in the capital of Manila, denying that the policy is “anti-poor”. The “no vaccination, no ride” policy is designed to curb a recent wave of Covid infections and applies to all modes of transport to and from Metro Manila, including public buses, jeepneys, rail, boats and planes. The policy will be fully implemented from Monday, according to local media, when passengers will be required to show proof of vaccination. Less than half of Filipinos are fully vaccinated, though vaccination rates are higher in the capital, at more than 90% of the eligible population. Rights groups, including the Philippine Commission on Human Rights and Amnesty International, have criticised the transport ban for unvaccinated people, warning that it penalises the poorest, who are less likely to have the option of working from home or of travelling in a private vehicle. “The reality is that ordinary Filipinos continue to rely on public transportation in attaining basic needs, such as for food, work and accessing health services,” the Philippine Commission on Human Rights said in a statement. It fears that even those who should be exempt from the rules could still struggle to access essential goods or services because they do not have a private vehicle. The Philippine Commission on Human Rights said the government should find less punitive ways to promote vaccination. “We continue to urge the government to address vaccine hesitancy and the low vaccination rate in the country with education that addresses common misconceptions and positive encouragement,” it said. The Department of Transportation, however, said the policy was not “anti-poor, draconian or punitive”, adding: “We believe that it is more anti-poor and anti-life if we do not impose interventions that will prevent loss of life due to non-vaccinations.” It said exemptions would be made for people who were unable to receive a vaccination for medical reasons, as well as those who needed to buy essential goods or travel to a vaccination site. The Philippines has experienced a recent surge in infections, which health experts have blamed on the more transmissible Omicron variant. The country reported a record 34,021 cases on Thursday, the highest since the start of the pandemic, half of which were reported in the national capital region. A further 82 deaths were confirmed. The rise in cases has placed a strain on public services, including hospitals and schools, as well as private businesses. Schools in the capital have announced they will close for a week, with no online or in-person classes, while the government has placed limits on the amount of paracetamol and other over-the-counter medicines that can be bought by one individual or household, due to shortages in shops. Last week, unvaccinated people in Manila and several other provinces and cities were told to stay home, with president Rodrigo Duterte ordering the arrest of those who violate the orders. Under the rules, unvaccinated residents may leave home only for essential reasons such as work or to buy essentials or access medical care. Businesses such as restaurants and beauty salons are also operating at a lower capacity, as are churches and parks.These first few days of the new year have been blustery, and the wind has scoured most of the snow off of the hilltops. During a lull from wind and rain, I take a chance and head out to a remoter path of the Abernethy forest. The track is strewn with small, wind-torn branches and twigs, lichen and pine needles. Clouds scud across the sky and the forest is an ever-changing mosaic of light and shade. A stiffening breeze drowns out any birdsong that may be about, including the flock of finches that fly over which I know will be crossbills. From somewhere among the trees, I hear an odd sound of metal against metal, a hollow jangling that doubles and trebles, each tone a slightly different key. From within the trees I see a cow, then another, and more still – one is black, another grey, a few are sandy brown, and one’s a darker brown with a white face and rings around its eyes. They turn to look at me with a mixture of vague curiosity and nonchalance, before turning back to continue munching on the heather. This herd, a mixture of breeds, has been introduced to this forest to mimic the work that aurochs – the now extinct native wild cattle that used to roam here – would previously have done. They’ll eat the heather and churn up the ground with their hooves, creating more opportunities for biodiversity in the field layer and giving space for new flushes of blaeberries and crowberries that are such important food sources for capercaillies – those so elusive and threatened birds that I always hope to see. There’s something quite magical about their stillness and the size of them. Usually, any larger animals in this place will be deer, which will startle and spring away, but these cows are going quietly about their business; if it wasn’t for their cowbells, I may not even have noticed them. I turn back to take another path, watching them from afar as they lumber off, their jangling receding as they disappear further into the woods, lost among the Scots pines once more. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThe global surge in demand for energy could spark another three years of market volatility and record power plant pollution unless countries make major changes to how they generate electricity, the world’s energy watchdog has warned. The International Energy Agency recorded the steepest ever increase in electricity demand last year, which triggered blackouts in major economies and led to historic energy price highs and record emissions. The IEA’s annual electricity report said this could continue for another three years, with serious consequences for consumers and economies unless there is a faster structural change to the way electricity is produced. “Sharp spikes in electricity prices in recent times have been causing hardship for many households and businesses around the world and risk becoming a driver of social and political tensions,” said the IEA’s executive director, Fatih Birol. The IEA found that the world’s demand for electricity surged by 6% last year, following the global economic rebound from the 2020 pandemic recession, the steepest increase since 2010 when economies began to bounce back from the global financial crisis. The total increase in electricity demand was over 1,500 terawatt-hours, the largest on record. About half of the growth in electricity demand took place in China alone, where it rose by an estimated 10% compared with 2020. China and India both suffered from power cuts in the second half of the year because coal supplies failed to keep pace with the demand on their power plants, leading to an economic slowdown in Asia. In the UK, electricity market prices have reached record highs in recent months, in large part because the power grid continues to rely on gas-burning power plants for almost half of its electricity. The cost of running of these sites has rocketed following a global gas supply crunch which has triggered record high market prices across Europe. The rising cost of keeping the lights on has left the UK facing a national energy crisis as household bills have rocketed, energy suppliers have collapsed and factories have been forced to shut. The global strain on electricity systems has also led to record emissions from power generation as economies turn to cheaper coal power plants to keep a lid on soaring costs. “Policymakers should be taking action now to soften the impacts on the most vulnerable and to address the underlying causes,” Birol said. “Higher investment in low-carbon energy technologies including renewables, energy efficiency and nuclear power – alongside an expansion of robust and smart electricity grids – can help us get out of today’s difficulties.” The IEA’s report found that renewable energy sources grew by 6% in 2021, but that increase was unable to keep pace with the surge in demand as economies reopened following the sudden Covid-19 lockdowns that had choked economic growth. In order to meet the rebound in demand for power, coal-fired plants generated 9% more electricity last year, or more than half of the global increase in power demand, to reach an all-time peak as gas became more expensive. Electricity generated by gas power plants grew by 2% last year, according to the IEA, while nuclear generation increased by 3.5%. The return to dirtier sources of electricity caused the world’s total carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from power generation to climb by 7% to a new all-time high after having declined the two previous years, the IEA said. Birol warned that emissions from electricity would need to decline by 55% by 2030 if the world hopes to limit the rise in global heating by becoming “net zero carbon” by 2050. “But in the absence of major policy action from governments, those emissions are set to remain around the same level for the next three years,” he said. “Not only does this highlight how far off track we currently are from a pathway to net zero emissions by 2050, but it also underscores the massive changes needed for the electricity sector to fulfil its critical role in decarbonising the broader energy system.” • The headline of this article was amended on 18 January 2022 to more accurately reflect the words of the IEA, which warned of price volatility rather than price rises.The House select committee investigating the January 6 insurrection at the Capitol has ordered several social media firms to hand over data relating to the attack, a significant step toward transparency that could have broader privacy implications. The committee on Thursday subpoenaed Twitter, Meta, Alphabet and Reddit for private messages exchanged on the platforms about the attack as well as information regarding moderation policies that allowed communities to remain online even as they incited violence in early 2021. Congressman Bennie Thompson, the chairman of the select committee, said the committee was seeking to answer two key questions: how the spread of misinformation contributed to the violent attack, and what steps social media companies took to prevent their platforms from “being breeding grounds for radicalizing people to violence”. The subpoenas mark an escalation in the committee’s efforts to get answers from the tech companies. Thompson added in his letter that the subpoenas came after “months of engagement” with the firms and that the four companies had so far ignored requests for information. “We cannot allow our important work to be delayed any further,” he said. The panel in August asked 15 tech companies, including the four subpoenaed on Thursday as well as TikTok, Snapchat, Parler and 4chan, for records related to the riot. In letters sent this week to the tech firms, Thompson lamented their lack of response. In a letter to Meta’s CEO, Mark Zuckerberg, Thompson said that “despite repeated and specific requests for documents” related to Facebook’s practices on election misinformation and violent content, the committee had still not received these materials. Meta said in a statement that it planned to produce the documents requested. Reddit also told the Guardian it had received the subpoena and planned to comply with the requests. Twitter declined to comment. Google did not respond to request for comment. “As Chairman Thompson said recently, ‘Facebook is working with [the committee] to provide the necessary information we requested.’ Since then, Meta has produced documents to the committee on a schedule committee staff requested – and we will continue to do so.” Following the January 6 attack, social media platforms have been scrutinized for amplifying calls to violence, spreading misinformation and serving as an organizing tool for the rioters. Last March, lawmakers grilled the CEOs of Google, Twitter and Facebook about the platforms’ role in the Capitol riot. And in the months since, the major platforms have all announced initiatives to curb the spread of misinformation through their products. But still, much about the content moderation policies of major tech firms remains black box, with executives slow to reveal details of how misinformation and hate speech is moderated and how many resources are dedicated to mitigating such issues. Now, increased transparency could come by means of subpoena. For lawmakers, the problem came even more acutely into focus with papers leaked by the whistleblower Frances Haugen in October 2021, which showed how Facebook failed to enforce policies that would rein in hate speech because they were detrimental to its bottom line. Speaking to Congress, Haugen called for more transparency from Facebook and other companies, including an independent oversight board. In a letter to Zuckerberg, the select committee cited revelations from Haugen, requesting access to the company’s internal analyses of the spread of misinformation and calls to violence relating to the 2020 election. In particular, the committee requested more information on the “Stop the Steal” movement and how it was regulated. A “Stop the Steal” Facebook group amassed hundreds of thousands of members and was used to coordinate some of the actions on January 6. While Facebook eventually took it down, other related pages stayed online, said Imran Ahmed, CEO of the Center for Countering Digital Hate. “It is absolutely crucial to understand the decision making process that led to them to leave those pages online – how they executed enforcement of their policies against violence, encouraging violence, intimidation, extremism and hate.” Similarly, Reddit has been requested to provide information on its community r/The_Donald. That group was banned from Reddit in June 2020, but its community migrated to another platform where many actions of January 6 were planned. Lawmakers were also seeking materials from Alphabet, the parent company of YouTube, because the video platform hosted significant communications by key players in the Capitol attack, including Trump’s former chief strategist Steve Bannon and rioters livestreaming their movements on January 6. Activists say the need to hold companies accountable for how their policies contributed to the Capitol riots should be held in balance with civil rights and privacy protections. The subpoenas may bring up privacy concerns, said Evan Greer, deputy director of digital rights group Fight for the Future. “Forcing companies to hand over private messages of its users could have major privacy implications,” Greer said. “It’s essential to remember that government surveillance and demands for data from private companies are primarily weaponized against marginalized communities,” they said. “The white supremacists who stormed the Capitol deserve to be held accountable, but we should never cheer on expansions of surveillance or government overreach.” An earlier version of this story inaccurately stated that the committee’s letter stated there was discussion or planning of the riot on a r/The_Donald. This article has been amended to reflect that the group was banned from Reddit and migrated to another platform.An Indiana group whose anti-abortion campaign was endorsed in a signed advertisement by Amy Coney Barrett before she became a supreme court justice, keeps a published list of abortion providers and their place of work on its website, in what some experts say is an invitation to harass and intimidate the doctors and their staff. In one case, court records show, a doctor whose name was published by the group, which is called Right to Life Michiana, was warned by the FBI of a kidnapping threat that had been made online against her daughter. The threat prompted the doctor to temporarily stop providing abortion services at the Whole Woman’s Health Care clinic in South Bend, which is also named on the Michiana group’s website. The doctor said in the court document that the clinic regularly attracts large gatherings of protesters, who she feared could identify her. Barrett signed a two-page advertisement in 2006, while she was working as a professor at Notre Dame, that stated that those who signed “oppose abortion on demand and defend the right to life from fertilization to natural death”. The second page of the ad called Roe v Wade, the landmark 1973 decision that legalized abortion, “barbaric”. The advertisement, which was published in the South Bend Tribune and signed by hundreds of people, was sponsored by a group called St Joseph County Right to Life, which merged with another anti-abortion group in 2020 and is now called Right to Life Michiana. The supreme court is expected to rule this year on challenges to Roe v Wade that many court experts expect will gut the rights of women in the US to obtain legal abortions. In arguments before the court, Barrett – who has said her personal views do not affect her legal judgment – argued that passage of safe haven laws, which allow parents to relinquish their newborns at hospitals or other designated centers without the threat of legal consequences, had in effect given women options outside of abortion for those who did not want to become parents. During her 2020 confirmation hearing, Barrett said she had signed the advertisement as a private citizen, while she was making her way out of church, and had not recalled signing it until it became public following a report in the Guardian. “It was consistent with the views of my church,” she said, in response to senators’ questions about the statement. She later added: “I do see as distinct my personal, moral, religious views and my task of applying the law as a judge.” An examination by the Guardian of Right to Life Michiana, which publishes the same advertisement denouncing Roe v Wade as “barbaric” every year, reveals that the group does more than publish statements in newspapers: it urges supporters to “take action” against what it calls a “local abortion threat”. In one section of the website, which is titled Local Abortion Threat: The Abortionist, the group lists the names and educational background of six doctors that it claims perform abortions at the Whole Woman’s Health Clinic in South Bend. Among them is a doctor – who the Guardian is declining to name – who testified in 2021, in a case involving abortion restrictions in Indiana, that she started traveling to South Bend once a month – beginning in 2020 – in order to perform first trimester abortions at the South Bend clinic. She stopped making the trip – a 2.5-hour car trip each way from her home – after she was alerted by Planned Parenthood, who had been alerted by the FBI, that a kidnapping threat had been made against her daughter online. “I felt it would be best for me to limit my travel and exposure during that time,” the doctor said in testimony. “I was concerned that there may be people who would be able to identify me during that travel, as well as it’s a very small clinic without any privacy for the people who are driving in and out, and so therefore, people could directly see me.” Jackie Appleman, the executive director of Right to Life Michiana, said in response to questions from the Guardian that the information on its website was “publicly available information”. “Right to Life Michiana does not condone or encourage harm, threats or harassment towards anyone, including abortion doctors, abortion business employees and escorts. We encourage pro-choice groups to also accept our nonviolent approach when it comes to the unborn,” she said. The group has also previously stated that it supports the criminalization of doctors who perform abortions and the criminalization of procedures that routinely occur in the in vitro fertilization process, including the discarding of frozen embryos or selective reduction of embryos. The publication of doctors’ names – and in some other cases, their home addresses – is a well-known tactic used by anti-abortion groups. The practice gained attention in the 1990s and early 2000s because of a legal battle over a website called the Nuremberg Files, which was supported by radical abortion opponents and published the names, photos, home addresses and licence plate numbers of abortion providers. In some cases, spouses and children were also identified. Doctors who had been murdered had a line crossed through their names. One of the most high-profile cases of violence against abortion providers surrounded the case of George Tiller, who was one of the few doctors who performed late-term abortions when he was killed while attending church in 2009. Sharon Lau, the midwest advocacy director for Whole Woman’s Health Alliance, and serves as its security specialist, said Michiana Right to Life regularly protested at the group’s South Bend clinic, approaching patients and blocking its driveway. Asked about the naming of doctors on the Michiana website, Lau said: “It is clearly something that is threatening, so we take it seriously and we know that these types of things have consequences. The language is saying, ‘these people are a threat’. Which spurs people to action. We saw that with Dr Tiller.” WWHA has been frustrated in part, she said, by what appeared to be a reluctance by local prosecutors to charge protesters who it said were violating trespassing rules. “The law is not enforced. We know that if you enforce the fairly minor crimes, it can prevent escalation, so we’ve tried to impress that on them,” Lau said. Melissa Fowler, program director at the National Abortion Federation, said anti-abortion protesters have been emboldened by the recent passage of abortion bans in Texas and Mississippi, and that the group had documented an increase in aggressiveness, including protesters taking advantage of “open carry” laws to stand near health clinics with visible weapons. Mira Shah, a doctor who travels in order to performs abortions in underserved communities, including in South Bend, who is listed on the Michiana website, said such groups aimed to instill fear in medical professionals and try to get them to stop doing their work. “It can honestly be scary,” Dr Shah said. “I am really careful and do what I need to do to stay safe. We’re trying to care for our patients and do the best we can do.” Amy Coney Barrett’s chambers at the supreme court was forwarded questions by the Guardian but did not respond to a request for comment.The suggestion that a British Chinese solicitor has been allegedly working on behalf of China to influence UK politics adds further evidence of the bilateral relationship mutating from a “golden era” to an “ice age”. The latest development will clearly not help improve ties and, along with previous incidents, make the “China v the west” narrative increasingly look like an early cold war plot: suspected influence operations and – although not apparently the case here – alleged espionage as well as expulsion of personnel. On Thursday, the British political establishment was warned that Christine Lee, a solicitor, may have been seeking to improperly influence parliamentarians for a number of years. The memo alleged Lee, who, according to Companies House filings, is also a British national, “has facilitated financial donations to serving and aspiring parliamentarians on behalf of foreign nationals based in Hong Kong and China”. The memo further accused that the facilitation was “done covertly to mask the origins of the payments”. Lee has not responded to the allegations. The Guardian has contacted her law firm. The Chinese embassy in London said that Beijing’s non-interference foreign policy means that it has “no need” to buy influence. “We firmly oppose the trick of smearing and intimidation against the Chinese community in the UK,” it added. Modern states are not strangers to spycraft and influence operations. They may happen among allies, too, both through on-the-ground and cyberspace operations, as Edward Snowden’s NSA revelations showed nearly a decade ago. But Thursday’s reporting came after repeated warnings from Britain’s top security officials about Beijing amid deteriorating diplomatic ties. Under David Cameron, the British-Chinese relationship was touted as a “golden era”. In his speech in Beijing in September 2015, the then chancellor, George Osborne vowed to make Britain China’s “best partner in the west”. The claim was made despite criticisms from his own party about China’s human rights record and the situation in Hong Kong. In the years since, a consensus has formed among strategic communities from London to Washington: that China is seeking to change the postwar world order led by liberal democracies. The diplomatic relationship between the UK and China, in particular, has deteriorated further since the start of the Covid pandemic. There have been bilateral sanctions in place because of China’s actions in the Xinjiang region and in Britain’s former colony of Hong Kong. “Bilateral relations between the UK and China are not in great shape, but today’s announcement might not make it worse, either, as it wouldn’t be in Beijing’s interest to see this happening,” said Dr Andrew Chubb, a China researcher at Lancaster University. “[But] it sends a clear message that London is scrutinising Beijing’s friends and allies in Britain for potential crossovers into interference.” In his last public address, the head of MI6, Richard Moore, said a rising China had become Secret Intelligence Service’s “single greatest priority” for the first time in the agency’s history. China accused Moore of “peddling fake news and false intelligence”. Security services in Britain have been pivoting to China in recent years as threats from Islamist terrorism recede. Last year, the British press reported three journalists were asked to leave the UK for allegedly working as spies for China. The alleged departure was low-key and was not revealed until months later. China denied the report. As diplomatic relations sour, China’s modus operandi both inside its own territory and around the world are now under heavy scrutiny. For example, although it is dismissed by some seasoned China researchers for lack of substantial evidence, Moore insisted last month that Beijing was using a “debt trap” to exert control over smaller states. Thursday’s announcement may come as no surprise to those who have been following Lee’s successful – and sometimes controversial – legal career in the UK. In 2017, she was accused of using money to influence British politics and through projects such as the British Chinese Project , which she founded in 2006. Politicians – across the Labour and Conservative divide – were implicated by the claims. The irony is that, until recently, Lee was one of the few visible faces of the small but growing British Chinese community in the UK. With the British Chinese Project, which has been suspended since the Covid pandemic started, she was rewarded for including more British-Chinese people in the UK political system. “You should feel very proud of the difference that the British Chinese Project is making in promoting engagement, understanding, and cooperation between the Chinese and British communities in the UK,” Theresa May, then prime minister, said in a personal letter to Lee when awarding her the 2019 Points of Light award. Lee’s award has now been rescinded. The prestigious award was first established by President George HW Bush in 1990, with the UK initiative launched in the cabinet room at No 10 in April 2014. The award committee says the honour highlights “an enormous array of innovative and inspirational volunteering across the length and breadth of Britain”. “The wellbeing of the British Chinese community in the UK will always be of great importance to me and I am pleased to have had the opportunity to assist in any small way with our integration into UK society,” Lee responded to May after the award.An official investigation into police handling of loyalist paramilitary activity in Northern Ireland that resulted in 19 murders has identified “collusive behaviours” and “significant concerns” about officers’ conduct. The long-delayed report by the Northern Ireland police ombudsman into the killings included an investigation into the circumstances around the 1993 Greysteel pub massacre, which left eight people dead and 19 injured. All the attacks were carried out by the Ulster Defence Association/Ulster Freedom Fighters in the north-west of the island of Ireland between 1989 and 1993. In her damning report, ombudsman Marie Anderson found some of these lives could have been saved were it not for shortcomings within Northern Ireland’s police force at the time, the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC), in relation to use of intelligence and use of informants. While she said that there was no evidence that the RUC had prior knowledge of the attacks, the names of a number of people targeted in the attacks were discovered in loyalist “intelligence caches” between November 1989 and February 1992. The police failed to warn a number of people their lives were at risk and in some cases did no assessment of the risk. That, she said, was a “contravention of RUC Force Orders”. Of the 11 attacks investigated, seven involved the targeting of individuals whose names had appeared in the caches. “The lists included the names of six of the 19 people murdered by the UDA/UFF during this period and that of Patrick McErlain, who survived an attack in August 1992,” said a statement accompanying the report, published on Friday. Anderson found that while there was no evidence that the RUC had prior knowledge of the attacks, families’ concerns about “collusive behaviours” were “legitimate”. Eight people died as a result of the UDA in Greysteel on the eve of Halloween and 19 were injured. Four loyalists were later convicted of the murders, which had been carried out in revenge for the nine Protestants killed in the Shankill bombing the week before. The Greysteel victims were both Catholic and Protestant. The youngest was 19-year-old Karen Thompson, who died along with her boyfriend, Steven Mullan, while the oldest was 81-year-old James Moore. Anderson stated that the investigations following the attacks she investigated had been “prompt and thorough” and the majority of intelligence gathered by the RUC special branch was shared with murder investigation teams in a timely manner. However, she criticised “intelligence and surveillance failings” at the RUC which allowed for the arming of the north-west UDA/UFF with military assault rifles. “I am of the view that police were aware of the growing threat posed by the North West UDA/UFF from 1989 onwards. This increased threat, however, was not initially accompanied by a policing response proportionate to the increased risk to members of the republican and nationalist communities,” she said. She also criticised the RUC’s continued use of informants despite possessing intelligence that they were involved in serious criminality including murder. “I am of the view that this illustrated a practice on the part of some RUC special branch officers to recruit, and continue to use, informants suspected of involvement in serious criminality, including murder, contrary to applicable RUC policy at the time.” Her report comes as the Northern Ireland secretary, Brandon Lewis, edges closer to publishing a bill designed to give amnesty to police, army members and others involved in killings in Northern Ireland and elsewhere. The ombudsman’s investigation found that a number of lives could have been saved were it not for the RUC’s failure to act on intelligence. She also said police had failed to deal appropriately with members of the security forces suspected of having passed sensitive information to loyalist paramilitaries. Some were investigated properly but instead of facing criminal investigations “they were dismissed or repositioned”. “I am of the view that allegations of RUC officers passing information of use to terrorists was a serious matter that should have been investigated robustly and consistently,” she said.Three decades of school choice in England has left parents feeling more “cynical, fatalistic and disempowered” than their peers in other parts of the UK, according to new research. A study comparing parents in England, where families can name up to six state schools for their children to attend, with those in Scotland, where children are generally assigned to local state schools, found Scottish families were still more likely to be satisfied with the outcome. While 75% of parents in England said they had enough choice of schools, 76% of those in Scotland said the same, despite their lack of explicit choices within the admissions process. Parents in England were more likely to express frustration and disempowerment, with several calling the current school choice policies an “illusion”, in surveys and interviews conducted for the research published in the Journal of Social Policy. Aveek Bhattacharya, the chief economist at the Social Market Foundation and the author of the paper, said: “This research adds to the growing evidence that school choice policies have failed to bring the benefits they were supposed to. “For all the emphasis that policymakers in England have put on increasing choice, parents south of the border are no happier with their lot than their Scottish counterparts. Indeed, many are disenchanted and dismayed. “These findings show that parents offered a range of options for their children’s school are no happier than parents who have less choice about education.” The findings come ahead of the deadline for primary school admissions in England on 15 January, which sees hundreds of thousands of families apply through local authorities for state school places starting in September. In London, Manchester, Birmingham and some other areas, families can rank up to six school preferences, while in most parts of England families have up to three choices. Local authorities then act as clearing houses, using an algorithm to match applicants to schools on the basis of parental preference, admissions criteria and the availability of places. But in Scotland, children are assigned a place at the nearest school unless their parents or carers decide to opt out and apply to a different one. As a result, children in Scotland are twice as likely to attend their local school than those in England. But with school choice enshrined in legislation in England since 1988, Bhattacharya said the government may find it is unable to meet the expectations it has raised. “It is unclear whether in England the genie can be put back in the bottle, as parents may resent choice being taken away from them, now it has been granted. Having raised expectations, policymakers might only be able to limit the frustration. “They can do this by minimising unsuccessful applications, for example by creating more places at the most popular schools, and reducing the uncertainty of the process, for example by guaranteeing children a place at their nearest school,” he said. Previous research has found that 35% of families in England name just one school in the admissions process, while 27% name the maximum number permitted. The earlier research also found that there were wide differences in the use of choice based on family ethnicity: 41% of white British households named only one choice of school, compared with 17% of Asian households and 12% of Black households.Filmed in a breath-holding single take in a small performance space, Into the Night tells the real-life tale of a doomed lifeboat rescue mission off the Cornish coast in 1981. Combining clever camerawork, projected visuals, live music and heartfelt performances, this feels like an entirely new dramatic genre from the aptly named Original Theatre Company – one that combines the fallibility and intimacy of theatre with the scope and technical wizardry of film. Frazer Flintham’s script is based on the book Penlee: The Loss of a Lifeboat by local resident Michael Sagar-Fenton, and hums with harrowing detail. The crew had no pagers – so it was down to the village landlady to pick up the phone and send the lifeboat volunteers out to sea. They had no GPS signal, either, so when the stranded ship’s radio fails, it’s up to a single man and his binoculars to send the rescuers in the right direction. As the camera jumps from the twinkling Christmas lights inland to the flickering switchboard of the HM Coastguard control, the red rescue helicopter or the rain-soaked cabin of a nearby tugboat, we get a sense of an ever-expanding network of rescuers heroically pulling together. Often, we’re shown the mere suggestion of a scene – a sign that says “The Sea” or a lifejacket quickly being snatched – and are then left to fearfully fill in the gaps ourselves. Covid factors mean this final product is a recording of the dress rehearsal. That’s no bad thing. Every missed cue (and there aren’t many in director Alastair Whatley’s immaculately conceived production) only makes the actors feel that little bit more human, and the awful loss this small community experienced just that little bit more real. • Available online until 20 February.It is early afternoon in downtown Nashville, and the party is already going strong. Bachelorettes in pink cowboy hats are flowing, mask-free, in and out of the honky-tonks. The members of Big Thief, though – Adrianne Lenker, Buck Meek, Max Oleartchik and James Krivchenia – are sitting outside the Ryman Auditorium like dots of oil floating atop the water. No one seems to notice that one of the US’s best bands is scattered around a patio table a few hours before their show tonight, just yards above the 24/7 bacchanal. “There’s a pigeon-keeper up there,” says the band’s frontperson Lenker, leaning forward in her chair in a horse-print shirt, jeans and a bandanna, her gaze fixed on a small skyscraper. She points, and the rest of the band follows her finger to a group of birds on top of a building, furiously in motion. “They’re flying in circles, so there has to be a cage up there. They only do that when there is someone conducting them.” There is no conductor in Big Thief, nor do they move in circles – but they do stay in formation. Since the release of their debut album Masterpiece in 2016, they have been one of the most prolific working bands as a collective and individually, flying free of music industry best practices (two competing and equally brilliant albums, UFOF and Two Hands, were released in 2019), Instagrammable perfection, or any sort of pomp and circumstance, with Lenker’s intricate and vulnerable lyrics leading the way in songs that traverse indie rock and folk. When they take to the Ryman stage later, they will do so without big displays or sets, raw and unfiltered in front of a closed stage curtain. They have two Grammy nominations and have graduated to big venues, but would rather talk about the marvel of human consciousness than accolades, discussing the process of creating art as if they’re astronomers not just content to find the next star, but eager to unveil a whole unseen universe. Everything that makes Big Thief work could be the undoing of any other band. For one, Lenker and Meek are divorced – they met and started the group together in New York in 2015, and were married young. Bassist Oleartchik lives a world away in Israel, and each band member has a vibrant set of solo interests that overlaps rather than competes with Big Thief itself. During the pandemic alone, Lenker released two solo albums, Songs and Instrumentals, guitarist Meek had one, Two Saviors, Oleartchik worked on his jazz material and Krivchenia released an ambient album and sat in on drums for numerous projects, including Taylor Swift’s Red (Taylor’s Version). “The alchemy of all those things is what makes Big Thief Big Thief in the first place,” says Meek, who wears all black and smiles as if he’s known you for ever. “So we’ve all honoured that, and each other, I think.” Their new 20-song album Dragon New Warm Mountain I Believe in You comes, in title, from that interconnecting continuum: it’s taken from a line in Anything, from Lenker’s album Songs, further narrowing the distance between what is hers and theirs, as if that even matters. They got here by engaging in a non-stop battle against the ego. “We don’t let ourselves be the cliche of the rock star,” Oleartchik says. “It can feel like that – you’re on stage, people are screaming – but that’s where you can get lost in yourself.” Dragon New Warm Mountain I Believe in You doesn’t try to fit neatly into a box that further defines the Big Thief sound, whatever that may be, or grasp at bigger rock stardom. Sometimes, its songs beautifully meander without a chorus (Certainty), or the music melds perfectly with the feel of the lyrics, though not specifically the meaning. There are mentions of potato knishes and elbows (Spud Infinity) and microwaves (Dried Roses) that would have made John Prine chuckle, and lines that kick you in the gut with their brilliant simplicity: “I wanna live for ever till I die,” Lenker sings to a country romp. “Maybe I’m delusional, but I don’t think we’ve ever made anything because someone else expected us to. If anything, it’s the opposite,” Meek says, turning to Lenker, who is rubbing a bottle of water against her forehead to help cure a headache. “You write the songs because it’s a form of survival. You’re my favourite songwriter on Earth, and we’re definitely my favourite band on Earth. We are the vessel for music that doesn’t exist that I want to hear.” This comes across as enthusiastic joy, not ego, and the music sounds like he feels it, too. “You are my favourite songwriter!” Lenker responds – this love-in is more heartfelt and less corny than it might read. But Lenker had a lot of excavating to do to find this happiness, and when the pandemic hit, everything rushed to the surface once the crowds grew quiet. “I had gone through marriage and divorce,” Lenker says in a separate Zoom call later, alone in a hotel room with her dog. “We had to try to transform our relationship, to let it die and be reborn, all while being on the road in proximity to each other. And holding space for other people through our art, writing about it and singing about it together on stage. He’s like family now, which I think is a testament to the love that we do [still] share.” Big Thief were in the middle of a European tour when the pandemic hit in March 2020; they had been on the road incessantly for three years, and Lenker had started a new relationship, with the musician Indigo Sparke, which came to an end early in quarantine. “My heart,” she says, “was broken into smithereens.” All of a sudden, it seemed like her body started to “purge everything out”. Her sister and solo album co-producer Phil Weinrobe both had to remind her to eat on a daily basis, and she came down with shingles and multiday migraines, ending up in hospital in Brooklyn before retreating to her sister’s cabin in western Massachusetts. She worried something might really be wrong medically, until it became clear that it was the grind she had been engaging in since she was a little girl, and the trauma that came with it. “I realised it wasn’t about this thing with this person,” Lenker says, “it was about old trauma manifesting in current life.” She doesn’t say specifically what that trauma was (though she has spoken elsewhere about how difficult her childhood was), but the breakdown of the two romantic relationships “triggered this whole thing inside of myself, and I was living in a state of self-abandonment. I’m not going to perpetuate that cycle but in order to do that I really need to not be violent to myself. And that’s not something that just happens overnight.” Lenker was born in Indianapolis, raised in a cultlike Christian sect that her parents eventually distanced themselves from, and she started writing music before she was 10; her first album, Stages of the Sun, came in 2006 and shows the origins of her penchant to incorporate country or folk textures into her work, even though others around her seemed to think she was more destined for pop stardom. Lenker, clearly, was uninterested in that. After attending Berklee College of Music in Boston on a scholarship and moving to New York, Lenker met Meek in 2015, who was playing in, as he puts it, “a crazy ragtime swing band”. Meek, from Texas and appropriately well-schooled on singer-songwriters such as Townes Van Zandt and Guy Clark, made a perfect busking partner for Lenker in the early days. Oleartchik was a jazz player and son of Alon Oleartchik, a popular Israeli musician and member of 70s breakthrough rock band Kaveret, while Krivchenia, born in Minnesota, was established on the punk scene. Once the foursome formed Big Thief, everyone committed fully to the collective. Krivchenia, who produced Dragon New Warm Mountain I Believe in You, presented the concept to the band one morning over a continental breakfast at a hotel in Copenhagen before the pandemic, typed up and printed in the hotel business centre. The idea was that they would go as a group to four locations – upstate New York, Topanga Canyon in California, the Arizona desert and Colorado mountains – with four different studios and four different engineers, each with a sonic goal in mind. “Before he finished we were all like: oh my God, yes,” Oleartchik says. Krivchenia really believed in the concept, but he also didn’t want to upset the power balance in the band – or the lack of one, really. “There’s a communal thing with this band where all opinions are very important,” he says. “I just wanted to check my ego to make sure I wasn’t positioning myself in any sort of role.” Mostly, he wanted the band to help create some time, some freedom from a ticking clock. “It’s like sex,” Lenker says of recording, laughing lightly. “If you feel pressure to make love well and you only have an hour to prove yourself, forget about it!” Lenker’s songs are a grounding force of Big Thief, never meant to lead definitively one way or the other, though extremely revealing at the same time. “Her writing is more complex than, ‘it’s her nature album or it’s her breakup album’,” Krivchenia says. “She wants to leave space for people to add their own meaning,” Oleartchik adds. Her bandmates talk about her songwriting so she doesn’t have to; she doesn’t enjoy deconstructing her own work in that way. She’d rather stay vulnerable with the songs, so she can stay vulnerable on stage. Sometimes Lenker will be chatty during a set. Other times, she will say nothing at all. “Sometimes,” Krivchenia says, “Adrianne rambles for five minutes and we are like: let’s do a song, we’re getting cold back here!” She is so resistant to cultivating a performance or persona over an authentic shared experience that she gets emotionally worn down and can “feel like a flat piece of cardboard” after a night or two of touring. “A huge part of our craft is trying to come into this radical acceptance of what is happening, and our imperfections and idiosyncrasies,” Lenker says – Big Thief’s music voices a constant yearning to heal, and her own process is ever-evolving. Recently, she shaved her head to confront her insecurities about her face and beauty. “I’m still on that journey, and it may be a lifelong one … We have quirks, and we ride with them. Hopefully people in the room can feel a wave of inspiration to embrace exactly how they are in the present moment, happy or odd or chaotic. I think we need more of that in the world.” Meek remembers something that Krivchenia told him at a show in New Orleans a few nights earlier as they gathered in a huddle. “You said: ‘Remember to keep saying yes,’” he says. “So that whole night I kept reminding myself that: just keep saying yes because it’s so easy to say no. Even if you play the wrong note. Just go: ‘Yes! I played the wrong note! Yes!’” “It’s like an improv skit,” Krivchenia says, “Saying no fucking kills the skit.” “And, suddenly,” Lenker cuts in, “you’re creating something.” Dragon New Warm Mountain I Believe in You is released on 11 February on 4AD.Picks of the week Disgraceland Taylor Swift might seem an odd choice for a podcast devoted to the world of sex, drugs and rock’n’roll, but Jake Brennan finds plenty of juice to squeeze as he begins this new season. He uncovers a raft of stalkers, death threats and a whole load of lost songs in Swift’s closet. But what the salacious tale really brings home is how tough and dangerous it is for a woman to be one of the world’s most recognisable celebrities. Hannah Verdier Tenfold More Wicked “This story is a thriller where the killer simply vanishes,” says author Kate Winkler Dawson as she unveils the story of Clara “Tiger Woman” Phillips, who murdered her husband’s lover. Dripping in gossipy, true-crime insights from 1920s Los Angeles, there’s also an undercurrent of a coercive relationship. HV Lonel(i)ness There is no shame in feeling lonely, so why is there still such a stigma attached? That’s the issue tackled by Jaja Muhammed in this one-off Broccoli Productions podcast. Speaking with people about their experiences, Muhammed unpicks all the ways a person can feel lonely, and asks what the government is doing about the loneliness epidemic. A reassuring and timely listen. Hollie Richardson Exactly. With Florence Given “Conversations that provide the depth you don’t get from an Instagram caption” is the MO of this new podcast from artist and author Florence Given. The first batch of episodes are about sex, with episode one featuring a candid, funny conversation with dominatrix Madam Storm. Future sex chatters will include The Good Place’s Jameela Jamil. Alexi Duggins Room 5 This new podcast from the brains behind Tunnel 29 attempts to create an immersive experience that puts you in the shoes of people who’ve received life-changing medical diagnoses. Think vivid descriptions of treatment rooms, the background burble of medical staff and heart-rending moments from the poignant to the tragic. AD Producer pick: The Wait Chosen by Maz Ebtehaj Watching the news this week I was never in doubt that Novak Djokovic would eventually be freed from his detention in Australia. The fate of the 14,000 refugees held in Indonesia by Australia is less certain. The Wait is a five-part series, presented by journalist Nicole Curby and Mozhgan Moarefizadeh. Mozhgan is a refugee stuck in Jakarta. She is warm and charismatic and she forms a presenting partnership that gives a raw glimpse into the lives of people trapped in the forever inbetween. Through interviews and candid recordings you see the dark reality of life, and the laughter rooted in the absurd. In the first episode Mozghan chuckles as she translates her brother’s story about helping the body of a dead refugee back to its family. Spoiler: It doesn’t arrive – even in death refugees can’t find home. “This is bad stuff. But this is ordinary,” she says. “This is our life now!”. Talking points Are new podcasts struggling? According to Bloomberg, statistics show that none of the top 10 most-listened podcasts in the US are under two years old, with the average age being seven years old. Apparently, this is due to the huge rise in new pods – making it harder than ever for listeners to discover great new shows. Strange. It’s almost as though the world needs a brilliant newsletter dedicated to showcasing great podcasts… Why not try: Twice Upon a Time | The Comeback Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about Hear Here or any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to the Guide, our weekly look at the best in pop cultureHumanity needs hokum and never more so than when things are – I think a majority would agree – so relentlessly grim. Bring us preposterous set-ups! Bring us ridiculous plots, to whose holes we must turn generously blind eyes! Bring us escalating nonsense, melodrama, unrealism and all the high-energy, low-stakes rest of it! Take us out of ourselves for an hour or a chapter or a reel at a time. For hokum to succeed, however, it needs to take itself seriously – no nods, winks to camera or cynical sneers in the script. Makers need to play it straight, so that viewers can take it how they will. On all these bases, Netflix’s new horror series Archive 81 delivers. Its dual narrative has film archivist and museum creator Dan Turner (Mamoudou Athie) recruited, in the present, by an enigmatic businessman called Virgil Davenport (Martin Donovan, who I hope is enjoying his character’s top hokum name) to restore a set of fire-damaged tapes. They are the remainder of an oral history project undertaken by grad student Melody Pendras (Dina Shihabi) in 1994. Her story unfolds for us via “found footage” and flashback. She is recording the life stories of the inhabitants of the Visser apartment building, which was built on the site of a mansion that burned down in 1920 and – did Melody but know it! – is about to burn down again, leaving 13 people missing. She is aided in her quest by young teenager Jess (an astonishingly good performance from Ariana Neal, in a show full of them), who was born in the building and I just bet knows more than she initially lets on. To do his restoration work and earn a bumper $100,000 for the job, Dan must stay alone in an isolated compound in the Catskills once used by Virgil’s DNA testing company – one of many pies in which he has more than the customary number of fingers. There is no wifi and barely any mobile phone reception – just enough to get through occasionally to his best friend, Mark, and ask him to Google people’s names as Melody mentions them on the tapes. There is a landline but it appears to be bugged. Dan quickly comes to suspect he is being surveilled as well. But Dan once had a nervous breakdown, after most of his family were killed in a house fire, so he is probably imagining things, right? Over the eight hour-long episodes of the series, Archive 81 ladles out generous portions – if perhaps sometimes at too stately a pace – of conspiracy theories, jump scares, corridor stalkings, things that go bump in the night, resurrected figures from the past, hallucinations (OR ARE THEY?), coded counsel from longtime tenants, haunting music whose terrifying strains drift into Melody’s room at night and put her in a state of nervous collapse, cultish goings on, mysterious smiles from inhabitants of the sixth floor, salutary warnings from fearful dwellers on the first-to-fifth and a gathering promise that – as long as you don’t look too closely at anything or for too long – more or less all will be revealed in a more or less satisfactory way. As with most series of this nature, it’s better watched over time rather than binged all at once, when the leaps of faith required to get past various illogicalities and inconsistencies can become too exhausting. It’s one of those programmes where you are best advised to sit back, relax and enjoy the ride.We think of industry and traffic as the main sources of air pollution and overlook farming and food production. A new study from the Chinese University of Hong Kong examined the impacts from changing diets and increased meat production in China since the 1980s. Initially, the changes in agricultural production meant more food and better quality food. Undernourishment was reduced and people benefited from fresher fruit and vegetables, and improved animal products. However, continued increases in meat consumption, more processed food and less whole grains have offset these initial gains. In addition to the direct dietary impacts on health, the quadrupling of China’s meat production between 1980 and 2010 has created an air pollution downside, due to the ammonia from animal waste and the fertilisers used to grow animal feed crops. The air pollution from the agricultural changes was estimated to have caused 90,000 extra deaths in 2010 – 66,000 from the rising demand for meat. People in poorer agricultural areas suffered the greatest effects even though they consumed the least meat. China is not alone is having air pollution problems from farming. Delhi’s persistently poor air pollution is made worse each year by farmers burning crop waste. In western Europe spring is often the most polluted time of year due in part to the ammonia from farm fertiliser and manure. Simply reducing meat consumption is one answer. Another is to decrease production. For example, the Dutch government has announced a €25bn (£21bn) programme to buy out cattle farmers. In his book English Pastoral, James Rebanks describes older mixed-farming methods where animal waste was used on the fields and crops were rotated, reducing the need for artificial fertiliser. A 2018 report by the UK Air Quality Expert Group highlighted that ammonia emissions could be reduced by about 40-60% by better management of manure. This includes covering manure stores, redesigning animal housings and tools to place manure directly on the ground or injecting it in soil rather than splash spreading. Planting trees around animal housings could help by capturing the ammonia and stopping its spread. Up to 40% of the ammonia from chicken farming can be trapped when chickens are kept under tree cover. A global methane pact was agreed at Cop26, which will increase pressure to reduce air pollutants from agriculture, and especially livestock farming. A growing number of national and local climate assemblies have brought together members of the public to learn, debate and prioritise solutions to the climate emergency. Farmers are great problem solvers. Is it time for a climate, or environment, assembly of farmers?Charity bosses and poverty campaigners have written to Boris Johnson demanding home insulation and heat pumps for people on low incomes, and a windfall tax on fossil fuel companies to fund emergency support on energy bills for vulnerable people. AgeUK, Save the Children and Tearfund are among 25 charities calling for urgent help for struggling households. Soaring energy prices, amid a gas supply crunch across Europe, mean poor households are facing £600 more on bills, forcing many to choose between eating and heating. The worst impact will be seen when the energy price cap is redrawn in April, and the government has promised help for those most affected. But some of the measures mooted – such as scrapping energy efficiency programmes that are paid for through bills – would be counterproductive, the charities warned. Dan Paskins, director of UK impact at the charity Save the Children, said: “The cost of living crisis, fuelled by soaring energy prices, is totally unsustainable and is hitting the lowest income families the hardest. Parents we work with tell us that they’re struggling to meet basic needs, leaving them having to make impossible choices between heating their homes and buying clothes for their children. And children are paying the price. Children deserve a fair and green future, and need a concrete plan from the UK government that tackles both the cost of living and climate crises.” Ministers are believed to be considering scrapping or changing the Energy Company Obligation (ECO) levy, which funds energy efficiency improvements such as insulation for poor households, with the £1bn cost shared out through additions to all UK household energy bills. But the charities warned this would penalise poor households most, reducing access to the home insulation vital to ending fuel poverty, and called instead for ECO to be retained in its current form and other levies that fund renewable and low-carbon energy, currently added to household bills, to be met through general taxation. William Baker, of the charity Solutions to Tackle Energy Poverty, another signatory to the letter seen by the Guardian, said: “ECO is central to the government’s legal duty to abolish fuel poverty by 2030. Scrapping the programme would show the government does not take its statutory responsibilities seriously. It would condemn many fuel-poor households to unaffordable fuel bills, ill health and, in the worst cases, death as a result of living in dangerously cold, unhealthy homes.” The Conservative manifesto at the 2019 general election included a promise of more than £9bn for home insulation, but little has been spent. The disastrous green homes grant collapsed last spring with only about 47,000 households benefiting, of which only about 15,000 were low-income households, instead of the 600,000 homes promised. Some rightwing commentators have sought to blame high energy prices on the target of net zero greenhouse gas emissions, and the push for renewable energy. Economic analysts reject this, pointing out that reducing reliance on fossil fuels is the way to avoid the impact of gas price volatility, while tackling the climate crisis. A government spokesperson said: “We recognise people are facing pressures with the cost of living, which is why we are taking action worth more than £4.2bn and supporting vulnerable households through initiatives such as the £500m Household Support Fund and Warm Home Discount.”From Afghanistan to Ethiopia, about 235 million people worldwide needed assistance in 2021. But while some crises received global attention, others are lesser known. Humanitarian organisation Care International has published its annual report of the 10 countries that had the least attention in online articles in five languages around the world in 2021, despite each having at least 1 million people affected by conflict or climate disasters. The findings, from a collaboration between the charity and international media monitoring service Meltwater, highlighted how the accelerating climate crisis is fuelling many of the world’s emergencies, said Laurie Lee, CEO of Care International UK. “There is deep injustice at the heart of it. The world’s poorest are bearing the brunt of climate change – poverty, migration, hunger, gender inequality and ever more scarce resources – despite having done the least to cause it,” he said. “Add Covid-19 into the mix and we see decades of progress towards tackling inequality, poverty, conflict and hunger disappearing before our eyes.” The number of people in need of humanitarian aid is expected to rise to 274 million this year, or one in 28 people, and more than 84 million people have been uprooted. Lee highlighted the impact of the UK’s 2021 foreign aid budget cuts, saying that it “resulted in over £166m less in humanitarian aid reaching the 10 countries mentioned in this report compared to 2019.” Zambia First on the list, Zambia has 1.2 million malnourished people and about 60% of the 18.4 million population living below the international poverty line of $1.90 (£1.40) a day. Women produce 60% of the country’s food supply, but families headed by women faced higher poverty rates than those headed by men. Food insecurity in Zambia has primarily been blamed on prolonged drought, but rising corn prices and flooding have contributed. Ukraine Currently in the news amid renewed tension between Russia and the west, in Ukraine, 3.4 million people were in need of assistance in 2021, after years of conflict. “While a comprehensive political solution for the conflict is still not in sight, people in eastern Ukraine are daily forced to put their lives on the line. Along the 420-km ‘contact line’ that separates Ukrainian government-controlled territory from that of the separatists, the situation is particularly dangerous,” the report said. Malawi Malawi is facing a food insecurity crisis, with 17% of the population severely malnourished. Droughts, floods and landslides have been predicted to worsen over the coming years. Cyclone Idai in 2019 severely affected harvests and left tens of thousands displaced. “The climate crisis is hitting people here earlier and much harder than the people of the global north,” said Chikondi Chabvuta, advocacy lead for Care International in Malawi. “We are already seeing real-life consequences with delayed rainfall, heavy and destructive rainfall, unpredictable rainfall patterns, infertile soil, destroyed harvests.” Central African Republic In Central African Republic (CAR), where civil war has exacerbated the humanitarian crisis, half of the population face food insecurity. A ceasefire agreement struck in October 2021 is fragile and more than 700,000 people have been internally displaced – more than half children. CAR is ranked second to last globally on the Human Development Index. “On average, a child attends school for just under four years, and girls for only three,” the report said. About 30% of children are in work. Guatemala Poverty, violence and the climate crisis are leading problems in Guatemala, which is on the migratory route to Mexico and the US. Two-thirds of the population live on less than $2 a day and 38% of the population face food insecurity. Camps sheltering those sent back by Mexico are overcrowded, meaning many live on the streets, the report said. Guatemala is considered one of the world’s most dangerous countries, with 3,500 murders in 2020 alone. “Although about 3.3 million people in the country rely on humanitarian aid, the frequent occurrence of violence is in many cases a barrier to accessing urgently needed assistance,” said the report. Colombia Nearly 5 million people live under the control of armed groups, and 6.7 million people are dependent on humanitarian aid. Food insecurity has been blamed on an economic recession caused by the pandemic. It has particularly affected indigenous communities, those uprooted internally and 1.8 million Venezuelan refugees, mainly in northern Colombia. Burundi Ranked as the country gaining the least attention in 2020, Burundi was seventh in 2021 when 2.3 million of the 12.6 million population were in need of humanitarian assistance. The country secured only 27% of the $195m pledged in aid. Extreme weather, hunger and political unrest were among the challenges faced by Burundians. In a country where 90% of people rely on small-scale agriculture, only a third of land is suitable for cultivation, due to drought, floods and landslides. The report also highlighted structural discrimination against women – 20% of those in Burundi’s decision-making bodies are female, while 60% of the agricultural workforce are women. Niger Niger is deeply vulnerable to climate disasters. Persistent droughts and recurring floods have had catastrophic consequences: nearly 3 million people rely on humanitarian aid. About 1.8 million children need food assistance and almost half of all children under five are malnourished. Militias in eastern and northern Niger have caused 313,000 people to be displaced as of last September. “Providing emergency relief is often hindered by the fact that infrastructure is destroyed, operation areas are marked by violence and rural areas are difficult to access,” the report said. Zimbabwe Zimbabwe has acute food insecurity with increasingly extreme climate conditions and economic mismanagement causing 6.6 million people to need humanitarian aid. More than a third of the population (5.7 million) lack sufficient food. “The harvests in many rural areas are not sufficient to secure basic food supplies and other needs. In these regions, households must rely on local markets when supplies are depleted – but the prices there are unaffordable for many,” the report said. Honduras Poverty and violence have exacerbated the humanitarian situation in Honduras, prompting many to leave for the US. About 70% of the population live in poverty, according to a 2020 study. There have been problems with farming due to drought, hurricanes and floods. The country has 937,000 displaced people, the highest number in Latin America. “In Honduras, people therefore often talk about poverty being female, as it is mostly women who stay behind with the children,” the report said.Top story: PM backer hands in letter of no confidence Morning everyone. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the top stories this morning. Boris Johnson’s government faces more damaging allegations about lockdown-era parties in Downing Street after reports that staff held two leaving dos featuring alcohol, and one with loud music, on the evening before Prince Philip’s funeral in April last year. Social contact was banned at the time and the Queen’s solitary mourning for her late husband became one of the defining pictures of the period. According to the Daily Telegraph, witnesses said a combined total of about 30 people took part in what appeared to be social events in different parts of Downing Street, before both gatherings combined in the garden. In echoes of the infamous “bring our own booze” email invite to a party in May 2020 revealed this week, one staff member was allegedly sent to the shops with a suitcase to fill up with wine. Johnson was not at the alleged event in April, but was forced to apologise to MPs this week for attending the May 2020 gathering. He is facing calls to resign, including from some of his own MPs. Andrew Bridgen became the fifth Tory MP to say he had lost confidence in his leader, while Labour deputy Angela Rayner said the “buck stops” with Johnson. Scottish Tory leader Douglas Ross has already said Johnson should quit, leading to Johnson being effectively barred from the Scottish Tory conference in March. The prime minister says he will abide by the findings of an investigation into the alleged parties by civil servant Sue Gray. Whitehall sources said last night that her inquiry might well uncover Downing Street’s “farcical culture” of drinking and impromptu socialising, which goes on with little oversight by ministers. * * * Royal removal – The Queen has sought to distance the monarchy from the Duke of York by stripping him of his military affiliations and royal patronages as the fallout from his sexual assault case continues. Buckingham Palace also said he would no longer use the HRH royal style in any official capacity as he prepares to fight a civil lawsuit brought by Virginia Giuffre after a US judge rejected his attempt to have the case against him dismissed. He strongly denies the claims. One observer said the prince had been “thrown under the royal bus”. Here’s how the papers have covered the story. * * * China warning – An unprecedented security warning from MI5 has been circulated to MPs and peers accusing a lawyer, Christine Lee, of seeking to improperly influence parliamentarians on behalf of China’s ruling Communist party. It is the first time that MI5 has issued an “interference alert” relating to China and concerns a high-profile Anglo-Chinese lawyer who received an award from Theresa May and who has donated £584,177 to the former shadow cabinet member Barry Gardiner. Lee, who has a law firm in Birmingham, has allegedly “knowingly engaged in political interference activities on behalf of the United Front Work Department of the Chinese Communist party”. Gardiner said he had been “liaising with our security services for a number of years about Christine Lee”. China has denied the allegations. The MI5 alert is being seen as a clear warning to China’s allies in the UK. * * * Meta case – The tech giant Meta is being sued for £2.3bn in a class action lawsuit that claims 44 million Facebook users in the UK had their data exploited after signing up to the social network. The case argues that Meta has broken the 1998 Competition Act by setting an “unfair price” for Facebook’s UK users when they are given access to the service. The lawsuit argues that the price for joining Facebook, which does not charge its users, is handing over personal data that generates most of the company’s income. A Meta spokesperson said people “choose our services because we deliver value”. * * * School choice ‘illusion’ – Parents in England feel more “cynical, fatalistic and disempowered” about school choice than their peers in other parts of the UK, according to new research. Families in England can name up to six state schools for their children to attend, but although children in Scotland are generally assigned to local state schools, people north of the border were were still more likely to be satisfied with the outcome, the study found. Some English parents said choice was “an illusion”. * * * Tech hub – Google has announced a £871m deal to buy the London development Central Saint Giles, calling the move a show of confidence in the return to more office working. The US tech firm currently rents space in the brightly coloured development designed by the architect Renzo Piano, which is at the eastern end of Oxford Street. Google is currently building a new headquarters in King’s Cross, and the new deal will expand its workforce capacity in the capital to 10,000 people. Today in Focus podcast: a royal mess The Duke of York’s attempts to get a civil case over allegations of sexual assault thrown out have failed. Ed Helmore in New York examines the case against the prince and his narrowing options to salvage his reputation Lunchtime read: ‘Songs are a form of survival’ – Big Thief The folk-rockers Big Thief have weathered divorce and trauma to become one of the US’s best bands. With a new, 20-song album coming out in February, they explain their need for imperfection, intra-band marriage and divorce – and why recording is like sex. Sport England’s bid to salvage some pride and win their first match of the Ashes series received a boost when Joe Root won the toss and opted to bowl first on a green pitch in the fifth Test. Australia slumped to 12-3 but are fighting back. Mikel Arteta hailed Arsenal’s “spirit, fight and brotherhood” after they held Liverpool in their Carabao Cup semi-final first leg despite playing with 10 men for well over an hour. The UK government has been urged to cut English cricket’s funding unless the England and Wales Cricket Board can prove it is serious about tackling the “deep-seated racism” that exists across the whole sport. Lewis Hamilton faces a two-month wait to discover the outcome of the FIA’s inquiry into the conclusion of the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix which denied him a record eighth world title. European rugby fixtures can go ahead as planned this weekend after the French government relaxed its rules on travellers entering the country from the UK. Geva Mentor has warned England’s Roses not to read too much into Australia’s lack of international action or their new-look squad before the start of the Netball Quad Series this weekend. And Team GB chiefs have set their sights on their greatest ever Winter Olympics medal haul in Beijing next month – and reiterated their support for British athletes who want to protest against human rights abuses in China. Business The global surge in demand for energy could spark another three years of market volatility and record power plant pollution unless countries make major changes to how they generate electricity, the world’s energy watchdog has warned. Half the increase in demand last year came from China. There are more jitters today on the markets about likely US rate rises. The Nikkei is down 1.5% and the Kospi index slumped 1.45% in South Korea, where the central bank announced back-to-back hikes today for the first time since 2007. The FTSE100 looks like shedding 0.5% at the opening while the pound is on $1.373 and €1.195. The papers The defenestration of Prince Andrew is the lead in most of the papers today. The Guardian says “Queen strips Andrew of military and royal roles”, while the Times has “Andrew humiliated as Queen strips his titles” and the Telegraph goes with “Queen freezes out Andrew”. The Mail’s headline is “Driven out” and the Express says “Queen casts Andrew adrift … for sake of the monarchy”. The Sun’s splash head is “Throne out”, as is the Metro’s, and the main head in the i is “Prince Andrew cast out by the Queen”. The Mirror splashes on the latest revelations about parties at No 10 – “No 10 ‘parties on eve of Philip’s funeral’”. The FT lead is “Russian threat to Ukraine persists after talks with west hit ‘dead end’”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend.North Korea has fired a possible ballistic missile, Japan’s Coast Guard said on Friday, which would be the country’s third such launch in two weeks. South Korea’s military said an unidentified projectile had been launched into the sea off its east coast. Kim Jong-un’s regime had earlier berated the US for imposing fresh sanctions over its latest missile tests and warned of stronger and more explicit action if Washington maintains its “confrontational stance”. In a statement carried by North Korea’s official Korean Central News Agency, an unidentified foreign ministry spokesperson defended the North’s recent launches of purported hypersonic missiles as a righteous exercise of self-defence. The spokesperson said the new sanctions underscored hostile US intent aimed at “isolating and stifling” the North despite Washington’s repeated calls for Pyongyang to resume diplomacy that has stalled over disagreements about sanctions relief and nuclear disarmament steps. The Biden administration on Wednesday imposed sanctions on five North Koreans over their roles in obtaining equipment and technology for the North’s missile programs in its response to the latest missile test this week and also said it would seek new UN sanctions. The Treasury Department’s announcement came just hours after North Korea said Kim oversaw a successful test of a hypersonic missile on Tuesday that he claimed would greatly increase the country’s nuclear “war deterrent”. The North Korean spokesperson accused the US of maintaining a “gangster-like” stance, saying the development of the new missile was part of its efforts to modernise its military and did not target any specific country or threaten the security of its neighbours. “Nevertheless, the US is intentionally escalating the situation even with the activation of independent sanctions, not content with referring the DPRK’s just activity to the UN Security Council,” the spokesperson said, using an abbreviation of North Korea’s formal name, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Tuesday’s test was North Korea’s second demonstration of its purported hypersonic missile in a week. The country in recent months has been ramping up tests of new, potentially nuclear-capable missiles designed to overwhelm missile defence systems in the region, as it continues to expand its military capabilities amid a freeze in diplomacy with the US. Hypersonic weapons, which fly at speeds in excess of mach 5, or five times the speed of sound, could pose a crucial challenge to missile defence systems because of their speed and maneuverability. Such weapons were on a wish-list of sophisticated military assets Kim unveiled early last year along with multi-warhead missiles, spy satellites, solid-fuel long-range missiles and submarine-launched nuclear missiles. Still, experts say North Korea would need years and more successful and longer-range tests before acquiring a credible hypersonic system. This is a developing story. Please check back for updates.Labor has accused the Morrison government of dragging out the Novak Djokovic visa saga to distract from its Omicron woes, as uncertainty over the tennis star’s ability to play the Australian Open enters its second week. With no decision yet announced by immigration minister Alex Hawke, the independent senator Jacqui Lambie also accused the government on Friday of an “absolute shambles” in its handling of the Djokovic visa issue. Djokovic’s lawyers are prepared to challenge a visa cancellation, which has made the Australian government hesitant to pull the trigger until it is certain it won’t be reversed by a court. A lengthy legal battle could drag the saga into the next week, when the men’s tennis world No 1 is due to begin his Australian Open title defence. Djokovic arrived in Australia on the evening of 5 January. He believed that a visa granted on 18 November and an exemption approved by Tennis Australia’s chief medical officer and a Victorian government independent expert panel would be sufficient to enter Australia. Djokovic’s visa was cancelled on the basis that a recent Covid infection by itself was not sufficient for an exemption from Australia’s strict vaccination requirements. Although the visa was restored by the federal circuit court on Monday, Hawke began to consider cancelling it again under a separate personal power. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, on Thursday refused to comment directly on the case but confirmed he expected authorities to enforce the requirement that non-citizen non-residents be vaccinated, in a signal interpreted as meaning a fresh cancellation was imminent. On Friday Lambie questioned why the saga “keeps dripping out of the tap” and why the minister “hasn’t done anything about this”. “So maybe it’s about time to stop this debacle, finish it once and for all … and make up your mind, Alex Hawke. Where are you, missing in action? Make a decision,” she told Channel Nine’s Today. Lambie said if the government couldn’t make a decision about Djokovic she questioned how they could run the country. “This is an absolute shambles. Let alone what it’s making us look like in the face of the rest of the world. It’s absolutely a shocker.” At a press conference in Maryborough in Queensland, Labor’s shadow treasurer Jim Chalmers accused the government of “using this Novak Djokovic saga as a distraction from the shortages in our supermarkets, the shortages in our chemists, the shortages of workers”. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, said it should “never have come to this” because Djokovic should not have been granted a visa if not eligible for an exemption. “Novak Djokovic and his participation in the Australian Open has been the number one sports story in the world for months. “Everyone knows he’s the number one player in the world. He’s won the Australian Open nine times, shooting for 10, shooting for his 21st grand slam to be the greatest champion of all time.” Albanese noted it had been 60 days since the visa was granted and said the government had “never answered the question of how is it that that visa was granted in the first place if he wasn’t eligible because he wasn’t fully vaccinated”. On Thursday Morrison explained that having a visa is different to satisfying the requirements for entry to Australia, warning those should not be “conflated”. Morrison said non-citizen non-resident arrivals would need to show they were double vaccinated or “acceptable proof that they can’t be vaccinated for medical reasons”. The first counsellor at the Serbian embassy, Ivana Isidorovic, revealed on Friday that Djokovic has a diplomatic passport, telling the Herald Sun it should ensure “adequate treatment” of the 34-year-old tennis star. “Djokovic, as our most recognisable representative in the world, is the holder of a diplomatic passport, which should, in diplomatic theory and consular practice, guarantee him adequate treatment when crossing borders,” she reportedly said. However, Djokovic’s passport is unlikely to have any bearing on the vaccination requirement or visa cancellation, and was not a feature of his federal circuit court case.Sydney festival board member Benjamin Law has resigned following the festival’s refusal to terminate a $20,000 sponsorship deal with the Israeli embassy. In a statement issued by Law on Saturday, the author and screenwriter said his resignation was an act of allegiance with fellow artists, who had been put in a situation not of their making. “While I can’t speak for the board or the festival, I am personally sorry to Sydney festival artists and arts workers that you were put in a position where you may have had to choose between your work and values, or thrust into conversations for which you may have felt unprepared,” Law said in a detailed and carefully worded statement. “Many of you were confronted with a lose-lose proposition. On one hand: perform and be criticised for apparently standing alongside a foreign government whose money you never touched. On the other: withdraw and lose vital work in a period that has been shattering for you and the entire arts community. “It has been humbling and moving to see some of you withdraw in solidarity with Palestinians. It has been inspiring to see some of you persevere with performances in diabolically difficult circumstances. It has been sad to see some of you feel you had no choice but to withdraw from fear or frustration – often, understandably, directed at Sydney festival.” Law said he had helped broker meetings between the festival and those protesting the funding in December last year, and that he hoped those meetings would continue. “In all of this, I’ve done my best to serve the festival, advocate for artists and help facilitate difficult but necessary conversations,” he said. “However, this has come at a personal cost. I acknowledge I’m one of many. Artists involved in Sydney festival – all of whom have seen Covid-19 obliterate work and income – have understandably felt frustration over why they were put in a situation not of their making. As an artist who has made work for Sydney festival myself, I feel that frustration.” He said the decision to leave the board was his alone and he was comfortable departing because he had confidence the remaining board directors would “put things right” through an independent review. Dozens of artists have pulled out of the 2022 Sydney festival over the $20,000 Israeli embassy sponsorship of the Sydney Dance Company production of Decadance, a work devised by Tel Aviv choreographer Ohad Naharin. On Friday, a statement by the board’s chairperson, David Kirk, acknowledged that the festival had “faced unprecedented challenges this year”, specifically from Covid-19 and the Palestinian Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions (BDS) movement. “This has put significantly increased pressure on all members of the board, the staff, and most importantly artists,” Kirk’s statement said. In an earlier interview with the Guardian on Thursday, Kirk admitted that the board had been unaware of the sponsorship deal, brokered by festival management in July last year, until the festival program was published in late November with the Israeli embassy logo. “It was just a miss,” he told the Guardian, adding he regretted the distress to artists that the sponsorship decision had caused. The chair ruled out the suggestion either himself or festival director Olivia Ansell should resign over the issue, which subjected many artists to pressure on social media either because they had decided to join the boycott, or because they had decided to continue with their scheduled performances. Kirk said normal processes had been followed, but those processes would be reviewed independently in the wake of the controversy. On Friday Kirk thanked Law for his service, describing him as “an insightful and much valued member” of the board since joining in 2020. “As we’ve worked through the complexities of this year’s festival, he’s been a considered and constant voice as we collectively arrived at our position,” Kirk said.The Bureau of Meteorology is working to verify readings showing the northern Western Australia town of Onslow has matched the record for the hottest day in Australia, prompting calls to make living with extreme heatwaves in the Pilbara more sustainable. According to the bureau’s records, Oodnadatta in South Australia’s outback experienced the hottest day ever in 2 January 1960 with a reading of 50.7C. On Thursday, the coastal town of Onslow, 1,386km north of Perth and home to 848 residents, matched that. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Nearby towns of Roebourne and Mardie also sweltered through the heatwave, with automatic weather stations recording temperatures of 50.5C – matching the hottest day ever recorded in Western Australia and breaking a new record for the second hottest day recorded nationally. Last year’s hottest place was Mardie, with a reading of 47.9C. On Friday, Onslow again simmered, hitting 48C, meaning the day2 temperature was hotter than anywhere else in the country during 2021. Temperatures of 40C were felt from Fitzroy Crossing in the southern Kimberley and down to Norseman in the southern Goldfields. Temperatures were not expected to get as high on Friday, but Onslow recorded a temperature of 48C just after midday. Despite experiencing 50C on Thursday, Roebourne locals were unfazed by the extreme weather. Michael Woodley, the CEO of the Yindjibarndi Aboriginal Corporation and a resident of the 630-person town, said it was “just another day in the Pilbara”. Woodley said people were pragmatic about the near-record-breaking day and looked to beat the heat however they could. Those who had air conditioning spent the day inside, while those without were forced to venture out to find some shade and keep cool with a garden sprinkler – or at the local pool. “People don’t really think about it. People here just know one day is hotter than the next, but I think it’s something people should be a bit more aware of now with climate change,” Woodley said. “If 50C becomes the norm, there’ll be serious problems, obviously.” He said that given the records, he hoped authorities would now consider what was needed to make living in the Pilbara sustainable, particularly as it was home to many First Nations people. Last year was the world’s fifth-hottest year on record, according to preliminary readings, and was likely the hottest recorded year with a La Niña event in the Pacific. La Niña years are characterised by the Pacific Ocean absorbing more heat than in a neutral year. The Macquarie University deputy vice-chancellor and member of the Climate Council, Prof Lesley Hughes, said temperature spikes during heatwaves showed the danger of climate change because “life isn’t lived on an average”. “Averages are useful because we can compare averages between years or averages between decades, but what averages hide is a whole world of pain,” Hughes said. “Along with those averages are the extremes, and it’s with the extremes we actually get the impact. Averages don’t usually kill. It’s the extremes that do the harm.” Heatwaves can be deadly when people are caught outside in high temperatures and quickly become dehydrated, leading to a surge in hospitalisations and even deaths. Extreme heat can cause heatstroke and exhaustion, but also strokes and heart attacks in more serious cases. Hughes said extreme heat puts stress on multiple functions of the body and can become lethal when core temperatures are pushed “outside a narrow band of safety”. This risk grows higher as heatwaves drag out over multiple days and overnight temperatures remain high, making it difficult for people to cool down. The high temperatures raised concerns about vulnerable people across the region, including 169 prisoners held at Roebourne prison on Thursday whose cells were not equipped with air conditioning. A spokesperson for the WA Department of Justice said cell temperatures were monitored throughout the day and prisoners were provided with fans and ice, but cells with air conditioning were limited and had to be reserved for those with medical conditions. “The department employs a number of effective controls to manage the heat risk across the state,” the spokesperson said. “At Roebourne, this includes fans in every cell, air conditioning in the recreation hall, shade structures in the main areas of the prison and a flexible routine to adjust to the Pilbara’s heat conditions.” The spokesperson said medical staff were continuing to monitor prisoners’ health and safety on Friday but did not respond to questions about whether air conditioning would become the norm due to hotter temperatures.Pick of the week Ozark It is the first episode of this tense rural money-laundering thriller’s final season, and the opening scene epitomises the series: calm, almost banal domesticity giving way to explosive action. It is often said that extricating yourself safely from organised criminal activity is far harder than getting involved in the first place – and so it proves, when Marty and Wendy Byrde (Jason Bateman and Laura Linney) have a gently terrifying conversation with Felix Solis’s cartel boss Navarro. Elsewhere, Ruth Langmore (Julia Garner) is making a move – and might a vacuum be developing for her family to fill? The knowledge that the end is near only adds to the excitement. Netflix, from Friday 21 January *** As We See It A cheerfully robust series on living with autism from Friday Night Lights creator Jason Katims. Three housemates, all on the spectrum, look to find their places in the world but face obstacles beyond the usual travails of twentysomething life. This requires a light and careful comedic touch, but it’s worth bearing in mind that Katims has a son with Asperger’s. Don’t expect much sentimentality – when Rick Glassman’s Jack is told by his helper: “I think you are such a beautiful person,” his response (“That makes me want to throw up”) suggests someone neither wanting nor expecting special treatment. Amazon Prime Video, from Friday 21 January *** Zen School of Motoring A lovely curio developed, as such things increasingly are, from a YouTube show. Enigmatic comic and rapper Ogmios drives through the streets of north London, calmly, sardonically but always kindly remarking upon what he sees and recording it on a dash cam. If you didn’t think that driving in the Smoke could be meditative, you’re in for a surprise – Ogmios is unfailingly polite and even philosophical: giving way to other motorists, slowing down for pigeons in the road, and worrying about cyclists. A cult gem in the making. BBC Three, from Sunday 16 January *** Stacey Dooley: Stalkers Remarkably – and horrifyingly – according to this new two-part documentary, one in five women will be stalked in their lifetime. Stacey Dooley embeds herself with a specialist police unit in Cheshire and a victim support organisation in Hampshire as she explores the reality of something that clearly isn’t limited to people in the public eye. Along the way, she discovers how easily stalking can escalate into harassment and, eventually, serious violence, and spends time with both victims and perpetrators as she seeks to understand stalking’s roots. BBC Three, from Wednesday 19 January *** Trauma Hot on the heels of BBC One’s The Tourist and Channel 4’s Close to Me, another drama about amnesia. In this French thriller, it has afflicted policeman Adam Belmont (Guillaume Labbé) who, in the middle of an investigation into a child killer, takes a bullet to the head. Not ideal in terms of the case but, additionally, Belmont has forgotten his own son and the colleague with whom he was having an affair. Worse still, there’s a terrified woman tied up in his basement and he has no idea how she got there. Melodramatic and occasionally baffling stuff. All 4, from Friday 21 January *** Puppet Master: Hunting the Ultimate Conman An extraordinary, bewildering true-crime documentary series about con artist Robert Hendy-Freegard, a former car salesman from Derbyshire who masqueraded as an undercover MI5 agent and insinuated himself into the lives of numerous women. They were then defrauded, manipulated and, at times, physically threatened into abandoning their previous lives. It does a good job of communicating the horrendous damage Hendy-Freegard has left in his wake as the families of some of his victims bravely step forward to tell their stories. Netflix, from Tuesday 18 January *** Fraggle Rock: Back to the Rock Apple TV+ has been the subject of an ongoing stealth Fraggle takeover for a while now. In 2020, the platform screened a series of shorts called Fraggle Rock: Rock On! and it has subsequently acquired old seasons of the Jim Henson puppet extravaganza. But now, the frizzy-haired, boggle-eyed scamps are back in earnest, sticking largely to the joyfully chaotic, all-singing, all-dancing vibe of the original show. But will 20s kids find the show as entrancing as their 80s counterparts once did? Nostalgic parents will be keen to find out with this 13-episode run. Apple TV+, from Friday 21 JanuaryStart The Drover’s Rest, Monkhill Distance 8 miles Time 4 hours Total ascent 70 metres Difficulty: Moderate Google map of the route I first came across Burgh by Sands – a mile up the road from this walk’s starting point in Monkhill – in a 1970s magazine devoted to paranormal phenomena. In 1964, a Carlisle fireman named Jim Templeton took a photo of his daughter Elizabeth near Burgh (pronounced to rhyme with rough) only to find that, when he developed it, a strange figure in a spacesuit and helmet had mysteriously materialised behind her. The Solway Spaceman looked like a Doctor Who Cyberman and generated headlines around the globe, though most experts these days think it was just an over-exposed image of Jim’s wife, Annie. That the marshlands of the English Solway should be the site of such a weird, Fortean event doesn’t seem all that surprising when you’re standing on one of the narrow wooden footbridges that span the deep tidal dykes, looking north across the wide, glimmering water. The Solway is a landscape of eerie, wind-blasted beauty. The light has a pale, ethereal brightness and the silence is so dense the ping of a phone alert echoes over the murky green flats like the toll of a church bell, sending flocks of sandpipers and golden plovers into panicked flight. Inspired by the strangeness, local Anglo-Saxons decorated a wall of St Michael’s Church in Burgh by Sands with carvings of magical beasts. The Solway Spaceman is their Kodacolor equivalent. Burgh is a postcard-pretty village around a green, its lanes lined with 17th- and 18th-century houses and a few of what are locally known as clay dabbins – cruck barns built from timber, clay, pebbles and hay. Walking north you pass a rush-thatched cottage with whitewashed walls and heavy buttresses that calls to mind the Vikings. It was warriors of another sort that made their mark here, though. Beside the Greyhound Inn stands a bronze statue of Edward I brandishing a sword and generally looking ready to take on all comers in the pub car park. The Hammer of the Scots died in Burgh in 1307. Sick with dysentery, the aged but still belligerent monarch was carried out to the edge of the Solway so he could call out the enemy with his dying breath. A Victorian stone tower marks the spot where Edward Longshanks croaked out his final insult. It’s surrounded by iron railings to protect it from the chunky, shaggy-coated cattle that wander the salty land as if re-enacting the scenes JMW Turner captured in his etching, Solway Moss. Nearby are remnants of more recent conflicts – concrete observation posts and a target arrow (which, as if in homage to Edward Longshanks, points straight towards Scotland) – left over from the cold war, when this strip of the Solway was an RAF firing range. Hadrian’s Wall begins to the west at Bowness-on-Solway, but there’s barely anything left of the stretch to Carlisle. Huge piles of the Roman masons’ precisely cut and crafted stone were carried off in the 15th and 16th centuries to build barns, houses and pele towers, thick-walled refuges for when reiver bands crossed the Solway on horseback via hazardous tidal fords or waths, to steal livestock and whatever chattels their victims possessed. There’s a good example of a pele at the eastern end of Saint Michael’s church. The violence of the Anglo-Scottish border was given a romantic gloss by Sir Walter Scott. The great novelist loved the wildness of the Solway, and as you walk towards the mouth of the River Eden, you’ll see Old Sandfield, which features in Redgauntlet, his novel of Jacobite revolt, as the Lady Lowther Inn. In the neat village of Beaumont, the Norman church is built on the site of a Roman turret. It’s barely 30 metres above sea level, but so low is the ground around it, the churchyard has commanding views that stretch from the north Pennines to the rugged brown hills of Annandale. Nearby is the course of a canal that once linked Carlisle with the hamlet of Fishers Cross, a dozen miles to the west (some of the bridges in Burgh were once aqueducts). In 1819, Fishers Cross was renamed Port Carlisle and investors promised that the new port would become “a second Liverpool”, bringing boom times to north Cumbria. The canal – deep and wide enough for 60-ton barges – had barely been completed when the railways arrived. Port Carlisle’s backers swiftly filled in the waterway and laid a track on top of it. They were too late. A rival group had already finished the line from Carlisle to the dock at Silloth. Port Carlisle was abandoned. Now all that remains of this once-grand scheme is a terrace of houses, a chapel and a few crumbling remnants of the old wharfs, a monument to the effects of what we might now call disruptive technology. The gleaming saltmarsh north and west of Beaumont is grooved with streams of dark water and the brackish muddy flats are filled with wading birds – godwits, redshanks, oystercatchers, turnstones and snowy white egrets – as well as half a dozen varieties of duck. The density of such succulent prey inevitably attracts raptors: peregrine falcons and hen harriers are spotted regularly and, if your eyes are keen enough, you may even catch a glimpse of the tiny, grey merlin whirling across the wide skies. In spring and autumn tens of thousands of barnacle and pink-footed geese and whooper swans land here on their way to and from their summer breeding grounds, the Solway’s enveloping quiet shattered by their mournful honking. The walk south from Beaumont takes you to Monkhill, where a converted and bladeless 19th-century windmill looms protectively above the tiny hamlet like some cartoon creature from the imagination of Tove Jansson. The pub Drovers Rest is a traditional, low-slung pub with blazing fires and a warm, community feel. It has great beer, knowledgeable, enthusiastic staff and inventive, ale-friendly food. Co-owner and chef Tom McMaster is a former butcher who makes his own hot-smoked Cumberland sausages (vegan version available) to serve in homemade buns. The chips are chunky and crisp. Snacks include excellent pickled Czech cheese, and deep-fried macaroni cheese balls. There are about seven craft beers from northern breweries such as Ulverston, First and Last and Crazy Monkey, plus experimental brews from further afield. It’s the sort of place that makes you consider moving house to be near. Stay Hillside Farm B&amp;B is on a working 1850s farm in the hamlet of Boustead Hill, four miles west of Monkhill. The location couldn’t be better. The farm is almost slap on Hadrian’s Wall, with open views across the Solway marshes to Scotland. There’s a double and a twin in the main house and a Georgian stable block has been converted into a bunkhouse with room for a dozen people. It doesn’t take card payments, so bring cash or a chequebook. Doubles £90 B&amp;B (single occupancy £60), bunk beds £15pp (fried breakfast from £4), hadrianswalkbnb.co.ukAmitav Ghosh can clearly remember his first interaction with the climate crisis. It was the early 2000s, and Ghosh, now one of India’s most celebrated authors and winner of its highest literary prize, was researching a novel set in the Sundarbans, a network of islands around the mouth of the Ganges Delta in the Bay of Bengal, which is home to the world’s largest mangrove forest. Climate change had barely entered into public consciousness back then, but Ghosh clearly remembers “visible signs that something wasn’t right”. “People spoke of their homes disappearing, of sea water levels rising and salt water erosion, but no one knew what was happening,” he said. “So I began researching. And as the years went on the signs became clearer and clearer.” Twenty years on, the Sundarbans are widely acknowledged to be one of the world’s most vulnerable areas to the climate crisis. Rising sea levels are eating away at the islands while extreme weather events have decimated the ecology and made the land salty and arid. Drilling for groundwater has only exacerbated the problem as it causes the islands to sink faster. Some predict that in less than a century, the unique biosphere will disappear entirely. Ghosh, who was born in Kolkata in West Bengal, less than 100 miles from the Sundarbans, never forgot the rapidly changing landscape he witnessed and has become one of the most vocal literary voices calling for the world to pay attention to the climate emergency. While he is still known best for his novels, most notably the Booker-prize nominated Ibis trilogy about the opium trade in the 1800s, it was to a “planet in crisis” that Ghosh turned his attention in his latest work of nonfiction, The Nutmeg’s Curse. Spanning horrific incidents of European settler colonial violence carried out across Asia, America, Australia, New Zealand and Africa, Ghosh maps out how the pillaging of those lands hundreds of years ago – and the systematic extermination of their indigenous people – laid the foundation for the climate crisis that threatens the world today. “Why has this crisis come about?” said Ghosh. “Because for two centuries, European colonists tore across the world, viewing nature and land as something inert to be conquered and consumed without limits and the indigenous people as savages whose knowledge of nature was worthless and who needed to be erased. It was this settler colonial worldview – of just accumulate, accumulate, accumulate, consume, consume, consume – that has got us where we are now.” Yet as Ghosh sat down to write the book in March 2020, he had no idea that the ideas that had begun to take shape in his head would begin to manifest so dramatically off the page. Suddenly the pandemic hit and New York, where he lives, was one of its hardest-hit cities. “That experience really shaped the book, because the pandemic is the most visible aspect of the planetary crisis that’s unfolding us around us,” said Ghosh. “I think the pandemic more than anything else made it perfectly clear that this is a crisis you can’t hide from. Money will not protect you, power will not protect you, we’re in the midst of it already. It gave it a terrific sense of urgency.” For Ghosh, the survival of our planet hinges on returning to interacting with Earth as a living being to be listened to, understood and respected. “The indigenous peoples of the Americas have been saying for decades that our past is your future and now that’s exactly what’s proving to be the case,” he said. There are signs this perception of nature is becoming more formally recognised and non-human voices are starting to be heard. Courts in countries such as New Zealand, once home to atrocious acts of violence by European colonialists, have begun to recognise the personhood and rights of rivers, mountains, glaciers and other geological phenomena. “This is one of the things that makes me hopeful because if it happens in legal language then at some point it’s bound to seep also into political language,” said Ghosh. But he also sees some developing countries, including India, reverting to the very same approaches of greed, consumption and extraction, and alienation of indigenous communities, that were inflicted by colonial invaders 200 years ago. “In India especially, governing elites have completely accepted the settler colonial models, and are now trying to impose them upon indigenous forest dwellers, adivasis,” said Ghosh. He pointed out that the Indian government was auctioning off sites for private coalmines, many in rich biodiverse forests with tribal communities. “They talk about environmentalism, development and progress but it only serves a middle-class, urban vision of the world,” he said. “Meanwhile, those who live off the land are made to suffer. It can only have disastrous consequences for the future of our planet.” Ghosh said this disconnect was worsened by India’s caste system, where adivasis are seen to be at the very lowest rung of society. “Indian environmentalism has tended to be very upper-caste oriented,” he said. “They have these visions of nature as pure and pristine and these adivasis are somehow contaminants of the forests.” According to Ghosh, there is still hope left in the fight against the climate crisis, but it is not a hope represented by large multinational bodies and institutions. Cop26 only proved his worst fears. “Cop26 really underlined that all those political mechanisms and institutions of liberal world governance that we rely on have failed us, and they’re going to fail more and more in the future,” said Ghosh. His hope for the planet lies instead in movements such as Black Lives Matter, the Standing Rock protests and Occupy, where the colonialist viewpoints that have infused society for hundreds of years finally began to be challenged and the power and potential of global connectivity was felt. As Ghosh writes in the final lines of the book, it is not of billionaires or technology that will save us, but instead a “vitalist mass movement”, driven by human spirit, that “may actually be magical enough to change hearts and minds across the world”.Munich, based on the Robert Harris novel, is a German-British TV production that was filmed in Germany and subsequently in England in late 2020. I was invited to join the crew as an on-set stills photographer for the UK leg of shooting. We started in Liverpool, which was doubling for 1930s London. The historic Liver Building, which stood in for Gotham city in the forthcoming Batman movie, made a very convincing Whitehall. The production later moved south to Amersham in Buckinghamshire where we shot in historic houses used as sets for Chequers and Downing Street. Liverpool doubled for 1930s London – with the historic Liver Building making an impressive substitute for Whitehall George MacKay running down ‘Whitehall’ the side of the Liver Building. The camera is ahead of him on a makeshift tricycle George MacKay makes sure his young co-star feels at ease director Christian Schwochow gives notes to actors At this point in the pandemic, England was in tier four, which made for a strange but fascinating experience. After months shielding in London and seeing barely anyone, it was overwhelming to be near so many other people. Overwhelming and at times bizarre when, after so much isolation, I’d suddenly find myself surrounded by more than 100 masked supporting artists in immaculate 30s period dress. Extras at the Downing Street set at Elstree Studios. This set is also used, with slight period modifications, for The Crown. Right: extras on set at Elstree The streets of Liverpool were almost entirely deserted, which meant that the period details, classic cars and authentic costumes made for a convincing illusion. Classic cars correct to the period are rare. Their owners tend to ‘play’ the drivers in period productions and the cars move between all sorts of film and TV sets. They aren’t always reliable, though (unsurprising for cars nearly 100 years old) and the odd scene was held up as the drivers did some quick mechanical repairs A large scene in Liverpool with a snagged barrage balloon. Most of the effect was done with a huge model, but there will be embellishments added inpostproduction Supporting artist ‘waiters’ watch the barrage balloon Part of the budget for the production went into Covid protection,now standard on all film and television productions. We formed a giant bubble. Lateral flow tests were administered every other day. PCR tests every three days. Masks were worn and monitors – the so-called “Covid police” – checked that everyone was maintaining protocols and distance. Covid-secure extras playing Conservative MPs in the House of Commons Extras waiting for an elaborate dining scene to start Extras wait outside in masks on the Liverpool set The cast, principal actors, and all extras wore masks on set until the final rehearsal and during takes, after which face coverings went back on. Windows and doors were wide open everywhere. Extras in Liverpool giving the sense that Britain knew war was coming The film’s action is mainly set in late summer and early September but we were filming in an unusually cold, frosty late November and December. The interiors were as cold as the exteriors. One particularly frigid day, in a country house with huge open windows and doors, a “creative” decision was made, partly by the poor actors in their 30s suits (with crew in North Face and thermals) to the effect that Prime Minister Chamberlain would have had an open fire roaring during his early September cabinet meeting. Jeremy Irons between scenes set in Downing Street The protocols worked and other than the odd heart-stopping false positive lateral flow test, there were no actual cases of Covid during the British leg of filming, despite the large numbers of people involved in some scenes. The strangest part was what the Covid precautions did to the camaraderie of the production. For Munich, we routinely worked 10- or 11-hour days as part of a tight crew but then went back to the hotel to eat alone in our rooms. Supporting artists playing MPs queueing for their Covid-secure lunches while protecting their immaculate costumes Even so, it was thrilling to be part of such a large creative group. As the stills photographer I was with the camera department. All of the active camera crew were German, working under director of photography Frank Lamm. Usually, scenes were shot with two cameras, an “A” and a “B” device. For larger scenes, there were up to four cameras, each one accompanied by a focus puller, a microphone boom holder and a grip to make sure cables were clear . The A camera crew with cinematographer Frank Lamm seated. First assistant director Finn McGrath. The first AD is one of the most important people on set, making sure every scene is running to time and that everyone is exactly where they should be so that the director and cast can have the right space and atmosphere to do their work As a stills photographer, I would often try to shoot during rehearsals before each take, but this wasn’t always possible. Actors like to have the set clear and quiet, the better to communicate with the director. That meant for much of the filming I was shooting during the actual take. This entailed trying to fit myself as unobtrusively, respectfully and noiselessly as possible into a space near the camera so as not to be in shot. This meant keeping on the right side of the boom holder so I could crouch next to their chest [their work means they have their arms above their head and are close to the actors]. It’s a good spot but a very tight one and, as the stills photographer, I had to remember I was the least important part of any take. If I messedup, got in someone’s way, or distracted an actor, the I’d be the the easiest person to kick off the set. George MacKay and Jessica Brown-Findlay George MacKay, and right; Jessica Brown-Findlay as Pamela Legat Aidan Hennessy playing a young Arthur Legat, and George MacKay. George MacKay in a scene where his voice was needed for another actor’s shot but he didn’t need to be on camera. He decided to hide behind a desk so he could give the other actor what they needed but remain out of shot. I enjoy the challenge of getting the balance between being pushy enough to edge close to the action I want to photograph while being discreet and diplomatic enough to be allowed to do this by the rest of the crew. Director Christian Schwochow and George MacKay Jessica Brown-Findlay playing Pamela Legat, George MacKay as Hugh Legat and Abigail Cruttenden as Anne Chamberlain chatting during a break between takes There was one big challenge of working with the German camera crew. While they were incredibly welcoming, Frank and the other cinematographer, Niv, operating camera B, along with German director Christian, tended to make very quick decisions, often after the rehearsal, about what the shot would look like. They spoke in German, meaning we non-German-speaking members of the crew had to try to work out where was safe to stand. The nightmare would be being standing in some actor’s way or, God forbid, ruining a whole take by ending up in shot. A scene in what was supposed to be the Downing Street garden in late summer. It was actually -1C with a thick fog and heavy frost. Gardeners from the crew had planted summer flowers and roses and Frank used an exceptionally powerful light high on a crane to replicate the afternoon summer sun The effect was a remarkable trompe l’oeil. It was incredibly cold and uncomfortable for the actors spending hour after hour in their light, seasonally inappropriate costumes The closest I came to disrupting a scene was when we were filming in the freezing fog trying to shoot a late-summer, Downing Street garden scene. I misunderstood the German and nearly found myself directly under Jeremy Irons’s feet. I threw myself under a rhododendron bush and just about got away with it. The producer of Munich, Andrew Eaton, was also the original producer of The Crown and there are similarities in the attention to period detail and the degree of veracity achieved with props and costumes. Particularly in scenes set in the secretaries’ offices under Whitehall (filmed in an imposing and deserted bank in central Liverpool). Anjli Mohindra playing Joan Menzies in the elaborate sets representing the Downing Street secretary pool In restaurant scenes, there were real chefs providing period-correct meals for the extras to pretend to eat. Likewise, the newspapers they were reading were all perfect reproductions, as were the period posters. I walked on the set when everyone had broken for lunch and, apart from the odd piece of gaffer tape and the lingering foul smell of theatrical herbal cigarettes, the illusion was total. One really could have been in a 30s government office. Every letter on every desk was addressed and franked realistically. The stationery in drawers was correct to the period. The calendars on desks were set to the correct date. It’s remarkable how much work goes in to this just to create a convincing and absorbing recreation – so that the actors and audience “feel” it. Truly remarkable. George MacKay in Rochdale town hall, which was used as the Palace of Westminster The production used Rochdale town hall, a building chosen by Hitler to be shipped to Germany brick by brick in the event of a successful Nazi invasion of Britain, as a substitute for the Palace of Westminster. Rows of green benches full of picture-perfect supporting artists were dressed and made up to be the MPs on the Tory benches, augmented with green screens that would help the visual FX team insert the rest of the famous chamber. At the wrap on the last day of filming, I shot the camera crew with signs from the prop department on the steps of No 10 I’m not often on film sets, but I always love it when I am. To be involved with a production of this size during the extreme strangeness of a pandemic made it all the more memorable. • This article was amended on 14 January 2022. The text and an image caption of an earlier version misidentified Rochdale town hall as “Rochester town hall”.Somebody Somewhere, a spiky and endearing seven-part HBO series created by and starring the comedian, actor and singer Bridget Everett, begins in the quiet aftermath of loss. Sam, a 40-something woman played by Everett, is struggling to adjust to life in her hometown of Manhattan, Kansas (also Everett’s hometown), where she returned a year prior to take care of her beloved sister Holly during an illness. Six months after her death, Sam works as an unenthusiastic grader of standardized tests and sleeps on Holly’s couch; she still can’t bring herself to touch Holly’s bed. Sam is a void, turned inward and speaking little, a fuck-up to everyone other than a sympathetic coworker and former high school classmate, Joel (Jeff Hiller), who remembers her as a “big fucking deal” in their show choir days (hence the BFD title of the first episode, written by co-creators Hannah Bos and Paul Thureen and directed by executive producer Jay Duplass). Quiet is not how one would describe Everett, a fixture on the New York comedy scene as a bawdy, thunderous performer of alternative cabaret (signature ribald songs include titties, what I gotta do to get that dick in my mouth? and keep it in your pants song). HBO has billed Somebody Somewhere as a “coming-of-middle-age” story and that’s pretty accurate – both for Sam, reeling from the loss of the only person who seems to have understood her, and for the 49-year-old Everett, in her first leading series role after years of bit parts (perhaps most famously on Inside Amy Schumer). Everett’s stage persona is larger than life – her operatic voice, her libido, her body and especially her boobs, with which she has been known to motorboat audience members. Sam, by contrast, is a repressed, unconfident alter ego of the brash performer, a fictionalized vision of what might be, had Everett not left the “Little Apple” for the big one, or was tampered down instead of emboldened. Sam lumbers between her snooty sister Tricia’s (Mary Catherine Garrison) house and her parents’ farm, stuck and unsure, dressed down in oversized clothes, alone. She is a singer at heart and the author of Everett’s own dirty songs, but afraid of the grief music will expose. Sensing her potential, Joel, a gay Christian with his own complicated relationship to his hometown, invites Sam to his “choir practice” – a deceptively titled celebration of music and queerness and a haven for the town’s misfits. The first episode’s climactic scene, as with half the episodes of the series, is a moving musical number: Sam, with Joel’s coaxing, embraces the stage for the first time in years. The moment, played to convincingly high stakes by both Everett and Hiller, cements the two central romances of the series: Sam’s re-embrace of singing, and thus her more honest self, and the tender, tart, altogether winning friendship between her and Joel at an age when most adults seem to eschew making new platonic confidantes. Both relationships are a joy to watch blossom, even if they’re not always the most exciting. One’s enjoyment of Somebody Somewhere depends somewhat on your threshold for backseat plot – there are buried resentments and secrets, tense conversations and occasional blowups, but little external conflict or antagonism. For the most part, everyone on the show (even Tricia) is a good person at heart doing their best, trying to communicate and making small realizations along the way. Though filmed in Illinois, the show’s many interstitial shots of cornfields and a cutesy college town street (Manhattan is home to Kansas State University) effectively conjures a midwestern town: warmhearted, a little sleepy, unassuming and full of characters if you know where to look, such as Sam and Joel’s friend Fred Rococo, the master of choir practice ceremonies played by the New York drag king, Murray Hill. The main draw, though, is Everett, whom I would watch do anything after imbuing Sam with this much bruised charisma. For all her walls, which Everett never lets us believe are anything but shaky and ill-fitting, Sam has an undeniable and magnetic maternal side – not in the sense of literally having kids, whose absence leaves Sam feeling judged by her town’s faith and family milieu, but in caring for others. She is a disarming, unvarnished support for her teenage niece Shannon (Kailey Albus), the person who convinces her father Ed (an excellent Mike Hagerty) to convince her alcoholic mother Mary Jo (Jane Brody) to give rehab a try. When she lashes out at Joel after a particularly painful afternoon at the receiving end of Tricia’s judgments, it only takes a day for her to make amends with self-effacing vulnerability. “I don’t think I’m really friend material,” she says. Joel disagrees, as do I. Welcoming Sam – wounded and warm, subdued and obnoxious, finally open to new friends – into your life for seven half-hour chapters is a breeze, as natural as Sam’s final command of the karaoke mic. Somebody Somewhere is on HBO in the US and Foxtel in Australia, with a UK date to be announcedNovak Djokovic has fallen victim to the latest harsh application of border policies by an Australian government, but he still only has himself to blame. On Friday the Morrison government’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, took the momentous decision to again cancel the world No 1’s visa, which is very likely to trigger deportation despite Djokovic’s win in court on Monday. Now Djokovic’s only hope would be a second Hail Mary court case, made all the harder by the godlike powers given to the minister in Australian law and a slower, steadier process of decision that has consumed the whole week. When Djokovic landed in Melbourne late on the evening of 5 January, he thought a visa and a medical exemption approved by Tennis Australia’s chief medical officer and an independent Victorian government board would guarantee him a shot at his 10th Australian Open and record 21st grand slam. But his fate was sealed by a hardening view in the Australian government and its border force that a recent Covid diagnosis was itself not enough to enter the country quarantine-free – and an error on his immigration paperwork that took days to come to light. Djokovic challenged his visa cancellation in the federal circuit court, winning because the judge agreed it had been unreasonable of the border force to renege on a deal to give him more time to address the exemption issue. First set Djokovic. He took to Melbourne Park, ensuring familiar images of him on Rod Laver Arena’s Avatar-blue court that seemed to promise another shot at grand slam greatness. Even public opinion – so long set against Djokovic for his refusal to be vaccinated to play a tournament in one of the world’s most locked down cities during the pandemic – seemed to swing back his way. Transcripts of his interview with border force, released in court documents, painted the picture of a weary traveller who stayed cool and calm despite being genuinely bewildered as he thought he’d done everything right. Or as judge Anthony Kelly put it: what more could this man have done? Accepting the loss on procedural grounds, the government’s lawyer warned the minister was still considering the nuclear option of re-cancelling his visa. Technically, the old ground of possible risk to public health was enough to do so, although it could be construed as a churlish response demonstrating the government was always out to get Djokovic. But momentum swung against Djokovic when it was noted that his presence in Belgrade for Christmas suggested a declaration he hadn’t travelled in the fortnight before his flight to Australia from Spain was wrong, to say nothing of his public appearances in the days after his positive test on 16 December. Djokovic’s Wednesday statement conceded error in his paperwork, blamed an agent who had filled it out, and acknowledged an “error of judgment” attending an interview and photo shoot after he received his result. That statement gave new impetus to cancel his visa and further harming his public image for exposing others to Covid back in Serbia. At a late-night Friday hearing, Djokovic’s lawyers revealed the government’s new reason to cancel his visa was a fear his presence in Australia might “excite anti-vax sentiment”. The politics of this decision will be mixed. Some will think it an overreaction for a government trying to normalise the inevitability of endemic Covid cases and Serbian-Australians will be furious. But time and time again Australian governments have been rewarded for keeping people out and the prime minister’s “rules are rules” refrain last week showed this is where the Coalition thinks the balance of public opinion lies. Yes, the decision is harsh, as most travellers’ declarations and exemptions are not subjected to this level of scrutiny. Yes, it will have an enormous impact on Djokovic and his quest to be recognised as the greatest male singles player of all time. But still, the judge’s question can now be answered easily enough. What more could Djokovic have done? Get vaccinated; isolate while awaiting the result of a PCR test instead of doing an event with children (even if, as Djokovic claims, he felt fine and rapid antigen tests came back negative); stay in isolation after being notified of a positive result instead of doing an interview and photoshoot; and answer the form correctly. While it seems bizarre that the minuscule risk of one unvaccinated man entering a country overrun by Omicron could justify deportation, harshness – and even cruelty – are the hallmarks and organising principles of Australia’s border policies. The decision was Hawke’s to make, but it’s worth noting Morrison proudly displays an “I Stopped These” trophy of a boat in his office, and once complained the relatives of deceased asylum seekers received taxpayer-funded flights to attend their funerals. Donald Trump remarked to another Liberal prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, “you are worse than I am”, intending it as a compliment on Australia’s refugee policies. A system that crushes the hopes and dreams of refugees and asylum seekers who did nothing except seek safety in Australia was always going to be able to find a way to crush those of a man who has hit plenty of unforced errors.Twenty new “pandemic billionaires” have been created in Asia thanks to the international response to Covid-19, while 140 million people across the continent were plunged into poverty as jobs were lost during the pandemic, according to Oxfam. A report by the aid organisation says that by March 2021, profits from the pharmaceuticals, medical equipment and services needed for the Covid response had made 20 people new billionaires as lockdowns and economic stagnation destroyed the livelihoods of hundreds of millions of others. From China, Hong Kong, India and Japan, the new billionaires include Li Jianquan, whose firm, Winner Medical, makes personal protective equipment (PPE) for health workers, and Dai Lizhong, whose company, Sansure Biotech, makes Covid-19 tests and diagnostic kits. The total number of billionaires in the Asia-Pacific region grew by almost a third from 803 in March 2020 to 1,087 by November last year, and their collective wealth increased by three-quarters (74%), the report said. The report said the richest 1% owned more wealth than the poorest 90% in the region. Mustafa Talpur, campaigns lead at Oxfam Asia, said: “It is outrageous and highly unacceptable that poor people in Asia [were left at] the mercy of the pandemic facing severe health risks, joblessness, hunger and pushed into poverty – erasing the gains made in decades in the fight against poverty. “While rich and privileged men increase their fortunes and protect their health, Asia’s poorest people, women, low-skilled workers, migrants and other marginalised groups are being hit hardest,” he added. In 2020, an estimated 81m jobs disappeared and loss of working hours pushed a further 22–25 million people into working poverty, according to the International Labour Organization. Meanwhile, the Asia-Pacific region’s billionaires saw their wealth increase by $1.46tn (£1.06tn), enough to provide a salary of almost $10,000 (£7,300) to all those who lost a job. Covid has claimed more than a million lives in just Asia, and countless more deaths will result from increased poverty and disruptions to health services. The report said women and girls were more likely to have lost jobs or income. Women are also more likely to work in frontline roles, putting them at further risk; in the Asia-Pacific region, women account for more than 70% of healthcare workers and 80% of nurses. In south Asia, people from lower castes do the bulk of sanitation work, often without protective equipment, and face poverty and discrimination that prevent them from accessing health services. The pandemic has exacerbated this, said Oxfam. The wealth gap is set to grow. Credit Suisse forecasts that, by 2025, there will be 42,000 more people worth more than $50m in Asia-Pacific and 99,000 billionaires. The number of millionaires by 2025 is projected to be 15.3 million, a 58% increase on 2020. Both the World Bank and IMF have said that coronavirus will cause a significant increase in global economic inequality. Talpur said: “The political system is protecting the interests of the tiny rich elite. Governments have consistently failed to work for the majority during the pandemic. It was the juncture of global solidarity, but rich countries and big pharmaceutical companies turned away their faces.”In the first chapter of this novel a hit man remarks to himself: “No one realises how much hit men owe to Hollywood scriptwriters.” But how does the author know? The throwaway joke, along with an unashamed obsession with verbally recreating and namechecking the mise-en-scène of streaming TV drama, is typical of the book’s effervescent playfulness. Hervé Le Tellier, after all, is the current president of Oulipo, the French “workshop of potential literature” whose past masters included Raymond Queneau and Georges Perec. And what he has done here would delight his forebears with its paradoxical nature: he has written an Oulipan bestseller, a Prix Goncourt-winning novel that has already shifted a million units on the continent. Each chapter of the book’s first section introduces a different cast member, mainly French or American, in a different novelistic or televisual style (deftly handled in Adriana Hunter’s clever translation). After the hit man, Blake, we meet a writer, Victor Miesel, followed by film editor Lucie, architect André, musician Slimboy, six-year-old Sophie and her pet frog, lawyer Joanna, and mathematicians Adrian and Meredith. Victor’s story is a hilariously deadpan satire on the Parisian literary scene: his two unbestselling novels glory in the titles The Mountains Will Come to Find Us and Failures that Missed the Mark, while he also “translates entertaining English-language bestsellers that reduce literature to the status of a minor art for minors”. (He commences work on a book entitled The Anomaly, because of course he does.) Other tableaux are by turns amusing and affecting: Slimboy is a Nigerian pop star wondering whether he can come out as gay; David is diagnosed with an aggressive cancer; André and Lucie were once an item but no more. Adrian and Meredith are tipsily flirting at a faculty party at MIT, where “there’s some tequila in the Turing Room, in the cupboard behind the felt pens”. Here is Meredith considering Adrian: “For a statistician, he’s a dreamer. He has green eyes that make him look like a number theorist, even though he has long hair like a game theorist, and wears the Trotskytising small steel-rimmed glasses of a logician and the holey old T-shirts of an algebraist.” It has been a bravura 100 pages of introductions and emotional or comedic complications before the conceptual inciting event happens. Air France flight AF006 from Paris to New York emerges from the turbulence of an unexpected storm to the bafflement of air traffic control, and is redirected to a secret military base. Why? Because it’s exactly the same flight as one that already landed at JFK after emerging from a storm three months ago. Not just the same flight number but the same plane, with the same people on it. And guess what links all the characters we have met so far. There are now two copies of Blake, Victor, Lucie, Joanna, and all the rest – except Adrian and Meredith, who are instead whisked off to consult for the American government on what this might mean, while the interlopers are sequestered in a Hollywood movie hangar. At length the assembled brains trust (you’d cast Jeff Goldblum in a shot) decides that the most likely explanation is that we all live in a simulation. Not like The Matrix, where humans are real but enslaved by machines; instead, we ourselves are nothing more than computer programs, running in some vast simulation overseen by an alien civilisation of unimaginable technological capability. The boffins explain this by reference to Oxford philosopher Nick Bostrom’s “Simulation Argument”, though something very similar was a pan-galactic religion known as “The Truth” in Iain M Banks’s sci-fi universe. If it is the truth, though, what does this sudden duplication of an aircraft full of people mean? Maybe it’s a test, characters suppose. How will humanity know if it has failed? As the intelligence and military types argue the toss, the rest of the novel follows the characters as, in different situations, they meet their doppelgangers. Would you share your life with the person who also thinks they are you? Would you claim them as a long-lost twin? Or would they need to disappear? After a suitably ludic ending, we are left with an after-echo, a feat of fiction informed by other fictions. Le Tellier describes a world flattened by the unbearable lightness of representation (where some still remember a time “when too many photos hadn’t yet killed photos”). Does he mean to make a sly case that the great god Netflix has become the default way for us to interpret the world? In any event, it seems fitting that the novel’s screen adaptation rights have already been sold. From TV has The Anomaly arisen; to TV shall it return. • The Anomaly by Hervé Le Tellier, translated by Adriana Hunter, is published by Michael Joseph (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Here are the main stories from Friday, 14 January: Immigration minister Alex Hawke cancels Novak Djokovic’s visa again, leaving him in limbo ahead of his first round Australian Open match on Monday. NSW records 29 Covid deaths on state’s deadliest day of pandemic; Victoria records 18 deaths; six Covid deaths in South Australia, three Covid deaths in Queensland; Tasmania reports 1,201 cases, ACT 1,125, the NT 546 cases; There are more than 4,000 Covid patients in hospital nationally; NSW police decide not to fine Hillsong, despite the behaviour at the church’s youth camp raising questions about whether Covid restrictions had been breached; and The NT government admits it has not been contacting people who attended exposure sites for the past week because of an error within its health department. We will see you back here for more news tomorrow. And from now on you can get all your Djokovic news over here at our dedicated live blog: Under the cancellation issued by Hawke, which is classified as an adverse decision under section 133C(3) of the Migration Act, Djokovic would not be able to be granted a visa (while offshore) for a period of three years, except in certain circumstances. And here come what will be an avalanche of hot takes. And: Obviously there is nothing in that statement about detention, or about a court appearance, but both are very much on the cards. Here’s one court appearance we do know about: Djokovic is due to play his first round match at the Australian Open on Monday. The immigration minister Alex Hawke has cancelled Novak Djokovic’s visa on the grounds of “health and good order” and on the basis that it was “in the public interest”. Here is Hawke’s full statement: Today I exercised my power under section 133C(3) of the Migration Act to cancel the visa held by Mr Novak Djokovic on health and good order grounds, on the basis that it was in the public interest to do so. This decision followed orders by the Federal Circuit and Family Court on 10 January 2022, quashing a prior cancellation decision on procedural fairness grounds. In making this decision, I carefully considered information provided to me by the Department of Home Affairs, the Australian Border Force and Mr Djokovic. The Morrison Government is firmly committed to protecting Australia’s borders, particularly in relation to the COVID-19 pandemic. I thank the officers of the Department of Home Affairs and the Australian Border Force who work every day to serve Australia’s interests in increasingly challenging operational environments Alex Hawke has reportedly cancelled Novak Djokovic’s visa, again. Disability service workers urgently need more support from state and federal governments as Covid-19 has caused severe staffing shortages, according to union officials and the industry’s peak body, AAP reports. National Disability Services chief Laurie Leigh on Friday told AAP some providers had lost up to 30 per cent of their workforce because staff were either isolating or sick with the virus. Most providers, she said, had lost five to 15 per cent of staff. The NDS chief said lack of access to rapid antigen tests and workforce shortages were the two largest headaches for the sector. “The current wave of COVID-19 infections is putting significant strain on the provision of disability services,” Ms Leigh said. Health and Community Services Union official Roisin McGee said staff shortages had heaped more pressure on workers already suffering from burnout. She called for the sector to have priority access to free rapid antigen tests. Workers could then prove they are able to provide COVID-safe care to clients without spending hours waiting in line for a PCR test and days for the result. “This industry has already been cut to the bone, but staffing numbers are now at the minimum safety level,” Ms McGee told AAP. “It’s dangerous for workers and worrying for people with a disability who need support. “The staff who are still working now - they’ve worked through pandemics, lockdowns, seeing their colleagues get sick and maybe die. And now they’ve seen their fellow employees burn out and leave.” She also said that in Victoria, delays surrounding the NDIS screening check - which ensures workers do not present an unacceptable risk to participants - had ballooned out to up to 12 weeks. One service provider had 130 potential new workers waiting for their application to be processed, Ms McGee said. “The NDIS check is important, but it can’t come at the expense of disabled people’s care,” the union official said. I enjoyed this opinion piece from earlier today, via Lisa Bryant. Health officials in New South Wales say they are increasingly confident new cases of Covid-19 will begin to plateau next week, as Dominic Perrottet declares that schools will only close as a “last resort” in the case of outbreaks once classes resume. NSW reported another record day of deaths from the virus on Friday, the third time the peak has been broken this week, with 29 people succumbing. A further 63,018 new cases of Covid-19 were also recorded, 37,938 of those from rapid tests. But despite conceding that the health system is under significant strain as a result of the surging Omicron outbreak, with a fall in the number of overall hospitalisations in the state due in part to the suspension of non-urgent elective surgery until February, the government is increasingly confident it has avoided disaster. The full story is here: The Victorian government has established two medi-hotels to house Covid patients in a bid to alleviate the strain on the state’s hospitals. From Monday, two of Victoria’s quarantine hotels will be converted to facilities for Covid-19 patients in partnership with the Melbourne Health and Northern Health services. Victorian health authorities say the Pullman Melbourne and the Mantra Epping will eventually accommodate up to 300 patients once fully operational. You can read more on that story here: AAP reports that an operation to remove a “sovereign citizens” protest camp has started in Canberra: Police have begun an operation to clear a protest camp near Old Parliament House in Canberra. The operation on Friday afternoon followed a request from the National Capital Authority to “remove structures and vehicles that are on Commonwealth land without a permit”. ACT police initially used a loudspeaker to announce all tents, caravans, vehicles and other camping equipment must be removed from the area by 4pm AEDT or police would remove it. They said camping within the parliamentary triangle without a permit constituted a breach of Commonwealth law. At 4.15pm police moved in and began asking individuals to remove their equipment and vehicles. Some people were seen to voluntarily pack their cars. But officers have begun physically dismantling tents and bundling them in a collection van. Some protesters were shouting messages such as “you will regret it” as officers moved in. The camp clearance followed a court hearing for two men charged over a December 30 protest which saw the doors of the now-museum set on fire. Protesters from the “Muckudda Camp” on Thursday sought to enter Parliament House but were prevented by police, with a number of people arrested in the forecourt. The “sovereign citizen” group has been arguing against Covid vaccinations and calling for the federal government to be “evicted”, among other issues. Their Facebook page includes promotion of unproven Covid treatments. The page also promotes an event scheduled for Saturday to “take old parliament (and) reinstate lore”. Representatives of the nearby Aboriginal Tent Embassy, which celebrates its 50th anniversary this year, have distanced themselves from the protesters. In an Instagram post, an embassy representative said the protesters were “breeding this cult-like mentality”, fearing there was “potential for people to get seriously hurt”. Local Ngunnawal elders have also asked the protesters to leave. The ACT Greens said it was an opportunity to stand in solidarity with the Tent Embassy and against “conspiracy theorists and the far right”. “Rather than bring even more attention to this new group of protesters, we want to use the coming days to celebrate the Aboriginal Tent Embassy, share their history and reflect on what 50 years of struggle can teach us,” they said. The Tent Embassy began on January 26, 1972, with four men sitting under a beach umbrella protesting the McMahon government’s approach to Aboriginal land rights. There’s no Djokovic news, just tweets about there not being any Djokovic news. And this: And of course the confirmation of nothing tweets: Sydney festival board member Benjamin Law has resigned in protest against the festival’s refusal to terminate a $20,000 sponsorship deal with the Israeli embassy. In a statement issued by the festival on Friday afternoon, author and screenwriter Law said: Today’s decision to leave the board is mine alone. I am only comfortable departing now because I have every confidence in the remaining board directors for the process ahead, and I remain an ardent fan and supporter of Olivia Ansell’s vision of a reactivated and dynamic Sydney. You can read more on that story here: The full Covid picture in NT, including a fairly wild admission from the government, and an update on the situation in remote Aboriginal communities, via AAP: The Northern Territory has reported 546 new Covid infections as the government makes an embarrassing confession over an exposure site reporting failure, saying it has “no excuse”. The new infections bring the territory’s total active caseload to about 3,300 with 27 – three more than the previous day – in hospital. 20 patients are considered acute or suffering serious symptoms and one is in intensive care in Royal Darwin Hospital. “About 75% of infections are in the Darwin region, including Palmerston and the rural areas,” chief minister Michael Gunner told reporters on Friday. Another 15% are in Alice Springs, 5% are in Katherine, 320km south of Darwin, and 4% are in East Arnhem Land. The rest are in other regional areas. Gunner admitted the territory’s new COVID-19 exposure site messaging system linked to the check-in app had not been operating as planned. “Over the past week these messages have not been sent,” he said. “There is no excuse for this.” Gunner said instructions had been given to a government team to set up the new system by the NT’s security and management committee. “But it was not implemented, which is unacceptable,” he said. Gunner said Territorians had a right to know if they had visited a location where a positive case had also visited. “The messages are intended to inform someone if they have been to an exposure site and (need to) monitor for symptoms,” he said. The government employee responsible for overseeing the project has been stood down from the role. Gunner said the system had now been set up and messages would be sent from 3pm on Friday. Meanwhile, an outbreak in Yuendumu and Yuelamu, about 295km northwest of Alice Springs, has grown to 43 cases. “But it continues to be confined to a handful of households,” Gunner said. A lockout of unvaccinated people will be extended until next Thursday. Gunner said Yuendumu’s vaccination rate continued to rise with 78% of residents 16 and over given one jab of a COVID-19 vaccine, and 58% fully vaccinated. “This is a solid jump over the last few days which is encouraging,” he said. Covid hospitalisations in NSW are expected to peak next week, according to the state’s health authority, and an analysis of hospital data shows the growth in the number of patients with Covid is slowing down. That full story by Nick Evershed and Josh Nicholas is here: There’s some backlash against the federal government for announcing a two-week consultation period for the 10-year national plan to end violence against women and children. A group of prominent women have demanded the consultation be extended, saying the short timeframe “speaks volumes about the seriousness with which the government is taking this issue.” In announcing the consultation period and releasing the draft report, the minister for women’s safety, Anne Ruston, tweeted: Every woman and child has the right to a life free from violence and abuse. The new National Plan to End Violence against Women and Children 2022–2032 is our pathway to achieve this. In the religious discrimination inquiry Andrew Walter, the acting deputy secretary of the integrity and international group in the attorney general’s department, has revealed the department has not done any drafting to implement a reported deal with Liberal moderates to amend the Sex Discrimination Act. A group of four Liberal moderates claim they won Michaelia Cash’s approval to repeal a religious exemption to the SDA that allowed discrimination against LGBTQ+ students. The deal is highly contentious because Christian groups (including the Australian Christian Lobby and Christian Schools Australia) threatened to remove support for the whole package as a result. Cash has since appeared to renege on the deal. Walter said he couldn’t comment on the suggestion there was a deal, but confirmed the department hasn’t worked on any drafting to remove the section from the SDA. Labor MP Josh Burns said that was fair enough because the department could only act on instruction of the government but it appears the deal has been “reversed and revoked”. The NSW Police acting assistant commissioner Peter Glynn has just released the following statement: NSW Police have attended an event in the Newcastle area and spoken with organisers. Following discussions with organisers and after consultation with NSW Health, no infringement will be issued. Event organisers are aware of their obligations under the Public Health Orders, and NSW Police will continue to ensure ongoing compliance. The church had come to the attention of police after footage circulated of a youth camp that appeared to show people breaching Covid restrictions. The church apologised, but said it did not believe it had breached restrictions. This is a wonderful piece from Mostafa Rachwani on Brighton Le Sands, the closest beach to people from western Sydney. A horrific story emerging in Melbourne: I did not know this lucrative beast was missing, but this is heartening news nonetheless. Here is the full update on the Covid situation in South Australia, via AAP: South Australia has reported a big spike in COVID-19 infections as new modelling suggests the state could have as many as 10,000 cases each day when the current outbreak peaks. SA reported 5,679 new cases on Friday, up from 3,669 the previous day, as a large number of state-issued rapid antigen tests were included for the first time. More than 20,000 RATs were distributed on Thursday, returning 1,747 results. Another six people have died while 246 people are in hospital, including 20 in intensive care where eight people are on ventilation. The premier, Steven Marshall, said the increase in new infections should be viewed with a “degree of caution” given the inclusion of RAT results and because some PCR tests were delayed by hot weather. The premier also released the latest modelling on the likely trajectory of infections which suggests SA could expect between 6,000 and 10,000 cases each day when the outbreak reaches its peak, predicted for between 15 and 25 January. He said the modelling so far had been “alarmingly accurate” and also showed that SA could have expected up to 40,000 cases a day had the government not introduced new local restrictions on Boxing Day. Those restrictions included tougher density limits in most venues and a 10-person cap on home gatherings. “The modelling provides for the peak to be reached as early as tomorrow. I think we’re very close,” Marshall said. “We’ve still got a couple of pretty tough days and weeks in front of us, but I think we can now look to the other side with great hope.” Chief public health officer Nicola Spurrier said the state had avoided a disaster with the swift introduction of new restrictions but the outcome would ultimately depend on the behaviour and attitude of everyone going forward. “People will agree that what we’ve done in South Australia has absolutely changed what would have been catastrophic,” she said. “Putting those restrictions in place after Christmas, I just can’t explain how significant that has been in reducing our cases.” The fifth Ashes test is about to start, with Australia losing the toss and being sent in, and all our coverage is over here: Here’s an update on claims made during the Queensland Covid update earlier that the federal government had taken rapid antigen tests ordered and paid for by the state. AAP reports: The federal government has denied claims by a Queensland government minister that rapid antigen tests intended for the state’s rail workers had been diverted elsewhere. As the state continues to grapple with a shortage of the test kits, the state health minister, Yvette D’Ath, said the transport and main roads minister, Mark Bailey, had proof of rapid antigen test (RAT) kits being pulled and that it was “disappointing”. But a federal health department spokesperson said the government had not issued a mandate to divert supplies. “The Department of Health is in regular contact with state and territory governments and is not aware of any other government seeking to requisition RAT,” the spokesperson said. Bailey claimed Queensland Rail received an email from their supplier that an order of 20,000 RAT kits was at Sydney airport. “Unfortunately the sponsor of the product has decided that (even though these were fully paid for) they will now only be dealing with the Federal Government and these tests are no longer available,” Bailey said on social media. D’Ath said on Friday authorities know there is a shortage of tests, but she hoped the Commonwealth was working with industries so stock wasn’t pulled back only to then be given to the same people. About 409,000 kits had been distributed for public testing clinics and a further 1m were expected on Friday. “Half of those are point-of-care tests so we won’t be using them at public sites,” she added. But D’Ath said doctors, primary health networks and aged care facilities were approaching the state for rapid antigen tests and personal protective equipment. “Now it’s the Commonwealth who are supposed to be supporting that and providing that stock and they told me this week they were,” she said. “We just can’t be diverting our supplies to primary care when the Commonwealth says they’ve got a stockpile for that very reason.” The federal health department spokesperson said the Commonwealth had bought more than 10m RATs since August and ordered more than 70m for delivery in January and February. “The states and territories have also placed orders for approximately 130m RATs for their own use,” the spokesperson told AAP. “The quantity of RATs procured is expected to meet the foreseeable Commonwealth-related need.” In the religious discrimination inquiry Jason Masters, the co-convenor of the Uniting Network Australia, has accused an unnamed government staffer of an “abusive” phone call about the church’s submission. Masters told the human rights committee: We mailed our submission and some media release information to MPs and the attorney general. I got a call from one of the staffers from the political office of the AG. He said he wanted to talk to me about it, I said I don’t have time right now can we make an appointment? He just kept bulldozing on. He said I was wrong with this wrong with that. It was quite an abusive phone call. After 15 minutes I had to stop to go talk to some people to get a bit of support after that phone call. Labor senator Deborah O’Neill said the report was “very disturbing” and “extraordinary” because in her view it amounted to “harassment and intimidation” of a witness. O’Neill invited Masters to submit more information about the alleged incident. Masters later clarified that the incident occurred under the former attorney general, Christian Porter. Guardian Australia has contacted the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, for comment. Ai-Media, a provider of closed captioning services to the Seven Network, has released a statement regarding an investigation into who leaked footage of two news presenters. The footage of Mike Amor and Rebecca Maddern criticising Novak Djokovic in fairly colourful terms circulated widely earlier this week. The captioning company says it has identified an employee who was working remotely and was responsible for the leak, and “appropriate action has been taken”. Health services in rural NSW are struggling under the burden of the Omicron outbreak, writes Natasha May. Hillsong church has put out a statement about that camp we mentioned earlier (which NSW police are still considering fining them over): Here’s an update about the news we brought you earlier regarding a police operation targeting so-called sovereign citizens in Canberra. AAP reports: Police have begun an operation to clear a protest camp near Old Parliament House in Canberra. The operation on Friday followed a request from the National Capital Authority to “remove structures and vehicles that are on Commonwealth land without a permit”. It followed a court hearing for two men charged over a December 30 protest which saw the doors of the now-museum set on fire. Police briefly attended the camp before agreeing to come back later on Friday when camp leaders were available. They have asked members of the public to avoid the area. Protesters on Thursday sought to enter nearby Parliament House but were prevented by police, with a number of people arrested in the forecourt. The ‘sovereign citizen’ group has been arguing against COVID-19 vaccinations and calling for the federal government to be ‘evicted’, among other issues. The Northern Territory has recorded 546 new Covid cases in the latest reporting period. The chief minister of the Northern Territory, Michael Gunner, has just made a fairly remarkable admission: that for the past week the territory has failed to contact people who visited exposure sites. Gunner said: Yesterday we were requesting an update on the exposure site messaging and the process. We were advised over the past week, these messages have not been sent. There is no excuse for this. There was a clear decision and a clear direction by the security and emergency management committee. This direction was not implemented, which is unacceptable. The person responsible for tasking this decision has been stood down from the emergency operations centre and will return to regular duties. Gunner said the issue was rectified overnight, and that people would start to receive messages. Onslow, the Pilbara town which hit Australia’s equal record hottest temperature yesterday (and which shares a name with my favourite Keeping Up Appearances character), is heating up again: 45C at midday WA time. The SA chief health officer, Nicola Spurrier, says the state maintains its own definition of close contacts, despite changes announced in some other states. As an example, she mentions there are only five people in the state who can do railroad signalling, and so it would be dangerous if they all caught Omicron. Speaking of Adelaide, someone has been going around putting large googly eyes on things, which I quite enjoy. And here too: The South Australian premier, Steven Marshall, is still talking in Adelaide. He says he wishes the state had reached 90% double dose already (they should reach it in the next couple days) and were heading to 95%. This is a fairly unusual story: Queensland police are searching for a missing police dog (of the type they would in fact use to search for someone who was missing). Here’s the AAP report: A missing Queensland police dog may have been taken in by a member of the public and a reward is on offer for information leading to his safe return. Police dog Quizz was helping track down an offender who allegedly ran from a stolen car at Redbank Plains, southwest of Brisbane, in the early hours of Tuesday morning. He got separated from his handler during the pursuit and is still missing, despite an exhaustive search involving all terrain vehicles, trail bikes and drones. PD Quizz is a three-year-old Sable German Shepherd with a black and tan hide. He was wearing a black tracking harness with a long tracking lead. Inspector Mick Thiesfield said there had been an unconfirmed sighting of the dog on Tuesday morning, and he could be stuck in nearby bushland. “The police dog could be snagged on some sort of tree ... as he moves around the bush,” he said on Friday. But given there have been minimal sightings over several days, Inspector Thiesfield said it is “probable” a member of the public may have taken in PD Quizz. PD Quizz is not considered dangerous but should not be approached. Anyone who sees him should contact police. The modelling suggests, among other things, that SA would have hit 30,000 cases a day if it had not delayed (and staggered) the resumption of the school year. Queensland has made a similar call. “The information we have received is very compelling,” Marshall says. There’s been some modelling released in SA too: Back on Marshall in SA. He says there’s three new RAT collection sites to open between now and Tuesday. He also says there are 557 SA health staff who are Covid positive, with 870 either infected or furloughed because of the virus. There are reports that police are planning to evict people from a sovereign citizen camp at Old Parliament House today. Police made arrests earlier this week after some of these protestors allegedly tried to force their way into new Parliament House. Marshall says that 246 hospitalisations is an increase, but the number of patients in ICU has dropped to 20 from 27 earlier in the week. Marshall says he does not have any more detail on the deaths, and says the case number is a little higher because many testing sites were closed for hot weather yesterday. And 1,747 results today are from rapid antigen tests. RAT results only started being included yesterday. He says he’s very pleased to be out of isolation. I didn’t know he was in isolation, but that’s good for him. I think we missed this fairly significant news out of WA, which dropped late yesterday. The state is about to become unvaccinated people’s worst nightmare. They will be banned from pretty much everywhere, with the restrictions to last “years”, according to premier Mark McGowan. The AAP story is here: Unvaccinated West Australians will be banned from entering bottleshops or dining at fast-food restaurants as the state prepares to open its borders. Premier Mark McGowan says the restrictions will come into effect from January 31 ahead of the February 5 border transition. Proof of double-dose vaccination will be required at all hospitality venues, including restaurants, cafes, pubs, bars and fast-food outlets for dine-in customers. It will also be needed for visitors to public and private hospitals and aged care facilities, indoor entertainment venues including play centres, casinos and cinemas, gyms and fitness centres, the zoo, Crown casino and amusement parks. The requirement will apply to anyone aged 16 and above and will be implemented across the state. “Life will become very difficult for the unvaccinated from January 31,” the premier told reporters on Thursday. “These will be the broadest proof of vaccination requirements in the nation and they will not be removed anytime soon.” Mr McGowan said West Australians who chose to remain unvaccinated were putting themselves and others at risk and increasing the burden on the health system. WA is set to scrap quarantine for fully-vaccinated arrivals from February 5 but the government is yet to outline how it will define close contacts of positive cases. The Australian Republic Movement has launched an advertising campaign, only days after unveiling its preferred model for selecting a head of state. The campaign features the tagline: “Thanks, we can take it from here.” The model, released on Wednesday and named the Australian Choice, proposes that Australia’s parliaments nominate candidates for head of state who then would be put to a national ballot. The head of state would be elected for a five-year term and be responsible for appointing as prime minister the person who has majority support in the House of Representatives, or calling an election if no one can obtain that support. The head of state would have no individual authority in relation to the setting of government policy, day-to-day governance or passing of laws, which remains the responsibility of the parliament, prime minister and cabinet. There’s been some reports circulating that indicate NSW police will not be fining Hillsong church for the singing and dancing that has been going on at a youth camp, possibly in breach of Covid restrictions. But a NSW police spokesperson has just told me that’s not necessarily the case, as the force is still considering the matter. Here’s our full story on the youth camp: There’s been a small win for Novak Djokovic, who before yesterday was reportedly facing investigations for possible breaches of Covid regulations in three countries: Australia, Spain and Serbia. Apparently Spain are not investigating his travel to the country. The often entertaining F3 derby in the A-League men between Newcastle and Central Coast has been postponed: This is horrific: there is no air-conditioning in the cells of a prison in the Pilbara, where the temperature yesterday reached 50.5c, according to Human Rights Watch. There’s also a more detailed report on that here. I mean, this is almost certainly not the reason why that package you ordered online is delayed. But it’s still quite wild and worth your lunch time attention: Thank you Caitlin, the best CC since nacho cheese. Looks like the clock has struck half past 12, meaning it’s time for me to pass the blog on to the thrillingly capable hands of Nino Bucci. Enjoy the rest of your respective Fridays. Still in Victoria – the dedicated quarantine facility in Mickleham is expected to be up and running by the end of next month. The accommodation hub will have room for 500 beds. The design of the new hub is based on the existing standalone facility currently operating at Howard Springs. A similar statistic to what we’re seeing in NSW: Here’s some more details on the medi-hotels to be established in Victoria. The hotels, which had been used for hotel quarantine, will provide care for more than 300 people at a time, the state government says. The two hotels will transform quarantine sites into specialised home-style care for less acute patients, with all the amenities of existing quarantine hotels. The medi-hotels will have the capacity to provide care for over 300 patients at a time – in partnership with Northern Health and Royal Melbourne Hospital. They will work to alleviate pressure on the hospital networks requiring beds for patients with high-care needs, the government says. Patients eligible for transfer will be those well enough to be relocated from a general hospital ward for the final stages of their clinical care. Clinical teams will be available to respond to any medical emergencies. The Victorian government will retain operational management of the hotels and Victoria police will remain on site. The ACT’s numbers are in, and there have been 1,125 new Covid cases reported overnight, including 885 from PCR tests and 240 from rapid antigen tests. There are 27 people being treated in hospital, including three in intensive care. Returning to the announcement of two medi-hotels to be established in Victoria, Merlino says it is in response to growing case numbers in the community, which is causing a rise in hospital admissions and emergency department presentations: This is placing enormous pressure on our hardworking doctors and nurses and the entire hospital workforce. We have been preparing for some time to manage an increase in Covid cases. We always knew that as we move away from lockdowns, there would be a significant increase in pressure on our hospital system. Some 21.2% of Victorians 18 and over have had three doses of a booster shot, equating to more than 1 million people. Merlino: 24,071 people were vaccinated yesterday through our state clinics. In terms of kids vaccinations, 5,147 kids aged five to 11 received a vaccine yesterday. But I would encourage anyone who hasn’t booked yet to get online and call and make that booking. More than 28,000 children are booked in to receive their first dose over the next seven days with almost 40,000 available for the next 30 days. Victoria’s press conference has begun. Two medi-hotels will be set up in the state to increase capacity for Covid care in the hospital system. The hospitals will take more than 300 Covid patients who require “lower level care”. Tasmanian premier Peter Gutwein says businesses impacted by the pandemic will be eligible for extra support funding, dating back to 15 December. Businesses that experienced an unavoidable loss, including spoilage, will be eligible for up to $5,000. The business impact support program has been designed to help those Tasmanian small businesses which have had a reduction in business turnover due to Covid cases and isolation requirements. It will cover initially the period from the 15th of December when we opened through to the 14th of January. The downturn for those businesses may have been caused by loss of staff due to exposure that has affected the business’s ability to operate, or loss of business due to significantly lower than usual customer demand. Funding of up to $5,000 will be available to eligible businesses depending on their business size and support of up to $5,000 will also be available for those businesses that experienced and unavoidable loss due to spoilage. Tasmania has recorded 1,201 new coronavirus cases. Of the new cases, the vast majority, 852, were from self-reported rapid antigen tests. There are 10 people being treated in hospital specifically for Covid symptoms. While we wait for the Victorian press conference, feast your eyes on this zebra foal. From AAP: A Victorian zoo has welcomed its first male zebra foal in four years, and the aptly-named youngster has wasted no time showing his stripes. The long-legged colt is up and walking under the watchful gaze of mum Zaide after being born at Werribee Open Range Zoo on Sunday. He has been named Zintlanu, which translates to the number five in South Africa and Zimbabwe’s officially recognised Xhosa language, as the fifth baby born to Zaide and father Melako. Wowee, some accusations flying from D’ath. Asked how Queensland is going with rapid antigen tests, the health minister says she talked to minister Mark Bailey yesterday afternoon who confirmed they’d “been given reason by the supplier that the stock was taken by the commonwealth instead. That is disappointing”. Reporter: The commonwealth denies it. D’ath: Well, minister Bailey says that he’s got proof of that. So I’ll leave it to minister Bailey to provide that information. But look, we know that there’s a shortage across the board. But I would hope that the commonwealth is working with industries, that if there is a time where government agencies have to turn to suppliers and say – we need for emergency reasons to acquire your stock – that they’re looking at where that stock is going. Because imagine if we’re pulling back stock only to find that we’re doing so to give it to the same people that we took it off in the first place. Posting this solely because I only just realised her official title is “Queensland Premier and Minister for the Olympics”. Over in the ACT, sovereign citizens involved with the Old Parliament House fire on 30 December are in the magistrates court today. Here is a summary of Friday’s Covid numbers. We’ll continue to update it throughout the day. New South Wales has reported 63,018 new Covid cases and 29 deaths, on the second day rapid antigen tests were included in the state’s total figures. There are 2,525 people being treated in hospital including 184 people in ICU. Victoria has reported 34,836 new Covid cases and 18 deaths from PCR tests and RATs. There are 976 people being treated in hospital including 112 in ICU. Queensland has reported 23,630 new Covid cases from PCR tests and RATs, and three deaths. There are 589 people being treated in hospital, including 41 in ICU and 15 requiring ventilation. South Australia records 5679 new cases from PCR and RATs, and six deaths. There are 246 hospitalisations and 20 patients in ICU. Tasmania has reported 1,201 new Covid cases, including 852 from self-reported rapid antigen tests. There are 10 people being treated in hospital specifically for Covid symptoms. There have been no deaths. The ACT has reported 1,125 new Covid cases, including 885 from PCR tests and 240 from rapid antigen tests. There are 27 people being treated in hospital, including three in ICU. There have been no deaths. The NT has reported 546 new cases, with 27 in hospital and 20 in ICU. No deaths reported. A reporter asks Gerrard if Townsville has enough ambulances after reports from the opposition of the deaths of two patients. Gerrard says it is too early to make any clinical determinations while the deaths are still under investigation. Look, I’m aware of those deaths. They’re under investigation at the moment. I think that it is certainly ... completely inappropriate for the opposition to draw links to any availability of ambulances to deaths when they are under investigation. Internal investigation, QPS and the coroner. So let’s leave it to the experts to determine whether there were any contributing factors. But you know, it was irresponsible of the opposition to be trying to make a clinical decision and findings without those experts still completing their investigations. Gerrard estimates Queensland is about two weeks from reaching its peak. New South Wales believes it is approaching its peak now. Different areas will be reaching their peak at different times in Queensland because we’re a more decentralised state. So presumably, and this is a bit speculative - Gold Coast, which was the first region to seem to get its growth, presumably, will reach its peak earlier than other parts of Queensland. The most useful things to look at will be hospitalisation rates rather than the numbers of cases. And we’re looking at those closely every day. And it’s when the hospitalisation rates start to steady. And Gold Coast has been relatively steady for a day or two, but you can’t read too much into a day or two’s worth of data. So I don’t want to overstate that. But I think that the Gold Coast will be the first to peak and then others will follow. But I really must emphasise, it’s too early to try to speculate from the data that we have. Back in Brisbane, Gerrard is asked if he is concerned there are deaths occurring at home. When asked whether the majority of deaths were occurring in aged care, hospitals or at home, he said it was “a mixture of both”. It does concern us when there are deaths at home. From the few reports that I’ve been seeing, we’re seeing reports of people having an illness for a short period and then sudden deaths. And we’ve reported about those earlier on. That’s been reported elsewhere in Australia and around the world ... which I think I’ve referred to on a previous occasion. But we are certainly keeping a close eye on that, particularly when there are deaths. Victoria’s Covid update will be at 12pm with acting premier James Merlino. The states and territories have been proceeding in a very civilised order today. Queensland’s vaccine coordinator Shane Chelepy takes to the podium. Some 52% of eligible people in Queensland have received their booster. But that also means is 40% of people out there who are eligible now, to get their booster. We are seeing really good numbers of people getting vaccinated right across the system. Queensland health has done over 70,000 vaccinations in the past few days which is terrific. My message is clear ... those that are able to walk into our Queensland sites can get boosted. Queensland’s health minister Yvette D’Ath says 5.96% of five- to 11-year-olds in Queensland have received a vaccine. I have to say, I think it is great our five- to 11-year-old vaccination rates, the first three days, we have had 5.96% of all five- to 11-year-olds in Queensland vaccinated. Almost 6% in just three days. We know the numbers going to grow as our pharmacies and GPs are able to come online as they get the vaccine supplies delivered to us. We have over 40,000 young people five to 11 booked in for appointments today at state clinics. That is great. Chief health officer Dr John Gerrard is up in Queensland. There are 23,630 new Covid cases in the state, including 10,182 that were logged from rapid antigen tests. Sadly, there have been three more deaths overnight. There are 589 people being treated in hospital, including 41 in ICU and 15 requiring ventilation. While hospitalisations remain relatively steady, ICU numbers have jumped from 26 yesterday. There is a steady increase in the number of patients in hospital. Not an explosive increase, a steady increase. It is across Queensland, the increases are across Queensland in all regions. There seems to be particular growth in ... Brisbane south of the river. That is where most of the growth is occurring at the moment. Not explosive growth but steady growth across the state. In the ACT, there are reports people are getting aggressive towards health staff at a testing site that is providing free rapid antigen tests to eligible people. Labor’s Deborah O’Neil has asked witnesses at the religious discrimination inquiry about the deal between four Liberal moderates to protect LGBTQ+ students at the same time as the religious discrimination bill. The deal is highly contentious – because Christian groups including the Australian Christian Lobby and Christian Schools Australia threatened to remove support for the whole package as a result. The attorney general, Michaelia Cash, has since appeared to renege on the deal, revealing broad protections for LGBTQ+ students will have to wait for 12 months. On Friday, Mark Sneddon, the executive director of the Institute for Civil Society, a legal social policy thinktank told the human rights committee inquiry he had no “personal knowledge” of the deal. But he noted that Cash has since spoken to a Christian group “denying the existence of a deal”. So stakeholders clearly interpret Cash’s comments to mean that Liberal MPs Katie Allen, Fiona Martin, Angie Bell and Dave Sharma have not won a guarantee to amend the Sex Discrimination Act at the same time as the religious discrimination bill. Good question from a reporter, to conclude today’s presser. They asked if, when Perrottet saw the number of deaths this morning and given the “awful week” the state has had, his resolve about the path NSW was on was shaken. Ie, at what point do we reconsider bringing in more restrictions, to prevent further hospitalisations and deaths? I believe we’re completely on the right path. The only way out of this is to push through. And that’s exactly what our people are doing. When we’ve talked about, over the last two years, learning to live alongside the virus, there’s all going to be challenges through this transition. We have to live in the world as it is – not as we want it to be. Chris – you know, it is confronting. It’s always confronting to see those figures of people who have died. Behind every one of those numbers is a person. Is a family that’s lost a loved one. And we’ve gone through this over the last two years where people have not been able to say goodbye to their loved ones because of restrictions we’ve had in place on funerals. People have had restricted weddings and haven’t been able to celebrate such a momentous day in the way that they would have liked. And we’ve done everything that we can to try to have society operating and open as much as possible – to return as much of society to normal. And we will do that ... we are going to get through this. Perrottet is asked about the Hillsong church camp doing the rounds on social media, that saw revellers singing and dancing in close proximity indoors. He says he was “extremely shocked” and “disappointed” by the images. He says even if it was within the rules, “it wasn’t in the spirit of the rules”, a possibly unintentional pun: I was completely shocked last night to see that and NSW Health is dealing with that last night, and I echo the frustration and anger that people right across the state has felt. What has got us through the last two years has been the efforts and sacrifices that many have made to keep people safe. That means that many businesses have had to tailor the way that they operate. Many people have had to change their behaviour to keep people safe. Now, we made those rules and even if, technically, it was within the rules, it certainly wasn’t in the spirit of the rules. Now, I understand that Hillsong are ensuring that that doesn’t occur again. But I was incredibly disappointed. These rules aren’t there for the sake of it. These rules are in place to keep people safe and for the 99.95% of people who are doing the right thing, I think everyone would feel completely frustrated and shocked by what they saw last night. And you know, we don’t want to see that happen again. We’ve made it very clear, as Dr Chant has just pointed out, in those settings, there is to be no singing and dancing and there are many hospitality venues that have had curb their operations in order to keep people safe as we move through this next period of time. So to see that last night, I was incredibly disappointed. Perrottet is asked about Covid parties, a frankly bizarre occurrence whereby people gather with the intention of getting Covid (please, don’t try this at home). He says “they should not be doing that”. We have made it very clear here in our state to minimise large household gatherings. In addition to that, as the prime minister clearly pointed out yesterday, there can be rates of re-infection. So anyone thinking that is a good idea is completely wrong ... now, from time to time, people do the wrong thing. But I say if you’re thinking about having one of those parties – don’t have one. Follow the guidance that we have provided and even outside of those parties, we’ve asked people to minimise household visitations, to minimise large household gatherings. And that’s clearly the position that we’ve taken and in the main, I want to thank everybody for making the effort. And particularly at a time when it’s summer. Many people are on holidays right across the state at a difficult time and many people – almost everyone is adhering to those rules. Interrupting the NSW press conference for a moment with a reminder on behalf of our community moderation team to our valued commenters. The off-topic rule as outlined in the Guardian’s community standards still applies to all live-blogs. Our liveblogs are not open threads for discussing all things. We welcome robust debate, but comments should only relate to topics that have been introduced in today’s liveblog by today’s bloggers. Off-topic comments (or those which break any other community standards) will be deleted. Back in NSW, and Perrottet says there is a “strong possibility” rapid antigen tests will be used in classrooms as part of the return to school plan, with a 50/50 cost sharing arrangement between the state and federal government: The agreement that we have with the federal government in relation to the cost-sharing arrangements with respect of rapid antigen tests, if they’re used for a public health purpose, that there will be a 50/50 funding arrangement. That has been confirmed by the prime minister. We’ll work through those plans and finalise them. Present them to national cabinet next week. My expectation is that you will see rapid antigen tests as a key part of it. In terms of supply – you know, I think that our state has certainly led the way when it comes to supply of rapid antigen tests. We have procured already 50 million. We are procuring an additional radio million ... A number of those tests have already arrived and we have complete confidence that we will have enough supply to provide for the plan once it’s finalised next week. Turning to vaccinations, and they’re picking up in every state and territory, as the booster interval is reduced and five to 11 year-olds join the rollout. The Guardian’s Nick Evershed has updated a series of Covid charts – first, on NSW and Victoria: Meanwhile: Dr Chant is asked how many deaths have been reported with the Omicron variant compared to Delta. She says at the moment, the focus is on understanding admissions to ICU, where everyone is being tested, and in some instances it is difficult to tell the cause of the death itself: Sometimes we won’t be able to in some of the circumstances get sufficient sample from the cases to sequence but we will work on improving you know, getting as much data as we can so to inform the community ... whether you test someone particularly the PCR testing it’s very, very sensitive. So you may well have cleared Covid and got over Covid for a period of time, and recovered, and then if you subsequently die it still may be found in your nose and throat ... it does mean that we are reporting cases and we are not trying to say they were directly caused by Covid, and we are doing some further work to look at the underlying reasons and give the community more information about that. But it is important, the question for us to understand the Delta versus Omicron deaths. So we will follow it up with the team. Dr Chant says is have become clear the risk of hospitalisation is “substantially lower” with Omicron than Delta – and the hospitalisation numbers “speak for themselves in that regard”. The length of stay in hospital is also lower. Emergency department attendances have also been down over the past week. Chant: For people who need to come to the emergency department, please keep coming. For those of you who have more minor illnesses, please consider what other healthcare you could access, including Health Direct and of course your doctor or your pharmacy. With respect to vaccinations ... whilst we are continuing to see our community adhere to social distancing and mask wearing that is assisting us in this, all the while we are getting those boosters into the arms of our community. Dr Chant turns to the modelling Perrottet mentioned earlier, which shows NSW projecting relatively well in terms of hospitalisations and ICU admissions. She makes an excellent point that can be easy to forget – that behind all the modelling and graphs and Covid updates there are people. It’s obviously very pleasing for us to see the actuals on that modelling graph track below the most optimistic prediction that we presented to you last week. I want to be clear though about that. Please don’t read that as meaning that our health system is not under pressure. And modelling ultimately is modelling. Behind every line and every dot on that page are people. And whether it’s Covid patients in our hospitals, people caring for themselves with Covid in had the community, and of course our staff who are managing this day in day out, at all fronts of the health system, we expect that pressure on our hospitals to continue for at least the next few weeks. Although what we are starting to become increasingly confident of is that we will see a plateauing next week and that is pleasing but that plateauing is obviously still at a relatively high level of Covid patients in this our hospitals and in our ICUs. The relationship between the hospitalisations, the cases, and what we are projecting in terms of those recent cases is holding up quite well. And does give us a degree of confidence about where we are headed as I said into the next couple of weeks. OK, this is interesting. Dr Chant clarifies that if you have tested positive for Covid and quarantined for seven days, you do not have to self-isolate if you are deemed a close contact for a full month after your exposure to the virus. She says the terminology of “close contacts” is moving towards degrees of risk. I think we are moving away from the terminology close contacts or casual contacts because they meant certain things at certain times. What we are trying to do is inform the community about their level of risk following an exposure to Covid ... so if you spent a long time indoors with a person, in close proximity without masks, that increases your risk. If it was a fleeting outdoor exposure it’s a low risk or if you have got a Service NSW ping that says you have been in the presence, you have probably been in an indoor environment where both of you have been masked, you have been socially distanced, low risk. It is also important this hasn’t been probably very clear and I apologise with everything moving very rapidly, but given we have got so many people exposed to Covid, we had many people with Covid ... so people with recent Covid who have had a high risk exposure like a household contact ... within four weeks of when they have been released from isolation they are not considered at risk of reinfection and therefore don’t have to isolate. So that may not have been clear. So for instance if you’ve had Covid you have gone in and done your seven days isolation, for the next four weeks even if you get exposed to Covid or someone else in your household gets Covid, that hadn’t had it before, you do not need to isolate. You are considered pragmatically at not to be considered at risk of reinfection for that – for that period. Dr Chant turns to the changed definition of close contacts. She says the state is moving away from the term more broadly and focusing efforts on those most at risk – household exposures. She also points out that while Covid-positive people are allowed to leave isolation after seven days, the risk does extend for a full 14 days. The premier just wanted me to cover off the issue of close contacts. Under the requirements close contacts – we are moving away from the term ... so we are focusing our efforts on those most at risk. Everyone probably can understand that household contacts are the group that’s most at risk if you have got an infectious case in that setting. We know the close proximity in households. We know that Omicron and other variants have spread very rapidly in households. So we are asking – there is a requirement when you are notified as a case you let your household know and your household is under an obligation to stay at home for those seven days – to do a RAT test immediately and to do one at day six. We are letting people know that whilst you’re most likely to acquire your infection in the first seven days after exposed to a case we need people to be aware that the risk really extends for the full 14 days. So whilst 75% of cases will arise in that first seven days after you have been exposed, there will be a smaller number that can arise in that second seven days. NSW chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant is up, providing a breakdown of today’s 29 deaths. Fifteen men and 14 women have lost their lives, aged between their 40s and their 90s. Sadly we are announcing the deaths of 29 people with Covid. The deaths of 15 men and 14 women. And can I also echo the premier’s condolences for those who have lost their loved ones. Three are in their 40s. Five in their 60s. Five are in their 70s. Eleven are in their 80s. And five are in their 90s. In terms of the people in their 40s, two were vaccinated with two doses of vaccine, one had no record of vaccination and we know that that strain was Delta. And in one of the cases they had significant underlying health conditions ... in terms of the 60s, four out of five were not vaccinated and the one vaccinated individual had had three doses but again had very significant underlying health issues. More than 40% of the eligible population in NSW have received their booster shot, Perrottet says. Nationwide, that figure is around 50%. Vaccination is key. It has been the key to keeping people safe during this difficult time. It is why here in NSW and right around the country we have one of the lowest death rates and hospitalisation rates anywhere in the world. That’s because we have a vaccination rate of around 95%. And we can see in our hospitals today, in our ICUs close to 50%, which has always been around that point, around 50% of people who will be in ICU are unvaccinated ... so I often say, the numbers don’t lie but the facts speak for themselves ... Despite the challenges of the last two years, despite the challenges that we are facing into today, we will get through this together. The NSW government released modelling last week in relation to the health system’s hospitalisations and ICU presentations. Perrottet says new modelling will be released today on where the state is tracking – which is “better than the best case scenario” released last week: On a worse case scenario last week as we set out we have the capacity within our health system ... early signs that was very encouraging given what we were facing into. Today we are releasing where we are tracking against that modelling and whilst the health system is under pressure and our health teams are doing an amazing job, we are currently tracking at both an ICU and hospitalisation rate here in NSW better than the best case scenario we released last week. So that is encouraging, reassuring and pleasing. The health system is under pressure in this state, just like right around the country and right around the world as we move through this pandemic. It is going to be a difficult few weeks ahead but the tracking that we are releasing today is very reassuring and encouraging given where we sit today in in the pandemic. Perrottet turns to changes agreed to in national cabinet to close contact definitions for critical workers, and the tightened condition of close contacts that excludes venues (supermarkets, bars etc). Nationally we had already worked through this approach here in NSW in respect of critical workers who are deemed to be close contacts. And some of those changes that we’ve made for those close contact exemptions include health, emergency services, safety law enforcement, justice and correctional services, energy resources, water, waste management, food, beverage and other critical goods. And you will all be happy to know the media as well. I would also like to reiterate the point the prime minister made yesterday in relation to the definition of close contacts. And just to confirm this a close contact definition is legally someone who is a household contact of a Covid positive case. I think it is incredibly importantt hat we realise that simply because you may get a notification through your Service NSW app you might have been at the grocery store or you might have been at a restaurant, that does not constitute a close contact. A close contact legally is someone who is a household contact of someone who is positive with Covid-19. Turning to schools, Perrottet says plans to get students back to face-to-face learning on “day one, term one” will be submitted at national cabinet next week and will be publicly released following the meeting on Thursday: I would also like to acknowledge the decisions that we made yesterday in the national cabinet. We agreed to six principles in relation to schools. As we have said here in NSW, we are completely committed to getting schools open day one, term one, in a way that is safe for students and for teachers. And we are – as we agreed yesterday we will be finalising those plans with the Department of Education and NSW Health, we are working very closely with the Victorian government where we are obviously in a very similar situation in relation to the virus to have those plans submitted at national cabinet next week and by submitting those plans we will release those publicly following national cabinet on Thursday. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, is appearing before the media in Sydney. He starts by sending his condolences to the families and loved ones of those who have died with Covid. The figure has reached 772 in the state after 29 deaths were reported today: On behalf of the government and people of NSW can I extend my thoughts, my prayers and our hearts go out to all families right across NSW who have lost a loved one at this time. Can I also acknowledge today the great work, the fantastic work of every – of all our frontline health workers right across NSW for the efforts that they are making, day in day out. There has been a fatal car crash on the New England Highway. In Victoria, detective inspector Dean Thomas will front the media at 11am following a double homicide in Mill Park and a double homicide in Mordialloc overnight. Homicide squad detectives are investigating after a stabbing attack at a home in Mill Park resulted in the death of a woman and a six-year-old girl. In Mordialloc, a man has been arrested following a suspected fatal double shooting. Two people died at the scene. Over in Queensland, Gold Coast district acting chief superintendent Rhys Wildman will front the media at 11am, local time, to discuss the removal of border restrictions in the state from 1am Saturday. Cleansing the blog for a moment with this absolutely lovely pig. Look at this pig! There have been 218 Covid deaths in Victoria and NSW in the past seven days. Health minister Greg Hunt has provided a vaccination update. Yesterday was a record day for boosters, with 50.7% of those eligible now having received their dose. NSW Health say of the 37,938 positive rapid antigen tests that form part of today’s daily figure, 24,329 were from the past seven days. NSW numbers are in, and 63,018 new Covid cases have been detected on the second day rapid antigen tests are included in the daily case count. Just over 61,000 rapid antigen tests were reported in Thursday’s case numbers – dating back to 1 January. Sadly, there have been 29 lives lost overnight – another record number up from yesterday’s 22 deaths. Hospitalisations are up by 6%, but ICU is up by just 1%. There are 2,525 people being treated in hospital, up from yesterday’s 2,383. ICU numbers, though, remain relatively stable – there are 184 people being treated in intensive care. Victoria’s numbers are in, and there were 34,836 new Covid cases detected in the past 24 hours. Some 31.06% of today’s tests returned a positive result. There are 976 people being treated in hospital including 112 in ICU, which is staying relatively stable with an increase of 23 hospitalised overnight. Sadly, 18 lives have been lost. Finance minister Simon Birmingham also appeared on ABC News Breakfast this morning, again forced to justify the national shortage of rapid antigen tests. Reporter: The ABC has a story this morning about rapid antigen tests, of the 22 or so that are in Australia, only one is locally made. The rest are coming in from overseas. That’s part of the reason why they aren’t freely available in shops right now. What’s the hold-up? There are two locally made waiting approval at least, why aren’t we making more of these here? What’s the hold-up? Birmingham: We do have to realise there is a global shortage of rapid antigen tests. They are in short supply in the United Kingdom and United States, in Canada, right around the world. Because Omicron has resulted in this huge additional demand. Now, Australia still has one of the highest testing rates for population, per capita in the world. So we have, despite all of the pressures of Omicron, managed to maintain some of the highest rates of testing of any country in the world. We are, as I said before, procuring additional kits to support that additional capacity. But amongst a global supply shortage there are pressures there. In terms of approvals for other kits to come on to the market, they are matters that the health authorities, the Therapeutic Goods Administration, work through carefully and obviously any kit that is going to be used needs to meet sufficiently high standards in term of its accuracy and efficacy to come on to the market and that testing of those kits is important in the first place. For all the Helen Garner fans out there – she is up on Radio National now recommending books and talking chooks (she is currently taking care of chooks). I’m sort’ve puzzled by the whole idea of summer reading, I don’t get that, I just read whatever’s before me but I must say I have been reading the newspapers about sport, I don’t care about cricket ... but I’ve been fascinated by the Novak Djokovic thing ... that’s my idea of summer reading, things that you look at them and just burst out laughing. Garner recommends a book called The Dancer – “a big, fat brick of a book” that portrays the life of Philippa Cullen. Imagine having a single rapid antigen test “Down Under”: This is quite a neat little pic from the Bureau of Meteorology. Be safe on the roads, morning commuters! NSW premier Dominic Perrottet will be up at 10am. The Transport Workers’ Union national secretary, Michael Kaine, was on ABC News Breakfast this morning discussing the fallout from national cabinet yesterday. He says “there is no plan” to address supply and staff shortages in the sector: This is the disappointment out of that national cabinet announcement from Scott Morrison yesterday. There is no plan to rebuild a healthy work force, to have road transport supply chains that do the brilliant job they have done over the two years of this pandemic, they need to be healthy. We wrote to Scott Morrison in September with a follow-up in October last year, saying it was critical, amongst other things, that road transport supply chains were flooded with rapid antigen tests because we could see in the context of the Delta outbreak that if we intended to reopen, we needed to ensure that workers were testing negative and we were maximising the number of healthy people in supply chains or we would have a problem. That was dismissed by the Morrison government. They don’t listen to the voices of workers and the results we are seeing today, and we saw them yesterday, reflect inaction from Morrison which is building on compounding the mistakes of the past. His approach here is to send back into the work force those people that we have deemed for the last two years close contacts, are most likely to be carrying the virus without knowing it. That means that we could actually be making matters worse. South Australia’s premier, Steven Marshall, was just up on FIVEaa. He is still negative to the virus after his daughter tested positive to Omicron. Labor senator Kristina Keneally is having fun on social media this morning: Birmingham is up on Radio National now, pushing back against calls to make rapid antigen tests free. He says the Omicron variant has been a curveball, necessitating the move towards RATs from PCR tests due to heightened testing demand. Senator Jacqui Lambie was also up on the Today show this morning providing her views on the Djokovic saga. In true Lambie fashion, she compared the situation to sending kids home when they play up at school: Why does this keep dripping out of the tap? Why hasn’t the minister done anything about this? If he’s going to do him on character, because they believe that his submission has been lied in, then, you know, this is what we do when our kids play up at school. They get sent home. So maybe it’s about time to stop this debacle, finish it once and for all without the tap keep dripping and make up your mind, Alex Hawke, and where are you, missing in action? Make a decision. If you can’t make a decision on Novak Djokovic, goodness me, how are you guys running the country? This is an absolute shambles. Let alone what it’s making us look like in the face of the rest of the world. It’s absolutely a shocker. The shadow treasurer, Jim Chalmers, was just up on the Today show alongside the finance minister, Simon Birmingham, who was sporting quite a holiday beard. Birmingham said a decision on Djokovic’s fate was a “matter for the immigration minister” but the federal government’s policy remained the same – “that non-Australian citizens entering Australia should be double-vaccinated. We’ve been very clear about that all along.” Chalmers replied: Look, our position has been clear from the beginning. If he doesn’t meet the visa requirements, he shouldn’t have been given a visa in the first place. But there is two issues now, I think, as this debacle drags on for another day. First of all, make a decision. Our international reputation is being trashed more each day that the government delays. Secondly, when Scott Morrison thought there was a political opportunity in this, he was all over it, and, now that it’s gone so badly, he wants to pretend it has nothing to do with him and it’s all Alex Hawke’s job and all of his fault. Unfortunately, there’s a pattern of behaviour here. When things are easy, there’s a photo or political opportunity, there’s Scott Morrison all over it. But when things get difficult, as they have with this Novak Djokovic case, he’s nowhere to be found. The Australian Council of Social Services chief executive, Cassandra Goldie, appeared on Sunrise earlier discussing the supply chain crisis after yesterday’s national cabinet meeting. She said making rapid antigen tests free would be a “crucial tool” to keep people safe. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, has echoed unions in calling for the free and wide distribution of the tests. Goldie: The government was advised many months ago about what was needed to deal with this crisis, national cabinet again yesterday failed to deliver. People out there, we know, are very distressed and anxious and trying to get their hands on these rapid tests. It is clear that we need these to be free for everyone, business and unions and the community sector, we have all agreed on this. We did not get that yesterday, we got what we think will be a messy system that will create a lot of confusion for people. We are worried that we have not got what we need. This is a deep public health crisis and these tests are crucial tool for people to know that you’re looking after yourself and your loved ones. And it is safe for you to go back to work. That is what we need. Good morning, We’ve nearly reached the end of the week, and what a week it’s been. Sports journalists around the world were left disappointed yesterday afternoon after it became clear no decision on tennis star Novak Djokovic’s fate would be announced during prime minister Scott Morrison’s press conference. The immigration minister, Alex Hawke, is yet to reveal whether he will revoke Djokovic’s visa. It comes as ticket sales will be capped at 50% due to the ongoing Omicron wave. Meanwhile, the Australian Council of Trade Unions has called an emergency meeting of unions for this coming Monday due to the supply chain crisis hitting Australian shelves. Morrison failed to respond to a letter sent by the council’s secretary, Sally McManus, at the beginning of the week. Under new rules announced after a national cabinet meeting on Thursday, workers in a swathe of industries will be allowed to go straight back to work after recording a negative rapid antigen test. Unions say this isn’t a solution to the crisis because of increased transmission, and have been calling for free and widely available rapid antigen tests as a priority. And travellers entering Queensland will be able to do so at their leisure with the state’s border rules to be scrapped from 1am Saturday. It comes as Queensland heads towards 90% vaccination targets. I’m crossing my fingers for a decision on Djokovic today so we can all move on with our lives, so let’s dive in.A dam that has blocked the Tromsa River in Norway for more than 100 years was blown up with dynamite this week, freeing migratory routes for fish. “It’s a big step,” said Tore Solbakken of Norwegian angling club Gudbrandsdal Sportsfiskeforening, who has campaigned for five years to have the old hydropower plant dam removed. “I’m very happy. It’s all about restoring healthy rivers and fish populations.” Built in 1916, the seven-metre high dam in the small town of Fåvang, in Innlandet, east Norway, has not been in use for more than 50 years. The Tromsa is a tributary of the Lågen River, which feeds into Lake Mjøsa, Norway’s biggest lake. Campaigners say removing the dam will help fish in the area thrive again, including grayling, burbot, Alpine bullhead and common minnows. It is hoped the main beneficiary will be the lake-dwelling trout, which can weigh more than 10kg and feeds in downstream lakes and the Lågen. Until now, the fish have only been able to live and spawn in the lower 950 metres before the dam, whereas they will soon be able to swim 10km upriver. “A few years ago, I watched the DamNation documentary and that inspired me to try to remove dams that aren’t in use any more,” said Solbakken. “Fish barriers, hydropower dams, roadbuilding and the way we secure rivers against flooding are all big problems for big brown trout and other fish. It is important to take care of all the small rivers. If we do that, we can have a positive future for our area.” The dam’s destruction is part of a trend to remove the obsolete barriers that litter Europe’s waterways. In October, the Open Rivers Programme, a €42.5m project to provide grants to support the removal of small dams and the restoration of river flow across Europe, was launched with the backing of the charitable fund Arcadia. Last month, the European Commission released a guide for member states to identify barriers that could be removed to help achieve the goal of restoring 25,000km of rivers to free-flowing by 2030. “Dams in rivers block migration routes – the swimways – of fish,” said Herman Wanningen, founder of the World Fish Migration Foundation and Dam Removal Europe. “Some fish species, such as Atlantic salmon, eels and sturgeon, travel thousands of kilometres to complete their lifecycle. Dams also impede important sediment and nutrient transport, and drastically change the natural flow of rivers. Breeding places are lost.” It is estimated that there are at least 1.2 million instream barriers in Europe and that they are a factor in the massive drop in the number of migratory freshwater fish across the continent, with numbers declining by more than 90% between 1970 and 2016. “Free-flowing rivers underpin a wealth of biodiversity,” Wanningen said. “They also provide food for hundreds of millions of people, as these rivers are full of life and fish. Free-flowing rivers deliver rich sediments, which are crucial to agriculture and also mitigate the impact of floods and droughts. There’s so much potential for free-flowing rivers in Europe.” “Norway is a major hydropower country. Removing dams here isn’t normal,” said Solbakken. “But it’s not controversial if you’re removing old dams that are not in use, in rivers protected by regulations against new hydropower.” The campaign by Solbakken and the 120 members of the fishing club resulted in the government agreeing to foot the bill of 3.4m kroner (£290,000) to remove the dam. On Wednesday, the small team drilled five holes deep into the dam then packed 20kg of dynamite into each one. Blowing up dams is unusual in Europe but was judged to be the safest method in this case. “As planned, the dam cracked in the middle and top,” said Solbakken. “The next step is to use the excavator. It’s a massive dam and it will take days to remove it all. There’s still plenty of work to do.” The team will then set about restoring the river directly ahead of the dam site. “The Tromsa dam is in a steep canyon, so our challenge is to build up a nature-like step-pool cascade to enable the fish to swim upstream in the strong current,” said Ulrich Pulg, a fish biologist and river restorations expert. “This project will have several one-metre steps. It will look like white-water rapids during floods but big lake-dwelling trout will make it.” Other dams are earmarked for removal across Europe in 2022, including in Spain, France and the UK. “More and more river managers and NGOs are picking up their tools for excavations,” said Wanningen. “Just a couple of months ago, three dams in Montenegro and one in Slovakia went down for the first time in the history of these countries. The European research project, Amber, which we participated in, has shown there are about 150,000 dams and weirs in Europe that have no function any more and can be taken out without any problem. “Rivers are the veins of the Earth. We need to treat them with care.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresA major supplier of animal feed is still buying soya and corn from a farm linked to deforestation in the Amazon, despite having pledged to clean up its global supply chains. Cargill, a giant agricultural multinational that sells feed to British chicken farms, buys crops from a farm growing soybeans on deforested land in the Brazilian Amazon. An investigation by the Bureau of Investigative Journalism, Greenpeace Unearthed, Repórter Brasil and Ecostorm uncovered Cargill’s links with the Brazilian supplier farm, Fazenda Conquista. The farm in the Brazilian Amazon was responsible for eight sq km of deforestation since 2013, with multiple forest fires recorded in 2020. Its trading with Cargill includes supplying soya, and the farm has signed a deal to deliver 5,700 tonnes of corn to the company this year. It is not known whether the crops in question were grown on a recently deforested part of the farm. The findings raise questions about Cargill’s due diligence process. The company has pledged not to buy soya beans from land deforested in the Amazon after 2008, and last year committed to moving faster to eliminate “commodity-driven deforestation”. But Cargill has also been repeatedly linked to deforestation. In 2020, the Bureau and Unearthed reported 800 sq km of deforestation and 12,000 fires since 2015 on land used by Cargill soya suppliers in the Cerrado, another protected biome in Brazil. The company exports thousands of tonnes of Brazilian soya to the UK each year for use in animal feed. Campaigners said the findings highlighted the hidden environmental costs of cheap meat. “Meat chickens are the most intensively farmed animals in the UK with over a billion slaughtered each year,” Lindsay Duncan, the campaigns manager at World Animal Protection UK, said. “The growing demand for cheap chicken leads to the growing demand for soy, causing large-scale deforestation and devastating environmental degradation, which destroys the natural habitats of millions of wild animals.” As much as 80% of all soya grown across the world is fed to livestock. The UK imported about 3.5m tonnes of soya beans in 2019, with roughly half of that ending up in chicken feed. About a quarter of the UK’s imported soya comes from Brazil, and the vast majority of that is traded by Cargill. Cargill said: “We are committed to eliminating deforestation from our supply chains in the shortest possible time, and we are accelerating our efforts.” Responding to the findings about Fazenda Conquista, the statement continued: “If fire has been used and has impacted the native forest or any irregularity is confirmed, we will take the appropriate measures.” The state of the land in question before 2013 is disputed: Fazenda Conquista’s management said in a statement that the farm had permission from the local environmental agency to carry out a “controlled burn” on the land because it had originally been deforested in the early 1980s. However, satellite imagery shows that the forest had been regrowing since then, and Brazil’s deforestation monitoring programme flagged the clearing in 2013 as deforestation. The local environment agency, Sema, confirmed it had authorised a burn on the farm in 2012 to clear pasture with some degree of regeneration. But the agency said no licences for full deforestation inside the farm had been authorised, and admitted that although it had lacked high-resolution satellite imagery prior to 2019 to identify real-time deforestation, a recent analysis suggested there had been deforestation within the property. Sema said it would investigate further. In an independent analysis of satellite imagery, the NGO Aidenvironment also deemed the land to have been deforested. This year the farm will be blacklisted under the Soy Moratorium, a voluntary industry agreement that bars the trade in soya beans on Amazon land deforested after 2008. The Working Group for Soya, which oversees the moratorium, said it had identified an area of deforestation that had been sown with soya in the last planting season. A reporter from the Bureau visited the farm this year and saw soya beans growing on the land. Destruction of the Amazon rainforest has serious consequences for the climate, with experts fearing the biome might soon cross a “tipping point” at which it begins to shift from lush rainforest into a drier savannah, releasing large quantities of stored carbon into the atmosphere. According to Brazil’s space agency, Amazon deforestation soared 22% over the 12 months to July last year. Major British food companies have adopted “zero deforestation” certification schemes to tackle the problem but “dirty” soya linked to deforestation continues to enter supply chains.The prosecution: Mick Annabelle commandeers the front room for her trashy TV when I want to relax with a good drama When I get home from a long day at work, I just want dinner, TV, shower and bed – in that order. But my daughter, Annabelle, hogs the front room to watch crap telly at least four nights a week. I like to watch a good series, like Boardwalk Empire or Peaky Blinders, to help me switch off. But if Annabelle is back first, she binges on reality TV. Sometimes she says, “Dad, I was here first and I’ve been working too.” I tell her she’s not been working as hard as me – she’s still at uni. I’m a manager, and when I’m in the office I don’t get back until 7pm. Even though I’ll say, “my house, my rules”, Annabelle will try to persuade me to watch her shows – but I can’t stand them. She loves dull dating shows, celebrities completing banal tasks, and influencers on islands. It’s so boring. Annabelle studies psychology and tells me her TV choices are educational, but I don’t buy that. I have lost my temper a couple of times over this: I called Annabelle selfish and told her to consider moving out. I don’t like shouting, but raising my voice is the only way to be heard. I have also started hiding the remote control before I go to work so if Annabelle gets home before me, she has to go to her room instead of settling on the sofa. She will text me asking where I’ve put it, but I’ve got my secrets. My wife doesn’t watch a lot of TV in the front room – she prefers her iPad. But when she does, it’s all soaps and reality TV. She tries to stay out of the arguments but I know she prefers my daughter’s TV tastes to mine. I never last long when I do watch Annabelle’s reality TV. I think it’s terrible how society makes untalented people rich and famous. Annabelle doesn’t mind my choices as much as I detest hers, so she should compromise more. She can catch up on her favourite shows on her laptop in her room. Besides, it’s my house. As long as I’m paying the bills and the mortgage, I should be able to watch what I want, when I want. The defence: Annabelle Reality television helps us empathise with others. Dad could learn a lot from it – and try to relax Dad is exaggerating. Obviously if I’m home before him, I will chill on the sofa and put my favourite shows on. But if he comes back and asks me to move nicely, I will. The problem is that Dad doesn’t always ask nicely. If he’s in a bad mood, he will storm in after he’s had dinner with mum and say, “Right then, move”, even if I’m in the middle of something. It’s really annoying and combative. How does he expect me to respond? I’m not argumentative but I do get snarky when he speaks to me like that. I’ll dig my heels in and tell him he has to wait. I know Dad pays the bills and I’m very grateful to live at home for free, but it’s just manners to ask me politely to go to my room. I don’t think my taste in TV is bad. Yes, I like dating shows. I watch the really dramatic American ones, like Are You The One? and Temptation Island, which Dad particularly hates, as well as the British ones like Dinner Date, First Dates and Love Island. I find watching human behaviour play out on these shows fascinating, and they sometimes reflect my studies at university. Reality TV actually helps us empathise with others – and dad could definitely do with working on his empathy. When we do watch a dating show together, he just moans and tuts, which ruins it. He will make irritating comments or call people stupid. It makes me cringe. When I watch his dramas I’m don’t comment every five seconds on people’s acting or their accents, I just watch it quietly like you’re supposed to. Dad can’t do the same for me. This new habit of hiding the remote control is really immature. I don’t even bother to ask him where he puts it any more; I just go straight to my room to watch something, but obviously watching television on a huge screen while spread out on the sofa is better than watching it on a laptop on your bed. I have definitely had to compromise and watch Dad’s TV choices more recently. What more can I do? The jury of Guardian readers Should Annabelle give her father first dibs on the television? Mick needs to press reset. Why not “Our home, our rules”? Annabelle is not a child, she’s a fellow adult with her own pressures. Making it about who works hardest will never end well. Try a family film night, taking it in turns to choose what to watch. Michael, 52 Mick has let his adult daughter live with him rent free – if that’s the agreement, it isn’t fair to hold that over her. He has to accept that it’s her home too, and stop being so judgmental and inflexible. Alice, 34 Annabelle is not guilty – there needs to be more tolerance and compromise. They should create a schedule so each can watch what they like at a certain time every evening. Claire, 58 It’s understandable that Mick wants to unwind, but hiding the remote is just antagonistic. His wife also seems to avoid watching the television to appease him; surely it is her house too. Mick needs to reconsider how he expresses his frustration - it’s just TV after all! Nitya, 21 Annabelle is a borderline slacker. Treating reality TV as homework is a pathetic excuse for a psychology major. Dad has superior taste in TV shows, but if he really needs to “switch off”, I’d suggest meditation rather than a series about violent low-lifers. Mick, 67 You be the judge So now you can be the judge, click on the poll below to tell us: should Annabelle stop hogging the television? We’ll share the results on next week’s You be the judge. The poll is now closed Last week’s result We asked if Mariana should stop bringing strangers back to her shared flat, as it worries her sister and flatmate, Mafalda. 24% of you said no – Mariana is innocent 76% of you said yes – Mariana is guilty Have a disagreement you’d like settled? Or want to be part of our jury? Click hereWho is the most interesting writer about politics in Britain today? No question, it’s Dominic Cummings. The Substack blog he started in June last year is not cheap – £10 a month for an erratic and irregular output via email – but it’s worth it. Whenever and whatever he does post, you can be sure it will contain plenty of extraordinary ideas, unexpected insights and eye-popping indiscretions. Cummings appears to have little or no filter on his thoughts, with the result that his writing offers as clear a view into the dark heart of contemporary politics as is available anywhere. He has no time for any of the usual pieties. What you get is a voracious intellect – Cummings is interested in everything from 19th-century German history to quantum physics – coupled with a tireless curiosity about anything that lies outside the conventional wisdom. It’s a revelation. As Boris Johnson’s former right-hand man – and the architect of Brexit and the Tories’ 2019 election landslide – Cummings is nothing if not divisive. Since Johnson fired him in late 2020, Cummings has turned on the prime minister and made it his mission to force him out of office. If your enemy’s enemy is your friend, this makes it hard for many of Cummings’ former critics to know what to think of him now. And who is the most boring writer about politics in Britain today? That too is Dominic Cummings. His blog is exhausting to read – too long, too aggressive, too inward-looking. He rarely bothers to explain who’s who in his cast list of spads (government special advisers), physicists and tech gurus. Anyone in the know will already know, and everyone else should be grateful simply to be allowed inside the loop. His hobbyhorses are ridden to death. Nearly a quarter of all his posts have been fanboy notes on Lee Kuan Yew’s book about how he made modern Singapore: an interesting story, but by the time Cummings has finished you’ll never want to hear about it again. His score-settling is equally relentless. Even if you find it hard to feel sorry for Boris Johnson’s wife, Carrie, you’ll wish Cummings would leave her alone, if only to vary the message a bit (she’s crackers, Johnson is frightened of her, it’ll all come crashing down in the end). He likes to recommend further reading on his favourite subjects, but too often that means links to things he has written himself, as though we needed more of his views on Brexit, or Whitehall dysfunction, or the merits of startup culture. He has a habit of wanting to remind us of what he got right, and what other people got wrong. Which turns out to be almost everything. I study politics for a living, and as a professor at Cambridge I’m a member of the chattering classes Cummings despises – so I signed up for direct access to his thoughts with mixed feelings. On the one hand, I was excited by what he had to say once freed from the shackles of government responsibility. On the other, I felt slightly queasy at the thought of all the bile heading my way. More than six months on, neither feeling has gone away. Cummings’ blog is intoxicating. And slightly puke-making. When it began, most early subscribers – including me – probably expected that the cheap thrill of an insider spilling the beans would be its selling point. But the first post established that Cummings was after something else, too: a way of reimagining how the world of politics might work. As he describes it: “This is about the intersection of: selection, education &amp; training for high performance; prediction; science &amp; technology; communication; high-stakes decision-making in politics/government.” Cummings offered to help readers who were confused and in need of assistance. For instance: “You are a government minister/CEO-type figure in an organisation and want to shift from the old world of PowerPoint + Excel to: code + prediction/keeping score + dashboards (and dashboard of dashboards!)”. If so, Dom’s your man! Still, there’s keeping the score, then there’s settling scores – and Cummings does plenty of both. *** The two Cummingses on display in his writing – fascinating Dom and infuriating Dom – are like a mirror image of the picture he paints of his former boss in No 10. Cummings says there are two Boris Johnsons: what he calls Boris-Normal (Boris-N) and Boris-Self-Aware (Boris-SA). Boris-N is a lazy, self-indulgent chancer. He has no interest in policy, doesn’t bother to read his papers, has no idea how to chair a meeting, and cannot enter a room without looking for the exit routes. This Boris only cares about his own prospects and will do whatever it takes to bolster them. But that means that occasionally, when things get really sticky, a different Boris emerges. Boris-SA knows he’s hopelessly out of his depth and will do whatever he is told to survive. This happened at the end of the 2016 Brexit campaign, when the previously shambolic Johnson was willing to follow the Cummings playbook to the letter once he realised his career was on the line. It also happened in the summer of 2019, when Johnson, terrified he would be the shortest-lived PM in modern British history, asked Cummings to bail him out, regardless of the cost. Boris-N cares obsessively about what people think of him. Boris-SA couldn’t care less how much he is mocked, so long as he ends up on the winning side. Cummings believes Boris-SA disappeared, possibly for good, in December 2019, once he had a thumping majority in the Commons and Carrie whispering in his ear about what the press was saying about them (that he was Dom’s puppet, and she was his Lady Macbeth). Cummings thinks that once anyone starts caring about what the idiot newspapers are saying, the game is up. Dom-Normal (Dom-N) is the opposite of Boris-N. He is intensely hard-working, obsessive about detail, always focused on the goal to be achieved. He has extraordinary gifts, not least his ability to think his way into the mindset of his opponents. Dom-N is self-aware about his limitations, including the gaps in his knowledge, and will do whatever it takes to compensate for them. He doesn’t care how he comes across so long as he gets results. But when he feels himself under attack or misunderstood, a different Cummings emerges. Dom-Can’t-Be-Wrong (Dom-CBW) is unable to resist overstating his case, rubbishing the alternatives and ranting about the stupidity of others. Most of the time Dom-N is in charge, which is what makes his blog so rewarding to read. But Dom-CBW is never far away and tends to emerge when the chips are down. The whole world saw this after his bonkers and lockdown-breaking trip to Barnard Castle in April 2020, when a man whose career is built on his ability to think outside the box was unable to think beyond his own foolish self-justifications. It happened again after his pompous post-resignation interview with the BBC’s political editor, Laura Kuenssberg, in July 2021, which led to criticism that he had ideas above his station, and was followed by his most whiny and least interesting blogpost. Having come across as both paranoid and absurdly self-important – apparently it was up to him and his little coterie to decide whether Johnson could be allowed to continue as prime minister after he had just won an election, when they twigged he was now going to listen to Carrie more than to them – Cummings needed to explain to his subscribers why giving the interview was still exactly the right thing to do. Apparently, he sees it as his job to “explain the craziness”, without being willing to explain his deep complicity in it. Johnson is lazy and self-serving except when he has no choice. Laziness is his default. Not Cummings. He only becomes lazy and self-serving when he can’t help himself. The supreme importance of hard work is a recurring theme on his Substack. He believes that a willingness to put in insane hours, sacrifice a home life, and keep coming back for more is a hallmark of any successful campaign. It’s one of the reasons he is so contemptuous of the operation around Keir Starmer: they just don’t want it badly enough. When he was in Downing Street, Cummings made it clear to his staff that work/life balance was for people who were better off out of politics altogether. To win you must outlast your opponents. He thinks you can tell a winning campaign by whether the office is still humming at two in the morning and at the weekends. Clinton had it. Blair had it. Vote Leave had it. Successful startups have it. But it’s almost nowhere to be found in Whitehall or in the modern Labour party, where downtime is celebrated as a sign of a healthy approach to problem-solving. Cummings thinks downtime is for political losers. It’s what made the chillaxing David Cameron easy meat for him in the Brexit campaign. That said, his blog does not feel like the work of a man who is fully committed to the enterprise, despite the large sums of money it must be bringing in (Substack doesn’t release the figures, only that there are “thousands” of subscribers, which means Cummings must be making hundreds of thousands a year). Posts are promised but never appear, deadlines are missed, and in his ask-me-anything sessions with subscribers he only bothers to answer the odd question that grabs his attention. (One way to get his attention is to tell him he was right about something, despite his claim in his launch post that he is “interested in the best arguments against what I say”.) What he really seems to like is suggestions for further reading. Meanwhile, great wafts of subscribers commenting on other subscribers’ comments pass him by. It is hard to know whether he’s reading these or just ignoring them. The result is that there is an odd, vicarious thrill when he does step in; even as a bystander you feel, ooh, Dom has noticed. He often hints that the reason he can’t give the blog his full attention is that he is caught up in private meetings with unspecified people planning a new future for British politics. These are people, by implication, with serious money, serious influence and ready to make a serious time-commitment. Unlike his regular subscribers. We are just hangers-on, but that is also part of the thrill. I have to admit I get excited when a new post pings into my inbox, because you never know – is this the one where he finally explains what his plan is, how he is going to upend the establishment? Cummings is not immune to the news cycle. Whenever Johnson – or “the Trolley” as Cummings has nicknamed him, often using the emoji for a supermarket trolley – “smashes from one side of the aisle to the other” and veers catastrophically off track, he can’t resist another analysis of what a cock-up it’s been. For the most part, though, he marches to the beat of his own drum. Cummings doesn’t follow the news. He doesn’t even want to make it now he no longer has an election campaign to run. He wants to undercut the news altogether by imagining an alternative political universe. Trying to reshape how the British state works is at the heart of the Cummings project. It means putting the right people in charge: relentless, take-no-prisoners problem-solvers like himself. What makes Cummings’ view of politics so distinctive – and so powerful, or dangerous, depending on your point of view – is that he reverses the usual balance of personal and political prejudices. Most people, including most politicians, have contempt for the ideas of the other side, but quite a lot of time for many of the individuals who hold them. Remainers tend to think Brexit was a stupid, cynical, corrupt cause, but are willing to admit that not all Brexiters are monsters, including some family and friends. Cummings is the opposite. He goes out of his way to say he doesn’t think remain was a stupid idea – it may turn out in the long run that Brexit was a mistake, after all. The possibility that the future will surprise us all should be baked into everyone’s political calculations. But Cummings thinks remainers are invariably fools, above all the better-educated ones, because they are incapable of accepting that they might be wrong. His shorthand for these people is Jolyons (after the remainer lawyer Jolyon Maugham) or, as he says of Keir Starmer, the ones who can’t resist giving “the London idiot answer” to any difficult question because they daren’t think for themselves. When Starmer got himself tangled up over the question of whether “only women have a cervix”, it was, Cummings says, because “he’s a dead player working off a script” – and the voters can smell that a mile off. *** Cummings cut his teeth campaigning against a new regional assembly for north-east England in the 2004 referendum. He was strategic adviser for the North East Says No (Nesno) campaign, now seen as a dry run for the leave campaign. He defeated the New Labour establishment – represented by then deputy prime minister John Prescott, a man never afraid of expressing a view on any subject – with a few simple slogans. “Politicians talk, we pay.” “More doctors, not politicians.” Cummings’ side won that vote by a margin of almost 80:20, despite polling indicating a victory for the government’s “yes” campaign. His opponents had no answer to his accusation that they wanted more of their kind of politics just for the sake of it. This is his political superpower: he takes the other side’s ideas seriously, but not the people who hold those ideas. It means he can think dispassionately about what his opponents are doing – even get inside their heads and explore how they will react to what he is doing – while retaining his unshakeable contempt for them. He likes to conduct thought experiments in which he imagines how the idiots might do their version of politics better if they weren’t such idiots. It’s what won him Brexit. When remainers wailed about his tactics, traduced his character and told him he was playing with fire, he just shrugged. He ignored the commentariat and relished the howls of outrage from the chatterati. But he also thought hard about how his campaign messages would affect theirs. By wrapping the case for Brexit in the mantle of the NHS, he not only made Brexit more appealing to many voters, he infuriated remainers who knew it was nonsense. Which meant they ended up talking about his message, Brexit = NHS, and not theirs. In politics, victory doesn’t always go to the people who work hardest. It also goes to the ones for whom outrage is a weapon, not simply an indulgence. The same applied in the tumultuous autumn of 2019, when parliament appeared paralysed by what to do about Brexit and the country was running out of patience. Cummings makes it clear that he had to persuade Johnson the only way through was to provoke an election, and that meant doing whatever it took to ensure his opponents ran out of patience first. It was a deliberate strategy. Prorogue parliament – not because you want to shut down democratic debate, but because you want to ensure the other side can’t talk about anything else. Send them mad and you will get what you want in the end, because they will be unable to think straight. Still, it took Boris-SA to get it done, though he had to put up with torrents of outrage and criticism, including from his own family. Then, in the election campaign that followed, Johnson allowed Cummings to frogmarch him from one hospital ward photo-op to the next, despite the fact the nurses in the background looked as if they might be physically sick. This campaign is a joke, the remainers cried. Can’t they see how much people hate them? But what they meant was: can’t they see how much we hate them? Cummings could of course see that, and he was delighted with it. In the end, Johnson won the biggest parliamentary majority for a generation. And as Dom-CBW repeatedly reminds us, all this was predicted with unerring accuracy by his state-of-the art polling algorithms. “We built a model that in December 2019 predicted we would win 364 seats – the result was 365 (we did better than the exit poll). We were lucky to be so close but … not very lucky.” But Cummings’ superpower is also his great weakness. It means that personal animus is his stock in trade, and anger and frustration are never far from the surface. The Cummings roll call of modern-day morons, repeatedly called out on his Twitter feed and itemised in his blog, includes almost the entire parliamentary Conservative party, all journalists with a handful of exceptions (Guardian journalists are the worst), any social science academic (he only really has time for physicists and mathematicians), most of the senior British civil service, and anyone stupid enough to think Keir Starmer might be up to the job. At the same time, the few individuals who garner his respect get praised to the skies. When he comes across a rare talented civil servant, he’ll insist they would make a better prime minister than any of the current crop of politicians. He believes his small but brilliant team inside Downing Street – ferociously hard-working, fearlessly loyal to the Cummings way – could have saved the country from the current fiasco of Johnson’s premiership, along with many of the lives needlessly lost to Covid. So how to explain the fact that he and they are now outside Downing Street, and Johnson is still there? Morons will moron. *** Cummings is not interested in half measures. He doesn’t want to reform the British state. He wants to blow it up and replace a bloated and inefficient machine with something brutally streamlined. Government departments that employ tens of thousands would do better if they were reduced to 50 people, so long as these were the right people. He thinks one of the biggest mistakes we make is to believe that intelligence and talent operate on a gradual gradient: that most very smart people are more or less as smart as each other. Wrong: the very smartest people can be tens or hundreds of times better at what they do than the next rung down. This means that searching for outstanding talent and then doing whatever it takes to hold on to it is far more important than treating people fairly. Given the risks we face – from China, from the next pandemic, from AI – anything else would be grossly irresponsible. But that, for Cummings, is the problem: unlike in Silicon Valley, where stupidity gets ruthlessly weeded out, Whitehall and Westminster don’t take responsibility seriously. What matters is keeping up appearances. British politics is all about trying not to look stupid in the eyes of others. Which, Cummings insists, is the stupidest thing of all. All this is oddly old-fashioned. At times, reading Cummings is like reading Colin Wilson’s The Outsider, published to wild acclaim in 1956, shortly after its author had discovered Nietzsche. Wilson was the original angry young man, an autodidact who believed that everything of lasting value was the work of the tiny minority with the courage to think for themselves. Cummings’ vision of small, secretive groups of brilliant people working to save the rest of us from disaster also recalls the world of John Buchan, though without the globe-trotting. Even within the British civil service, he believes there are tiny cabals of free-thinking renegades, determined to do the right thing, whatever it takes. These brave men and women don’t need to travel further than their computer screens. But they do need some protection from the higher-ups. And with Dom out of the picture, that’s what they are no longer getting. I say men and women, but something else that is Buchan-like about Cummings’ worldview is its intense maleness. He is aware of this and, in Dom-N mode, he does what he can to correct for it. The handful of brilliant civil servants and special advisers he singles out are often women, if only to contrast with the general uselessness of the men. It was women who tended to do a better job during the darkest days of the Covid crisis in 2020. He thinks Labour’s fortunes could be transformed if Starmer were replaced by Lisa Nandy, but really any northern woman would do, given how hopeless the current leadership is. He says that his toughest opponent over Brexit was Sabine Weyand, the EU’s deputy chief negotiator, who was “100 times” better at her job than the posturing Michel Barnier. But when it comes to the people Cummings thinks we should read and follow – mostly culled from the tech/science/futurism blogosphere – they are almost exclusively men. This is men talking to men, about cryptocurrency, autonomous weapons, supply chains, space travel, nuclear fusion, existential risk. Cummings knows his way around these topics and his intolerance for blather makes him an excellent guide. A lot of it is fascinating and it’s easy to get drawn in. Still, spending an afternoon in the virtual company of these people can feel like being trapped in a world where the little people don’t count. No one has time for small talk or the usual niceties. Given what is at stake – systems collapse, tech breakthroughs, seriously big bucks – it’s all about being ahead of the curve. Sensitivity to anyone’s feelings is anathema. In a blogpost from July, Cummings offered a guide to the most interesting nonfiction he could find (his taste in fiction is more conventional, though also very male: he likes quoting Tolstoy and classic sci-fi). The list includes Michael Nielsen on quantum computing, Steve Hsu on the future of war, Peter Scholze on mathematics, Scott Aaronson on quantum supremacy, Scott Alexander on polygenic scores, Balaji Srinivasan on cryptocurrency, Alvaro De Menard on pension systems, Tyler Cowen on university education, Andrew Sullivan on the “liberal left” (Sullivan is almost the only political commentator Cummings has any time for), Matt Yglesias on history curriculums, Alex Tabarrok on Covid, and Dominic Cummings on the birth of computing and mathematical paradoxes. The sole woman to make the list happens to be his wife, Mary Wakefield, writing in the Spectator about how women should toughen up. If you click through, Wakefield’s article turns out to be pretty vapid. She is discussing a recent book that caused an attack of the vapours in Silicon Valley by describing most women in the Bay Area as “soft and weak … and full of shit”. Its author was cancelled, and Wakefield wants to know why, given the offending sentence was taken out of context and meant good-humouredly. Fair enough, I suppose. But then she says women should respond to insults like this more like men, giving the example of an article published nearly 20 years ago in the Spectator that characterised west London men on the dating scene as emotionally stunted, misogynistic, borderline alcoholic, coke-addled man-children. Since this described many of those who worked at the Spectator, you might expect the journalists to mind. Not a bit of it – they loved the article and put it on the cover. The then editor of the magazine, Boris Johnson, even invited its author, a young Canadian woman, to lunch. Of course he did. To think these cases are comparable is utterly tone‑deaf. West London men didn’t mind being described like that because they knew it didn’t matter: they – Johnson included – could get away with this behaviour because they had the power and the impunity. It was all a big laugh. Cummings should know this about Johnson by now. By contrast, women in the tech world are routinely mistreated and discriminated against. The joke simply isn’t as funny, if it’s funny at all. One name for this kind of imbalance is systemic injustice, a phrase Cummings would doubtless hate. He is interested in systems, but not in what they do to people’s sense of self-worth. He cares about what they do to their ability to think for themselves. He thinks the danger of being stuck inside a system you can’t control, from the EU to 10 Downing Street, is that it forces you to take your eye off the ball. That said, he appears to have little sympathy for all those people – from women to minorities to workers – who can’t control the oppressive systems they are stuck in because they have been systematically deprived of their power to escape them. His rule of thumb for finding interesting people is to search out those who are comfortable being right on the edge of things, including the edge of polite society. That’s where the intellectual action is. He also believes it is crazy that in a world of failing and obsolescent systems, so little time and attention is devoted to studying the organisations that do work. This list is shorter. It includes the government of Singapore, the Mossad, Amazon, Y Combinator (a Silicon Valley company that funds and advises tech startups), and Berkshire Hathaway, Warren Buffett’s conglomerate. What these organisations have in common is their ruthless focus on what really delivers results. They also recognise and reward exceptional talent. Cummings doesn’t just think that the best mathematicians and physicists are so much more brilliant than their nearest rivals. It’s true of organisational genius, too. Jeff Bezos and Elon Musk have built their empires because they are orders of magnitude better than their competitors at taking and managing large-scale risk while drilling down into the details of a complex business operation. Their unparalleled wealth is a function of their unique abilities. “Musk and Bezos are similar,” he writes. “Smart enough to understand a lot of technical details but really far out on the tail when it comes to executing.” *** Ping! Another update. The blog jumps back and forth relentlessly from an intergalactic Silicon Valley perspective to digging up the bodies back home. It’s a dizzying ride. Last time we were rattling around in number theory and now here we are lamenting the moron count in SW1. Cummings believes that Whitehall needs a startup mentality, and what it has got instead is team-building exercises and job-satisfaction reviews. One of Cummings’ punchbags is Jeremy Heywood, routinely described as the greatest civil servant of his generation before his untimely death at age 56 during the height of the Brexit crisis in 2018. Four prime ministers spoke at his funeral and described his exceptional talent. Cummings thinks Heywood was vastly overrated: “a genius fixer, not a genius manager”. Heywood made unlikely connections – including between Cameron and Lex Greensill – and he kept the wheels of Whitehall spinning. He patched up ministers’ hare-brained schemes and refused to rock the boat. He treated everyone with courtesy. But he had no eye for system change, Cummings says. He was the system. He wouldn’t have got very far at Amazon. How exactly the British democratic state could be modelled on organisations which are anything but democratic is not something that much troubles Cummings. The fact that Singapore, hardly a bastion of freedom, is probably the most democratic of the ones on his list tells you all you need to know. Many of the alternative thinkers Cummings likes to cite are explicit in their contempt for democracy, which they consider close to obsolete. The world has moved on; asking whether something would be “undemocratic” is just sentimental attachment to a passing phase in human history. As elite technical expertise, both machine and human, becomes paramount, the idea of having to wait on public opinion to work out what to do starts to look absurd. What’s so interesting about Cummings is that although he seems to share some of this deep scepticism about democratic politics and politicians – too slow, too trivial, too easily spooked – he cannot fully embrace it. After all, tracking public opinion in a clear-eyed, unsentimental way is what he does, perhaps better than anyone. He is a genius at it. In the end, his blog reminds me of the old Woody Allen joke: “The food here is terrible!” “Yes, and such small portions!” Cummings thinks that British politics is broken, that the two main parties are ready for the knacker’s yard, and that most of the political class couldn’t strategise their way out of a paper bag. And yet he can’t resist trying to play their game. He wants to abolish the Labour party. He also wants to teach it how to win the next election. He’d like to put quantum physicists in charge of the government. He’d also like to see Rishi Sunak boot Boris (and Carrie) out of Downing Street. He wants to burn it down. He also wants to make it better. *** As we settle in to 2022, nothing is resolved. Johnson is in deep trouble and Cummings can claim that many of his warnings about the government’s incompetence and idiocy have been horribly borne out. Yet Johnson is – at the time of writing – still there. Like many, I wondered if Cummings was behind the drip-drip of deeply damaging photos and videos relating to office parties that pulled the rug out from under his former boss in the run-up to Christmas. But then a photo appeared of that wine and cheese gathering on the Downing Street lawn from May 2020, in which Cummings himself is on prominent display, the insolent slouch sitting opposite Boris, Carrie and the baby. Now in an attempted coup de grace he has pointed them away from the 15 May gathering he attended and towards the far more damaging 20 May shindig instead. Two Johnsons but – always – two Doms. I hesitate to recommend to Guardian readers a blog in which they will find nothing but contempt for many of the things they hold dear. I realised during the months I spent reading Cummings’ thoughts that I represent pretty much everything he loathes: a social scientist, a political commentator, no experience inside government, just another posturing talking head, pretending to have knowledge that I am too ignorant even to know I lack. That didn’t make me enjoy what he had to say any less. Cummings is a brilliant provocateur with an extraordinary ability to see through to what many of us would rather not face. His disdain for so much of British politics goes along with a genuine desire to prevent the idiots from dragging the rest of us down with them. It’s worth reading Cummings because however much you may wish he would go away, he isn’t going to. His Brexit moment might have passed. But the future probably still belongs to people like him. And it remains as important as ever to try to understand what the other side thinks. Outrage is an indulgence.The spirit of Cool Runnings is set to be rekindled next month when Benjamin Alexander, a 38-year-old from Northampton, will become the first athlete to represent Jamaica in an alpine skiing event at the Winter Olympics. Alexander only took up skiing in 2015 and has no full time coach, but he secured qualification for the Beijing Games on Wednesday when he finished seventh in the giant slalom at the Cape Verde National Ski Championships in Liechtenstein. A strategic approach and fearless technique have led the engineering graduate and former DJ not only to make sporting history but find success as a black athlete in a historically white sport. He counts among his mentors Dudley ‘Tal’ Stokes, one of the members of the men’s bobsleigh team whose journey from the Caribbean to the mountains of Alberta became the subject of a hit Disney film. “Qualified Olympics baby” read the message on Alexander’s Instagram account less than seven years after he was first exposed to skiing on a trip to the Canadian resort of Whistler. Alexander says he saw those racing down the slopes that day as “almost like superheroes putting on these skis and just disappearing,” but he took up the sport that winter and, after falling 27 times on his first descent, never looked back. Alexander is the child of a Jamaican father and an English mother. Raised in Wellingborough outside Northampton, he had a working class upbringing. “My mother, my father and my brother have spent the most part of their working career either in factories or driving,” he said. “None of the three of them finished high school with any decent GCSEs or O-levels.” Alexander however was acknowledged as a gifted child and earned a scholarship to a private school before studying first physics then engineering at Imperial College. A parallel life as a DJ in first the UK and then internationally saw him earn a residency at America’s Burning Man festival and he has also worked in finance in Hong Kong. A motivational speaker, Alexander bills himself as a “reinvention expert” and has used skills learned in his other careers to develop his pursuit of skiing success. “I’ve been to 67 countries, I’ve spent a lot of my life on the road,” he told Olympics.com. “I’ve always loved to travel and a big part of my previous role as a DJ was getting myself out there marketing myself in the right way, figuring out ways to get into venues, clubs and festivals that I wanted to perform at. I never hired the services of a manager or agent as a DJ because I wanted to do it my own way.” He built a support network that included Stokes and the American skier Gordon Gray, who called Alexander’s technique “terrible” but observed his lack of fear would give him a head start in competition. He devoted himself entirely to his sport, basing himself in Austria, but building a strategy to enter the Jamaican Olympic team after a visit to the last games in Pyeongchang. He went on to use his analytical skills to discover from data held by the International Ski Federation what times he would have to reach if he was ever to qualify, with some routes to Olympic qualification spots left open for countries without a history of winter sport success. “I’ve totally nerded out on that database,” he said. Alexander will become only the 15th athlete ever to compete for Jamaica at a Winter Olympics. The first were the bobsleigh team of 1988 who qualified, crashed out of competition, finished in last place and entered into history. “You’re going to have to have the determination to suffer and to struggle but to have pride and power,” is Stokes’ advice to the former UK Garage DJ. “That’s the attitude you’ll need.”Magnus Carlsen will launch his new campaign to achieve a 2900 Fide rating, the Everest of overall tournament performance, when the world champion makes his first move on Saturday (1pm start) in the opening round of the “chess Wimbledon” at Tata Steel Wijk aan Zee. Reaching the round number after being previously twice stalled at 2882 is the 31-year-old’s major target for 2022. After four successful defences of his global crown, Carlsen says he will only do so again in 2023 if his opponent is the current No 2, Alireza Firouzja, 18, or another grandmaster from the new generation. Calling the 2900 target an Everest is an apt metaphor. Add on another zero for what used to be calculated as the exact height of the mountain, although it was publicly stated as 29,002 feet in order to avoid the impression that 29,000 was a rounded estimate. There was an Everest expedition a century ago in 1922, two years before the tragedy of the famous 1924 attempt. Carlsen’s chances of reaching his personal summit are a good deal better than those of George Mallory and Andrew Irvine. His current rating after his world title match in Dubai is 2865, and he will need to score 9/13 at Wijk to gain just a single rating point. A 10/13 total would take him to 2876, within range of his personal bests. He achieved 2882 in Fide’s monthly lists in the years 2014 and 2019, while his unofficial daily peak on the live ratings is 2889. Having got so close, why has the No 1 not already surpassed his target? His all-time peak tournament performance rating of 3002 was achieved as long ago as 2009 at Pearl Spring, China, which among TPRs of nine rounds minimum ranks second behind Fabiano Caruana’s 3103 at St Louis in 2014. Carlsen’s performance in the first half of 2019 was also well above the required target at 2942. The problem has been that now and again a sub-par performance creeps in among the glittering successes. One of those was at Wijk 2021, where Carlsen finished only sixth following his shock defeat to Russia’s Andrey Esipenko, then 18. Overall, he has won Wijk seven times, the record number for victories by any player on the windswept Dutch coast, and his opposition for 2022, though of high quality, is missing his two closest rivals in the ratings, Firouzja and Ding Liren. Firouzja, the world No 2 who quit his native Iran and now represents France, had a spat with the Wijk organisers during the final round in 2021 when he was disturbed by tables being moved to accommodate the play-off for first prize between the Dutchmen Jorden van Foreest and Anish Giri. The teenager was invited to Wijk 2022, but asked for compensation for the final-day incident, and also wanted a much higher start fee than the organisers offered, so negotiations broke down. Ding, the world No 3, whose tournament appearances in the past year have been drastically few because of China’s difficulties with the pandemic, is also absent from Wijk. For Carlsen to jump from 2865 to 2900 in the next three weeks would probably require dropping just a single draw in 13 games. More realistic is 9.5/13, a gain of six rating points, which would be enough to show that the champion is en route to his self-imposed target. On the downside, second to Caruana would be disappointing but would still keep Carlsen’s dream alive. The round-by-round pairings announced on Friday are not ideal for Carlsen, who was given No 11 out of the 14 players and so, like all in the bottom half of the draw, has seven games with Black and only six as White. The world champion opens his campaign on Saturday (1pm start) as Black against Andrey Esipenko, the now 19-year-old who defeated him at Wijk 2021 in the upset of that tournament. In the second round Carlsen has White against his old rival and Dutch No 1 Anish Giri, followed by pairings against the World Cup winner Jan-Kryzsztof Duda and last year’s surprise Wijk winner Jorden van Foreest – who was also a member of Carlsen’s own backroom team for Dubai last month. What could be the tournament decider, Carlsen against the world No 4 and US No 1 Fabiano Caruana, will be in the 12th and penultimate round, and the champion has Black in that game too. To sum up, the rather unkind pairings will be a serious test of Carlsen’s Everest 2900 campaign. Game Changer by Matthew Sadler and Natasha Regan was a best seller which revealed the secrets of AlphaZero and its free open-source counterpart LeelaZero. Now Sadler has followed up with The Silicon Road to Chess Improvement (New in Chess, £25), which includes all-computer games as well as training games between computers and the grandmaster author, plus an analysis of significant themes and advice on how to use your own engine to improve your play. Sadler reveals that he used to regularly play two games a day, one with each colour, on his daily commute, losing nearly all of them against Stockfish but analysing them when he got home. He reckons that training games are more useful than the normal practice of checking your own all-human encounter with the website engine after the game is over. Sadler also analyses the themes, techniques and plans typical of engine strategy. Some of these are already widely known, especially the advance of Harry the h pawn against a fianchettoed bishop, with its ultimate version 1 d4 Nf6 2 c4 g6 3 h4!? Other ideas will be new to many players. Engines are more ready than humans to seek endgames with bishops of opposite colours, especially with rooks still on the board, with the rationale that dominance of half the board outweighs the risks of reaching a sterile drawn position. The power of entrenched pieces controlling the game from inside the opposing camp is another engine favourite. Long ago Adolf Anderssen or Wilhelm Steinitz may have claimed (sources are lacking) that with a knight at e6/d6 you can go to sleep and let the game win itself, and the writings of Aron Nimzowitsch show many examples of dominant knights. However, the entrenched piece in the heart of the opponent’s position is more likely to be a bishop. Today’s top GMs quickly make themselves familiar with useful engine concepts, and there is an example of an entrenched piece in a game played after Sadler’s book was published, in the decisive Maxime Vachier-Lagrave v Jan-Krzysztof Duda tie-break game in the World Blitz final. Vachier-Lagrave’s Bc6, which is hard to eject or exchange by normal means, dominates Black’s surrounding heavy pieces, and this proved decisive in the game and match. Silicon Road is a high-level read, which should be most useful to strong and/or ambitious players rated around 2000-plus, or keen juniors 1800-plus. One negative for this reviewer: the book is over 550 pages long, so a thick volume, and the binding is such that only the middle section opens flat. 3798: 1 Nxh6! gxh6 2 g5! hxg5 3 h6 Ne7 4 h7 Ng6 5 Kg2 when the WK advances to g7 and the h pawn queens. In the game Black tried 1 Nxh6 Ke6 2 Nf5 Nxa5 3 Nxg7+ Kf7 4 Nf5 Resigns as White’s g and h pawns will advance.Like a dog that could not be sorrier for chewing the sofa, it was a contrite prime minister who prostrated himself before parliament this week. Dogs are never truly sorry, of course. They have learned that if they whimper, hang their heads and look pathetic when caught, they can defuse their owners’ anger. But they don’t actually feel sorry, because dogs don’t think like that. They just want the shouting to stop. In Boris Johnson’s case, the ever-so-humble act certainly doesn’t seem to have lasted long. When he toured the tearooms afterwards, taking the temperature of his party, he reportedly horrified some MPs by insisting that he hadn’t actually done anything wrong and was merely taking the rap for someone else: some other prime minister, presumably, who had stood in the middle of a crowd chugging wine on his lawn and now claimed not to have realised that was a party. Douglas Ross, the Scottish Tory leader, who has publicly called for Johnson’s resignation, confirms the prime minister said something similar to him. What Scottish Tories have seemingly grasped faster than English ones is that an unrepentant prime minister may cost them not just an election, but potentially the union too. Boris Johnson isn’t going to change now, because if he did he wouldn’t be Boris Johnson. He’s going to keep running his government much as he once ran the Spectator magazine office – which famously boasted half-empty bottles of wine on all the desks and a ping-pong table in the garden, plus the general air of what one visitor memorably called a “knocking shop” – for as long as anyone lets him, although that may not now be very long. He’s not sorry, or not in the meaningful sense of resolving to change. He just wants the shouting to stop. But that’s not going to happen now. Shortly after new year, I was surprised to hear a former No 10 staff member who is well aware of the prime minister’s flaws privately predicting that Johnson would nonetheless see out 2022. But on reflection, it started to become clear how that might happen. Had it not been for the party revelations, this week’s two big stories would have been Michael Gove unveiling a resolution of sorts to the cladding crisis – a debacle that has hurt the Tories not just among young first-time buyers trapped in flats they can’t sell, but among the furious parents providing their deposits – and London hospitals reporting a fall in Covid cases. Had he not been pseudo-apologising for the party, Johnson would have spent this week boasting that he had called it right on Covid, riding out the Omicron wave without a lockdown. Sue Gray’s investigation into all the other Downing Street parties would still have loomed large on the horizon, of course, but until this week there were hints that Labour’s poll lead might be narrowing. Enough, maybe, to convince restless backbenchers that things weren’t irreparable. How interesting, then, that his old nemesis, Dominic Cummings, chose this moment to reveal the existence of yet another secret party. Now every Tory MP understands they are staking their majority on a prime minister who seemingly can’t help himself, and whose former closest aide seems determined to finish him off. Where Gray leaves off, the official Covid inquiry will in time pick up, reawakening the same painful memories all over again. But if Tory MPs think that merely replacing their current bespattered leader with someone less obviously compromised solves the problem, they don’t understand the depths of the hole they’re in. We are so conditioned to the idea of Labour having a mountain to climb in order to win again – still true, since the voters it lost last time aren’t simply going to fall back into its lap – that it’s easy to forget the audacity of what the Tories are attempting. At the next election, they will be asking for an unprecedented fifth consecutive term in power. Of their three most recent leaders, one had to resign after leaving the EU by accident, one was defeated by the task of clearing up the resulting mess, and the last has dragged his party into the gutter. “Give us a chance to finish the job” – the universal slogan of incumbents seeking re-election – starts to sound more like a threat than a promise. What gets governments re-elected is delivery: the sense that everyday life is getting better – if not for everyone, then at least for those most likely to vote Conservative. Tory MPs got cold feet about their last leader once she became better known for trying and failing to deliver a Brexit deal than for any concrete achievement. Their current leader was elected primarily on a promise to “get Brexit done”, but has so far rewarded his base with a deal so flawed he immediately started trying to renegotiate it, plus two years of grinding Covid misery and the promise of higher taxes. Even his vague post-Brexit mission to “level up” Britain has been hamstrung by a pandemic pushing things in the opposite direction: in parts of the north-west and north-east hit hardest by the virus, businesses have suffered longer under restrictions than in the south, and children are likely to have missed more school. The next looming crisis, meanwhile, will be NHS waiting lists, which were at a record high even before hospitals started cancelling operations to deal with the Omicron wave, and may well cost more votes at the next election than memories of a garden party. What the Conservative party really needs now is a workhorse of a leader, with an eye for detail and a record for delivery, who can knuckle down to the boring grind of actually running a country. But party members still drunk on ideology don’t want a Jeremy Hunt figure, some throwback to a forgotten era where competence vaguely mattered, and they’re suspicious of Michael Gove, the last Brexiter standing with the skills to drive a complex agenda through Whitehall. Nor do they want to face the truth about Brexit, which is that voters were promised something that doesn’t really exist, and that lies have a horrible habit of leading to more lies. The sickness lies not just with the leader but with the party that chose him, and which, having belatedly realised its mistake, seems to think it can just merrily spin the wheel again and force its next choice on the country. If there’s to be another Tory leadership contest, fine. But it must be followed immediately by another general election. The past few years have shown the people of this country to be astonishingly long-suffering. But they will no longer be taken for fools. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistAfter the first Week 18 in NFL history ended a topsy-turvy season in suitably dramatic fashion, we’re headed into the first ever Super Wild Card Weekend. The NFL is giving us six games over the next three days and while you can’t predict football – just ask the Indianapolis Colts – we can at least make semi-educated guesses how the following games will go. Las Vegas Raiders at Cincinnati Bengals (Saturday, 4.30pm EST/9.30pm GMT) What the Raiders need to do to win: Las Vegas were the last team to qualify for the playoffs and will be road underdogs on Saturday. Oddly enough, they have an identical regular-season record as the 10-7 Bengals. Given Cincinnati’s history of underachieving, all of the pressure is on the other side. If the Raiders can get an early lead, force a key turnover or two with their talented group of pass rushers, that could be enough to plant the seeds of doubt in their opponents. What the Bengals need to do to win: Quarterback Joe Burrow simply must keep doing what he’s doing, having thrown for 971 yards over the course of the last two games. The last time these two teams met, the Bengals won 32-13, on the road nonetheless. If he plays like this, this could be a laugher (which is what the league obviously expects, since they put this in the Saturday afternoon “ratings death” slot). The world is ready for the first text message ever sent celebrating a Bengals victory, who last won a playoff game in 1991. Key player: Ja’Marr Chase, wide receiver, Bengals. It was a cute story when the Bengals drafted Chase in last year’s NFL draft, reuniting him with his old college quarterback in Joe Burrow. Instead, it was a stroke of genius. The dynamic duo recently set a franchise record, combining for 266 yards and three touchdowns in an impressive Week 17 win over the Chiefs. The two have an almost psychic connection and it could be something to see this postseason. Prediction: Bengals over Raiders New England Patriots at Buffalo Bills (Saturday, 8.15pm EST/Sunday 1.15am GMT) What the Patriots need to do to win: Run like the wind. In the previous meeting between these two teams, the Patriots altered their game plan to take advantage of extremely windy weather conditions. Quarterback Mac Jones threw for 19 yards as New England relied on a talented running back corps to put together a flat-out hilarious 14-10 victory. Jones will have to do more this time around, but it wouldn’t hurt to go back to this blueprint. What the Bills need to do to win: The Good Josh Allen is going to have to show up. For Allen’s first few seasons, the Bills QB had serious issues with ball control despite his obvious physical talents. After Tom Brady relocated to Florida, he has emerged as the best QB in the AFC East. However, old habits die hard. In a four-game stretch this season, Allen threw seven interceptions and lost a fumble. He can’t afford that kind of carelessness again against a Patriots team with one of the league’s most opportunistic defenses. Key player: JC Jackson, cornerback, Patriots. To do so, Buffalo will have to neutralize this guy. Jackson might be their most impactful player on that side. Jackson’s eight interceptions were the second-most in the league this year and he has 25 over the course of his four-year career. The Patriots will desperately need him to work his magic for New England to pull off a road upset. Prediction: Bills over Patriots Philadelphia Eagles at Tampa Bay Buccaneers (Sunday, 1pm EST/6pm GMT) What the Eagles need to do to win: Hope that momentum is still a thing. The Eagles started their season 2-5, seemingly falling out of the playoff mix, but have looked like an entirely different team since. Since losing 28-22 to Tampa Bay back in Week 6, they have even led the league in rushing with 184.8 rushing yards per game. If they keep that up, we should have a competitive ballgame. What the Buccaneers need to do to win: This actually isn’t the worst time for the Eagles to face the Buccaneers with Tampa Bay still reeling from the fallout of the Antonio Brown situation. Despite his endless deficiencies as a teammate, the team will miss him what with Chris Godwin out for the season with an ACL injury. If Tom Brady’s favorite receiver is the “open receiver”, then the players lower on the depth chart are going to have to do their best to get themselves open. Key player: Tom Brady, quarterback, Buccaneers. No reason to overthink this one. Brady might just be the greatest player in NFL history. He’s also 44 years old and – despite all available evidence – Father Time will eventually have his say. He says he wants to play until he’s 50, and maybe he will, but he has to know this game could mark the start of his final Super Bowl run. Prediction: Buccaneers over Eagles San Francisco 49ers at Dallas Cowboys (Sunday, 4.30pm EST/9.30pm GMT) What the 49ers need to do to win: Limit Dak Prescott’s production. While the Dallas Cowboys quarterback struggled a bit down the stretch, he ended the season with a 295 yard, five-touchdown performance. If he’s even as two-thirds as good on Sunday, that’s probably a wrap for San Francisco – even if their run game is as good as advertised. What the Cowboys need to do to win: In contrast, Dallas must stop the run. The 49ers, who are basically between quarterbacks, rely on their running game to wear down opposing defenses. If the Cowboys’ defense, particularly recently acquired free agent safety Jayron Kearse, can limit their rushing yards, it could prevent the team from even needing a big game from Prescott. Key player: Deebo Samuel, wide receiver, 49ers. We’re listing Samuel as a wide receiver here, but he’s a new breed of do-everything offensive player who has picked up a total of 1,845 yards, 365 of those on the ground. In fact, with Jimmy Garoppolo hurt and rookie Trey Lance not quite ready to take the mantle, Samuel has even occasionally performed emergency QB duty, meaning that the 49ers have the luxury of running “trick plays” that are just “plays”. Prediction: Cowboys over 49ers Pittsburgh Steelers at Kansas City Chiefs (Sunday, 8.15pm EST/Monday, 1.15am GMT) What the Steelers need to do to win: Ben Roethlisberger has to have one more great (not just good) game left in his Hall of Fame career. It’s a tall order and even he seems to know it: “Let’s just go in and play and have fun,” he said earlier this week. Still, if he stays upright, at least long enough to make plenty of big plays (either with his arms or with his feet) maybe his Steelers career lasts another week. What the Chiefs need to do to win: The Steelers are 12.5-point underdogs against the Chiefs for a reason. They are playing against the most talented team in the AFC. One expects that Patrick Mahomes and company will be able to score, meaning the key question is whether or not the team’s much-improved defense turns into a pumpkin come into playoff time. If they can keep getting to Big Ben, the Chiefs win this game. Key player: Travis Kelce, tight end, Chiefs. Kansas City don’t even need Kelce to crush the Steelers, as they showed the last time these two teams faced each other. Even without the most dangerous tight end in the league, the Chiefs still steamrolled the Steelers. Kelce should be good to go on Sunday and that could be very bad news for this Pittsburgh defense. Prediction: Chiefs over Steelers Arizona Cardinals at Los Angeles Rams (Monday, 8.15pm EST/Tuesday, 1.15am GMT) What the Cardinals need to do to win: With Kyler Murray on their side, the Cardinals have a decisive edge at quarterback. However, given how good the Rams have been as a team, it won’t matter if the defense doesn’t do its part. The Rams have a 9-1 record when Matt Stafford is sacked one or fewer times in a game this year, but a 3-4 when he’s sacked multiple times. Correlation is not always causation … except when it is. What the Rams need to do to win: Well, obviously, the inverse to this is that the Rams will have to keep Stafford upright and Stafford will have to avoid throwing multiple picks. He does, however, have the edge in experience here as this will be Murray’s first postseason start. The win-loss record for quarterbacks making their playoff debut in the wild-card round since 2002: 11-31. May the least-rattled quarterback win. Key player: Andrew Whitworth, offensive tackle, Rams. There are plenty of players to pick in this matchup, but let’s take this opportunity to praise the most overlooked non-special teamers on the roster: the offensive linemen. Pro Football Focus puts Whitworth, the second-oldest player remaining in the NFL playoffs behind you-know-who, as the best pass blocker among the peers. Stafford’s desperately doing to need him to keep that level of play up. Prediction: Rams over CardinalsVirginia Giuffre has praised a court ruling enabling her sexual assault civil lawsuit against the Duke of York to proceed to trial and said she will “continue to expose the truth”. Giuffre wrote on Twitter she was “pleased” with the ruling, adding: “I’m glad I will have the chance to continue to expose the truth &amp; I am deeply grateful to my extraordinary legal team. “Their determination helps me seek justice from those who hurt me and so many others. My goal has always been to show that the rich and powerful are not above the law &amp; must be held accountable. “I do not walk this path alone, but alongside countless other survivors of sexual abuse &amp; trafficking.” The Manhattan federal judge Lewis Kaplan dismissed a motion by Prince Andrew’s lawyers on Wednesday to have the civil case thrown out after they argued Giuffre had waived her right to pursue the royal by signing a confidential settlement in 2009 with the financier Jeffrey Epstein. Giuffre, 38, claims she was trafficked by Epstein to have sex with powerful people, including Andrew, when she was 17. Andrew has consistently denied her allegations. He now faces the prospect of Giuffre giving a detailed account of the accusations and of having to divulge aspects of his personal life in open court this autumn. Legal experts have said that one way for the duke, 61, to avoid trial would be to reach an out-of-court settlement with Giuffre, but there are increasingly suggestions she would want to have her day in court, and her lawyer, David Boies, has said she would be unlikely to accept a “purely financial settlement”. Boies told Newsnight after the ruling on Wednesday: “I think it’s very important to Virginia Giuffre that this matter be resolved in a way that vindicates her and vindicates the other victims.” He added: “I don’t think that she has a firm view at this point, nor could she, as to exactly what the resolution should be. But I think what’s going to be important is that this resolution vindicates her and vindicates the claim she’s made.” It comes after the Queen stripped the Duke of York of his military affiliations and royal patronages as the dramatic fallout from the case continues. In a devastating blow to Andrew, who was born His Royal Highness, Buckingham Palace also said he would no longer use the HRH royal style in any official capacity. The decision represents the duke’s complete removal from official royal life, and an attempt to distance the monarchy from Andrew, who was once second in line to the throne as the spare to the heir, in the year of the Queen’s Platinum Jubilee. Legal experts say the duke’s options are now stark and limited. He can seek a settlement out of court, though a settlement with no admission of liability could be costly, and, as mentioned, Giuffre may not wish to settle. He can also contest the case, but that means giving a deposition under oath – possibly giving oral evidence – during which he will be questioned on highly personal matters. He can also default, in effect ignoring the court case, but that would lead to a finding against him. Andrew could also file for a motion of reconsideration on Kaplan’s ruling, or he could take an appeal straight to the second circuit court of appeals. Any appeal would delay proceedings.It’s more than 10 years since Thebe Kgositsile first skated into view as Earl Sweatshirt, the teenage enfant terrible of Los Angeles rap collective Odd Future. Since then, the Chicago-born rapper has largely turned his back on the provocative juvenilia that made him so chaotically appealing, instead turning inwards for a series of albums of inscrutable sermons that float over hazy, snipped beats. Earl’s style and sauntering nihilism have found new context amid the lo-fi street philosophy of newer peers such as Mach-Hommy and Westside Gunn – storytellers whose candour is matched by the nonchalance of their delivery, sketching in scant but precise details, and occasional winking wit. Sick! continues in this vein. These 10 songs, rarely more than two minutes long, are as fleeting as thoughts had in the shower or recollections of a fever dream – as in the twinkling roll of 2010 (“We got us a fire to rekindle”), the title track’s discombobulating array of silver screen samples or the run-on lines and homophone rhyme schemes of Lye. Musically, it’s an alluring mesh: all haunting organs, guitars soaked in reverb, and skittish, stoned drum hits. Earl was recording a different album when the pandemic hit, his focus shifted and the computer containing the older recordings got lost. The bright strings of Old Friend, and the dense, extended monologues of Tabula Rasa are the surviving remnants of the shelved project. They offer the promise of something more perhaps in the future, with richer, bolder production: another tantalising glimpse of Earl’s unique and enduring charm.Ukraine has been hit by a “massive” cyber-attack, with the websites of several government departments including the ministry of foreign affairs and the education ministry knocked out. Officials said it was too early to draw any conclusions but they pointed to a “long record” of Russian cyber assaults against Ukraine, with the attack coming after security talks between Moscow and the US and its allies this week ended in stalemate. Suspected Russian hackers left a message on the foreign ministry website, according to reports. It said: “Ukrainians! … All information about you has become public. Be afraid and expect worse. It’s your past, present and future.” The message reproduced the Ukrainian flag and map crossed out. It mentioned the Ukrainian insurgent army, or UPA, which fought against the Soviet Union during the second world war. There was also a reference to “historical land”. In a message to the Guardian, the foreign ministry’s spokesperson, Oleg Nikolenko, said: “As a result of a massive cyber-attack, the website of the ministry of foreign affairs and other government agencies are temporarily down.” He added: “Our specialists have already started restoring the work of IT systems and the cyber-police has opened an investigation.” Nato’s secretary general Jens Stoltenberg and Josep Borrell, the EU’s top diplomat, condemned the attacks. Borrell said the EU’s political and security committee and cyber units would meet to decide how to respond and to support Kyiv. “We are going to mobilise all our resources to help Ukraine to tackle this. Sadly, we knew it could happen,” he said. He added: “It’s difficult to say [who is behind it]. I can’t blame anybody as I have no proof. But we can imagine.” Stoltenberg said Nato and Ukraine would in the coming days sign an agreement on enhanced cyber cooperation. Kyiv would get access to Nato’s malware information sharing platform, he said. Sweden’s foreign minister, Ann Linde, said the west must stand up to any Russian aggression. “We have to be very firm in our messages to Russia, that if there are attacks against Ukraine, we will be very harsh and very strong and robust in our response,” she said. Sweden stood in solidarity with Kyiv, she added. On Thursday, Russian envoys sounded a bleak note after discussions this week with the OSCE in Vienna, as well as Nato and the US. Sergei Ryabkov, who led Russia’s delegation, said talks had hit a dead end. The Kremlin has demanded an assurance Ukraine and Georgia will never join Nato. It wants Nato to remove troops and equipment from its member states in eastern Europe, and to return deployment to 1997 levels, before Nato expanded. On Friday Russia’s foreign minister Sergei Lavrov said Moscow would not wait indefinitely for a response. “We have run out of patience,” he said at a news conference. “The west has been driven by hubris and has exacerbated tensions in violation of its obligations and common sense.” Russia has mobilised 100,000 troops on the border with Ukraine and sent in military hardware. Its defence ministry announced that further equipment would be relocated from the east of the country as part of what it said was an “exercise”. Meanwhile, Moscow said it had carried out a special operation against the ransomware group REvil following a request from the US. The FSB spy agency which Vladimir Putin used to run said it had detained and charged the group’s members. The US embassy in Moscow had no immediate comment. But the move appears to be part of carrot and stick operation following the latest cyber-attack on Ukraine, designed to wrong-foot the Americans. Thus far, the Kremlin has made little effort to curb hacks on western targets by Russia-based cyber-criminals. Ukraine has been repeatedly targeted since 2014, when Moscow annexed Crimea and kickstarted a war in the eastern Donbas region. About 288,000 cyber-attacks took place in the first 10 months of 2021, according to official figures, with 397,000 in 2020. The attacks have also been directed at critical infrastructure. In winter 2015 suspected Russian hackers took out parts of the country’s power grid, which led to almost a quarter of a million Ukrainians losing power and heat. A repeat attack happened in 2016. In 2017, suspected Russian hackers unleashed the NotPetya virus, causing mayhem. Banks, newspapers and leading companies were targeted.Further allegations of Downing Street parties taking place on the eve of the Duke of Edinburgh’s socially distanced funeral have been met with widespread anger across the political spectrum, bookending a turbulent week for Boris Johnson, who is facing renewed calls to resign. Prince Philip’s funeral took place in the private chapel at Windsor Castle on Saturday 17 April, the day after two leaving dos were reportedly held at No 10 at a time when such mixing was banned. The Queen, in mourning black, wearing a face mask and sitting alone to maintain social distancing, became one of the defining images of the national lockdown. The Liberal Democrat leader, Sir Ed Davey, and Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, were among those to condemn the allegations after the wealth of sacrifices made for the funeral to go ahead. In April last year, the country was under coronavirus restrictions and in a period of national mourning after Philip’s death. Carefully laid plans for his funeral, which had been revised over many years, were abandoned owing to the pandemic, with public elements unable to take place. Though some lockdown restrictions were relaxed in England on 12 April, there were no changes to the rules on social contact and people were still instructed to maintain a distance from each other of 2 metres. Outdoor gatherings, including in gardens, were limited to six people or two households, and people were told they must not socialise indoors with anyone with whom they did not live or with whom they had not formed a support bubble. How did Covid restrictions impact Philip’s funeral? Covid restrictions had a substantial impact on the proceedings, with the guest list trimmed from 800 to 30. The Queen attended the funeral wearing a face mask and socially distanced from the rest of her family, who were seated in their respective household bubbles, at the service in St George’s Chapel at Windsor Castle. Those in the funeral procession were required to put on face masks before entering the chapel. Bottles of hand sanitiser featured alongside the traditional dressing of floral arrangements and family wreaths. Original plans for military processions through London or Windsor were scrapped, with the royal family asking the public not to gather at the castle or other royal residences. The choir was also limited to four singers, while the few guests were banned from singing in line with Covid regulations.Ben McElroy first made music as a teenager experimenting with cassette recorders. His adult process may have upgraded to a laptop, but his primary tools remain doggedly lo-fi: accordions in such a state of distress that they fall apart before the end of a song, disintegrating audio equipment, plus well-worn string instruments, whistles and guitars. All often come together to create a shivering seabed of sound: when his barely there vocals appear, as they do on the title track, it evokes a haunting. How I Learnt to Disengage from the Pack recalls the ambient/indie-folk of groups such as Epic45, with technology adding texture – although McElroy’s tunes are often cast in more traditional clothes. Store Away for a Winters Day features a fiddle pivoting and swooping over a pretty soft drone, while Hedgehogs begins like a piece of 8-bit rural weirdness (carrying hints of the Ghost Box record label’s output) before blossoming into something straighter, but still playful and free. See More engineers webs of bright guitars before the tune turns into a processed, enveloping shimmer – suggesting a dazzle in communion with the natural world – while Wolves Dance yomps with grit on its boots, leading off from a cello towards whistles that create their twisted Celtic lament, accompanied by scattershot hand drums. Deeper stuff also lurks in its layers. Buried birdsong in From Time to Time casts the bouncy tune after it in a strange sheen, while electronic decay rubs and twitches throughout. A teacher by day, McElroy recorded this album in snatches over five years. Finishing it coincided with him moving out of a much-loved home: he wonders whether we can hear that loss in its fissures. If anything, this record is too pretty, and could do with more baring of teeth. Nevertheless, it remains a beautiful early year listen, shining a light in tough times. Also out this month Niteworks’ A’ Ghrian is the Skye band’s third album of Gaelic and Scots tunes taken down the trance rave-up. When it works it’s perversely fantastic, although it has to stray far from folk – you’d never guess that Gura Mise Tha Fo Èislein (I Am Full of Grief) was based on a traditional tune – but too often past and present jar for the pipers going poppers-o’clock. Nancy Kerr’s meaty and moving The Poor Shall Wear the Crown: Songs by Leon Rosselson (Little Dish) explores the political songbook of the folk club singer, children’s writer and Russian refugee. Prolific mid-Wales musician Toby Hay’s Live at Hyde Park Folk Festival (self-released) is yet another gorgeous release by the skilful guitarist, David Grubb and Aidan Thorne supporting him subtly with strings. • This review was updated on 14 January to correct an error: McElroy’s album coincided with him moving out of his home, not with the end of a relationship.In Ray Bradbury’s 1952 short story A Sound of Thunder, a private safari group travels back in time from 2055 to the Late Cretaceous to hunt a Tyrannosaurus rex. It’s a perilous enterprise, not just because of the lethality of the quarry, but because minute changes in the ancient environment can lead to cataclysmic shifts in the present; clients must never stray from a floating path and only shoot specially marked dinosaurs. After killing a T rex, the party makes it back to 2055, but finds a world that has altered: there is a chemical smell in the air, language has changed and a fascist candidate is now president. Examining the muddy underside of his boot, one hunter discovers the cause of their transformed landscape: a crushed butterfly, “a small thing that could upset balances”. A similar thread runs through Oliver Milman’s new book, The Insect Crisis: The Fall of the Tiny Empires That Run the World, a chronicle of the precipitous decline of insects and an investigation into what it means for human life and the creatures that surround us. Like Bradbury’s short story, it invites us to shift our focus away from the large, iconic creatures of the animal kingdom and consider these minute invertebrates – those small things that “could upset balances” – and their hidden labour. If anything, The Insect Crisis is even bleaker than Bradbury’s work of science fiction, revealing the terrifying implications of the continued loss of insect life. It is a sombre book, a catalogue of loss and unravelling, but also a lucid homage to the fabulous utility of insects and a critique of our fixation with backbones. Milman refers to the “tiny empires” of insects, and indeed there is something about these invertebrates that upsets our expectations about scale. Most individual insects are minute, but measured by biomass, they appear gargantuan. Milman tells us that southern England hosts 3.5 million flying insects each year, whose mass is equivalent to 20,000 reindeer, and swarms of mayfly grow so large that they can be picked up on radar. And yet, as Milman notes in painful detail, insects are declining at an alarming rate, threatened by the familiar cocktail of pesticides, habitat destruction, electric light and climate change. Among entomologists there is debate, sometimes rancorous, about the extent of this loss (insect populations are hard to measure and their numbers do fluctuate in the wild), but the pattern of steep decline is clear. Many of the entomologists he interviews appear alarmed, terrified and even depressed. Milman notes that Charles Darwin was so disgusted by parasitoid wasps that he could not conceive that a “beneficent and omnipotent God” could have created them. No doubt many of us, irritated by a fly or stung by a wasp, have wondered what purpose certain insects serve. But Milman lays out in great detail just how dependent we are on insect species for their services of pollination, waste disposal, pest control and nutrient recycling. “You get rid of flies? You get rid of chocolate”, notes one entomologist in one of the book’s lighter moments. In more disturbing passages Milman conjures a silent world without insects, where faeces and corpses dot the landscape and humans survive on a bland diet of staples, such as rice, that can be pollinated by the wind. Humans, or, rather, rich humans, muddle through, but it is an existence that is bland, colourless, and miserable. The Insect Crisis is the latest book to mark a growing shift in environmental writing, one that confronts species loss head on and contemplates the ruins of the Anthropocene. If its visions are sometimes mournful, there is also something wondrous in Milman’s revelation of our fragile dependency on insect life as well as its beauty and strangeness. He writes about armadillo-like giant burrowing cockroaches, the Hercules moth (“wingspan as wide as a dinner plate but no mouth”), and monarch butterflies whose fluttering wings create a sound “like light rainfall on a canvas tent”. Insects, says one entomologist, resemble “aliens on earth”, and yet these creatures suggest that the very opposite is true; without insects how would we be able to conjure images of alien life-forms? Equally fascinating are the entomologists who populate the book, the men and women who treat patches of earth, clumps of leaves or sections of bark as frontiers to be explored. In the face of public indifference or panic, they continue to soldier on and document species loss, sometimes appearing as lonely as the species they study. We, meanwhile, largely remain oblivious to the silent decline, fixated on domesticated species, such as honeybees, while ignoring the fate of their wild cousins. As much as a crisis of pesticides and habitat loss, the insect crisis seems one of indifference, of our failure to appreciate what is at our feet. It’s here that the book’s power lies, for once you read it you cannot fail to notice the butterfly underfoot. • The Insect Crisis: The Fall of the Tiny Empires that Run the World is published by Atlantic (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Pick of the week Mass Four parents meet in a church to talk about an incident several years earlier when the teenage son of one couple murdered the other pair’s son in a school shooting. Fran Kranz’s intense film is an ostensibly simple drama, theatrical in its single-setting, real-time setup, but shot in intimate closeup and red raw emotionally. Martha Plimpton and Jason Isaacs, as the victim’s mum and dad, and Ann Dowd and Reed Birney, playing the killer’s parents, give devastating performances. Running the gamut of grief, they ask hard questions – how much do you really know your children? Are you to blame for their actions? Is forgiveness possible after such trauma? – and find no easy answers. Wednesday 19 January, 3.20am Sky Cinema Premiere *** The Witch In 1630s New England, a none-more-pious father, William (Ralph Ineson), is banished from his Puritan settler community and takes his family to farm on the fringes of a forest. There, his wife Katherine (Kate Dickie) gives birth to a son – but while her eldest child Thomasin (Anya Taylor-Joy, in her first starring role) is babysitting, the boy is abducted by a witch. Based on true accounts from the time, the debut film from Robert Eggers is a gloriously nightmarish horror, imaginative and brutal, as dark forces – and mutual suspicion – overwhelm the family. Sunday 16 January, 12.55am, Channel 4 *** Pig In Michael Sarnoski’s deft drama, Nicolas Cage plays Rob, an Oregon forest-dwelling loner whose beloved pig – source of the truffles he sells – is abducted. Distraught, he heads into Portland with his young business contact, Amir (Alex Wolff), to find the lost porker. It’s the perfect recipe for a revenge thriller a la Point Blank – but this is the usually 11-on-the-dial Cage turned down to a two. Rob’s past in a quasi-criminal world of high-end dining, fight clubs and foodie philosophy is revealed slowly, with Cage simmering away nicely. Sunday 16 January, 10.35am, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere *** Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon The most celebrated in a wave of turn-of-the-millennium wuxia movies (a martial arts genre originating in China) that wowed western audiences, Ang Lee’s 2000 film still stands up. From vivid green bamboo forests to the dust-yellow Gobi desert, it’s an adventure of relentless visual splendour, as skilled swordspeople (and unconsummated soulmates) Chow Yun-Fat and Michelle Yeoh seek a mysterious thief. Could it be the imperial governor’s soon-to-be married daughter (Zhang Ziyi)? Forbidden romance and kung fu action in one stylish package. Monday 17 January, 6.40pm, Great! Movies *** Nobody Ilya Naishuller’s deeply silly action thriller is redeemed by the surprisingly convincing casting of Bob Odenkirk as the lead character. His mild-mannered Hutch, family man and ground-down office worker, reluctantly brings his brutal past in black ops back into play when his house is burgled and he falls foul of a Russian mobster. The Better Call Saul star adds several new skills to his CV, particularly in a superb close-quarters fight sequence on a city bus. Friday 21 January, 12noon, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere *** A Hero This involving Iranian drama deservedly won a major prize at Cannes last year for its director, Asghar Farhadi. Amir Jadidi’s sign painter Rahim, an ambiguous smile forever flickering on his face, is in prison for non-payment of a debt. While on temporary release, he’s given a handbag containing gold coins found by his secret girlfriend. After returning it to the owner and being publicly feted for the selfless act, he discovers that no good deed goes unpunished, as his little white lies – told to simplify matters – put him into a hole he can’t dig himself out of. Friday 21 January, Amazon Prime Video *** Munich: The Edge of War We are in prime Robert Harris territory here. The author’s interest in the second world war and the spy game is served well by Christian Schwochow’s film of his novel, as George MacKay’s fictional civil servant Hugh Legat crosses paths with real figures, principally Neville Chamberlain. Revolving round the prime minister’s dealings with Hitler on the eve of the conflict, it’s a stirring tale of derring-do and political manoeuvring, with Legat and his old friend, German foreign office official Von Hartmann (Jannis Niewöhner), trying to expose Hitler’s belligerent ambitions. Friday 21 January, NetflixLike news of illegal Downing Street “work events” held during lockdown, the transfer rumours keep coming thick and fast and much like Thursday, Manchester United figure prominently in Friday’s tell-all and are being linked with all manner of comings and goings. Disaffected midfielder Donny van de Beek is waiting impatiently in the departures lounge, having been offered to Newcastle United and Borussia Dortmund, while Paul Pogba continues to be linked with Paris Saint-Germain, whose manager Mauricio Pochettino could still go the other way. United have identified Napoli’s Spanish midfielder Fabián Ruiz as a potential replacement for Pogba, whose contract expires in June and future remains very much up in the air. With their star turn Federico Chiesa out for the season after suffering an ACL injury in his side’s win over Roma last weekend, Juventus are eyeing up replacements in the form of United’s Anthony Martial or Arsenal’s Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang. Already in the market for a new striker before Chiesa’s unfortunate collision with Chris Smalling, Juve have been forced to into an urgent rethink as far as their January transfer plans are concerned. Having successfully signed Chris Wood from Burnley, Newcastle remain interested in bringing Todd Cantwell to St James’ Park from Norwich in a move that probably wouldn’t be viewed as weakening another relegation rival considering how little time the playmaker has spent on the pitch this season. Cantwell, who has also been linked with Leeds, is expected to be in Norwich’s squad for Saturday’s game against Everton after recovering from illness. With their January trolley-dash continuing, Newcastle have also bid for Sevilla central defender Diego Carlos and have been warned they will have to pay the thick end of £40m to prise Serbian defender Nikola Milenkovic away from Fiorentina. Currently “winning” the January window after signing Philippe Coutinho and Lucas Digne, Aston Villa hope to consolidate by luring Yves Bissouma away from Brighton. Valued at £50m and also on the radar of Manchester United and Liverpool, the Mali midfielder is at the Africa Cup of Nations in Cameroon and has 18 months left on his contract with Brighton. However, his employers have hinted they might be tempted to cash in if they get a decent offer. “There are lots of ifs and buts,” said Graham Potter upon being asked about Bissouma’s future. “I’m confident. Yves is enjoying his football here but as I have said with the transfer window you never know.” Following their impressive performance against Liverpool, Arsenal are giving the glad eye to Youri Tielemans and Gini Wijnaldum. In the final 18 months of his contract, Tielemans is unlikely to leave Leicester this month but Brendan Rodgers has revealed a summer exit could be on the cards. “For players it’s about ambition, the challenge and sometimes it’s about a different environment,” he said. “We have seen it before many times.” In more heartwarming news for Leicester fans, their club is hell bent on making Ademola Lookman’s loan move from RB Leipzig permanent.The Big Beat: Fats Domino and the Birth of Rock’n’Roll Sky Arts, 9pm During his lifetime, Fats Domino not only sold millions of records but pioneered a new genre: rock’n’roll. With his signature mix of rolling piano playing and New Orleans sensibilities, he paved the way for artists from Elvis to the Beatles. Through electrifying vintage footage and interviews with the man himself, along with his collaborators, this documentary explores Domino’s life and legacy beyond his death in 2017. Henry Wong American Masters: Mae West: Dirty Blonde 8.40pm, PBS America A cracking biography of the woman who, until the censorious 1934 Production Code took away her best lines, was Hollywood’s biggest star. Critics and industry folk celebrate West’s signature vibe: independence and emotional strength, expressed via scorchingly rude innuendo, delivered in that irresistible Brooklyn drawl. Jack Seale QI XL 9pm, BBC Two The always lovely Sandi Toksvig returns with another extended episode (45 minutes, to be precise) of the long-running quiz show. Tonight, Alan Davies, Jimmy Carr, Chris McCausland and Jen Brister dissect funny facts on pretty much every subject under the sun. Hollie Richardson A Discovery of Witches 9pm, Sky Max As the final series of this somehow very middle-class fantasy saga gets into its rhythm, top vampire Matthew (Matthew Goode) has a dilemma: he wants to rid his family of their bloodlust but that might mean going public. The relevant undead authorities are not keen. JS One Night in … 10pm, Channel 4 Fantasies come true for Alex Brooker and Josh Widdicombe, who are spending the night in the UK’s favourite attractions. For the last in the series it’s access-all-areas Legoland, where they’re joined by Jon Richardson and Lucy Beaumont. From a Lego Eiffel Tower to driving the fire engines, it’s childlike fun all the way, topped off with a vegan feast. Hannah Verdier The Graham Norton Show 10.35pm, BBC One Joining the chatshow stalwart for some top-notch anecdote-sharing and self-promotion on tonight’s show are Ricky Gervais, Cate Blanchett and Ant and Dec. Plus, Elvis Costello &amp; the Imposters perform live. HR Film choices Save the Cinema (Sara Sugarman, 2022), 10.55am, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere A true story ripe for dramatic treatment, Sara Sugarman’s guileless drama follows the fight to save the Lyric in Carmarthen in the early 1990s. Hairdresser and youth theatre leader Liz Evans (a warm performance by Samantha Morton) rouses the opposition, including Jonathan Pryce’s retired teacher Mr Morgan, when the council plans to replace the cinema with a shopping centre. There’s light villainy in the shape of venal mayor Tom (Adeel Akhtar), a dash of Hollywood glamour and a gently reiterated message about the importance of community and local heritage. Simon Wardell Planes, Trains and Automobiles (John Hughes, 1987), 9pm, Comedy Central Who needs a straight man when you have talents such as Steve Martin and John Candy riffing off each other? In John Hughes’s superb comedy, the two are thrown together on a frantic, weather-impeded trip from New York to Chicago as they race to get home in time for Thanksgiving. Martin’s advertising executive Neal (superior, quick to anger) and Candy’s travelling salesman Del (genial, accident-prone) are the perfect odd couple in a film that bears comparisons to Midnight Run for its smartly plotted twists and characterful humour. SW The Tragedy of Macbeth (Joel Coen, 2021), Apple TV+ For his first film without collaborator/brother Ethan, Joel Coen has delivered a confident, stylish take on Shakespeare’s murderous Scottish play. Denzel Washington is a magnificently brooding Macbeth, while Frances McDormand embraces the dark side as his lady – a role she was born to play. Their regicidal plot is worked out across austere locations in crisp black-and-white imagery reminiscent of Ingmar Bergman’s The Seventh Seal. In an inventive touch, Kathryn Hunter plays all three “weird sisters” while eloquent support comes from Bertie Carvel as the doomed Banquo and Alex Hassell as an intriguingly shifty Ross. SWThe gate that once proudly displayed the name of Godwins primary school in Kampala has been removed. The compound, where pupils played at break time, is now a parking area for trucks ferrying goods to the nearby market, while the classrooms have been turned into a travellers’ lodge. Uganda’s schools were ordered to reopen on Monday 10 January, after nearly two years of closure – the longest school shutdown in the world – but not all were able to welcome pupils back. Godwins, in Kalerwe in Kawempe division, is one of the many schools that will never reopen. It had been in existence for 20 years catering to children whose parents work in nearby Kalerwe market. Harriet Namubiru, a charcoal seller whose two grandchildren, aged eight and 10, attended the school, says its closure is a “tragedy that has befallen us”. “The management of the school called a meeting and they told us ‘It has become very hard for us to run again. We shall not open,’” she says. “It was like lightning or something [had hit us]. Some parents who were in the meeting fainted. Some fell sick for weeks.” Kampala’s suburbs are littered with ghost structures that were once schools. Some buildings were sold, while others have been destroyed to make way for real estate development. Kampala Capital City Authority said that more than 40 schools in the city have closed for good. Local media is awash with reports of schools turned into bars, restaurants or travellers’ accommodation. There are no official figures on the number of schools that have failed to reopen countrywide. Kidcare nursery and primary school in the suburb of Najjera is now a depot for beverages. The dusty classrooms and dining hall at nearby Najjera progressive school lie empty; some of Najjera’s classroom blocks have been destroyed to make way for a real estate development. At Makerere highway school in Kivulu, a Kampala slum, pupils were welcomed by heavy padlocks. The building owner says she “no longer wants school business on her property”. She says previous schools have not paid rent for two years and she has opted to use the space for other businesses. Upcountry, some students arrived to find school roofs blown off or classrooms taken over by anthills. They were forced study under trees. Covid guidelines mean extra costs for schools and parents. Schools unable to meet these and the demands by some landlords that they pay rent arrears will stay shut – and many may never reopen. Namubiru is still searching for an affordable school for her grandchildren. “It’s difficult. Our school [Godwins] understood us. It accepted our children, and we brought tuition fees whenever we could,” she says, explaining that new schools are expensive and require fees upfront. The reopening of schools was met with relief by pupils, teachers and parents, but the turnout at many was low. At Chegere primary school in the northern Apac district, just one pupil appeared on the first day. Local media reports zero turnouts at some schools in the central district of Nakasongola. Nicholas Bwire, director of St Nicholas primary school in Mukono, central Uganda, says he registered few pupils but is optimistic that more will attend. “The turnout for learners has been poor. Parents are still worried that they may bring children, pay tuition fees only for schools to be closed again after a few weeks. This happened to them early last year when schools closed just days after opening,” he says. “[Parents] are telling us that ‘we’re coming on Monday’.” Bwire says he is happy that all his teachers except one showed up. All his non-teaching staff resigned, but he hopes to recruit new ones. Christine Babirye, a teacher at a community kindergarten in Kampala, says parents cited fees and lack of materials as reasons for not sending their children in the first week. She says her school has lowered tuition costs and encouraged parents to bring pupils. For those returning after 83 weeks away from the classroom, it is a cheerful moment. “I feel very good to be back at school. [Life at] home was boring,” says Mark Kibuuka, 14, a pupil at Bat valley primary school in Kampala. Fellow pupil Shatrah Nanyange, 11, adds: “My mother told me ‘If you go to school, be a good child and if you study well, I will give you everything you want.’ I am doing just that.” But experts warn the impact of long closure on schools and pupils cannot be overstated. Before the pandemic, Uganda was battling poor educational outcomes. This will worsen as dropouts grow. Dr Ibrahim Kasirye, a researcher at the thinktank Economic Policy Research Centre, says: “Inequalities in access to education have been exacerbated by the nearly two years closure of schools.” “The variation in the ability to access alternative forms of learning offered to kids during the lockdowns such as using radios and televisions, newspapers, and the internet has created two worlds within the country– – one that lost most of the two years of schooling and another, a ‘first world’ that managed the crisis and continued learning,” he says, urging special attention for the group that did not learn at all. Dr Mary Goretti Nakabugo, the executive director of Uwezo, a charity promoting access to learning in Uganda, says the country’s education sector is “in a crisis”. “We must ensure that all learners go back to school, but also what happens when they are back matters to ensure that they are not worried and are able to stay.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Manufacturers in Northern Ireland have ranked the post-Brexit arrangements for trade in Northern Ireland as the least of the challenges facing their businesses, according to a quarterly industry survey, with 28% saying trade with the EU has increased over the last year. The top concern was listed as labour shortages caused by the pandemic but also the end of freedom of movement that prevents EU citizens living in border counties in the republic of Ireland crossing into Northern Ireland for work. “The protocol was the least of their worries,” said Stephen Kelly, chief executive of Manufacturing Northern Ireland (MNI), which conducted the survey. While we all get caught up in the political narrative, in business the bigger concerns are staff recruitment, productivity and then the pandemic itself. “It shows the narrative favoured by the DUP [Democratic Unionist party] and others that Northern Ireland is going to hell in a handcart because of the protocol is quite clearly not the case, quite the opposite,” Kelly added. He said there was a “huge uptick” in the number of firms accepting that the “protocol is here to stay”, but many want it to work better through simplifications of paperwork. The survey reveals some businesses are now enjoying a Brexit dividend, with 28% saying they have experienced an increase in trade with the EU including the republic of Ireland. Two in five businesses also want the Northern Ireland executive, the equivalent of the government’s cabinet, to seize the unique opportunities the country has to trade with both the UK and the single market. The survey comes as the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, who took over Brexit negotiations after the resignation of Lord Frost before Christmas, holds a second day of talks with the European Commission over the protocol and wider relations with the EU. Truss is hosting the commission’s vice-president, Maroš Šefčovič, at Chevening House in Kent. Sources say that the UK will continue to press for further compromises on the checks on goods going from Great Britain to Northern Ireland. Businesses surveyed by MNI show that while it may not be a priority concern, many are still experiencing a “negative impact” of the checks and customs controls on goods crossing from Great Britain to Northern Ireland. However, the portion expressing concern in the last quarter is just over 50% down from 77% in the first quarter. Great Britain’s readiness for the customs paperwork that applies to goods “remains the big issue” as one in five “report their GB suppliers are unwilling to send” to Northern Ireland. “This has remained consistent throughout 2021,” said Kelly.Russia’s buildup of a potential invasion force on Ukraine’s borders has produced little reaction at home despite western threats of devastating economic consequences that would harm tycoons, top businesspeople and the general public alike. Since 2014, recurrent rounds of sanctions over the annexation of Crimea, the shooting down of the MH17 jetliner, the 2016 US elections interference, the Salisbury poisonings, the attempted assassination of Alexei Navalny and other international scandals have steeled Vladimir Putin’s elite supporters and prepared them for the worst. Many tripped over themselves to publicly show their loyalty to the Kremlin during the 2014 crisis, despite facing crippling sanctions as a result. “You must pay for everything in life, including knowing [Putin],” said Gennady Timchenko, a billionaire friend of the Russian president who was sanctioned in March 2014, in an interview with state media. Behind closed doors, top businesspeople and officials browbeat each other into staying loyal in the face of personal sanctions. “Our country is under sanctions. And the president is alone on the parapet,” Vladimir Yakunin, the then head of Russian Railways, said during a leaked account of a heated committee meeting in 2014 on whether to integrate Crimea’s football teams into the Russian league – a decision some feared would earn them personal sanctions. After eight years of persistent conflict with the west, the elite and the public appear largely resigned to whatever course Putin chooses in his quest to assert dominance over Ukraine. Despite signs pointing toward a greater conflict, polling and anecdotal evidence indicates that many Russians do not feel the threat of war as intensely. “This talk of war is more done on the western side,” said Dmitri Trenin, the head of the Carnegie Moscow Center, in a television interview this week. “On the Russian side, there is none of that. There is no feeling of an impending war in Ukraine. But military pressure is certainly there, and military pressure is certainly to continue; the military pressure may increase.” Russia has positioned more than 50 battalion tactical groups – or nearly a third of its total – within striking distance of Ukraine. More main battle tanks and other armoured vehicles have been filmed departing Russia’s far east on flatbed railcars, indicating the buildup is continuing even as high-stakes negotiations were under way in Europe this week. Top Russian officials have indicated talks are at an impasse. “I do not see any grounds to sit down, convene another meeting and begin the same discussion all over again in the coming days,” said Sergei Ryabkov, the deputy foreign minister who represented Russia at this week’s negotiations with the US in Geneva. He demanded that the US deliver concrete counterproposals or Russia would be forced to ensure its security via other means. While the Kremlin has delivered bombastic rhetoric blaming the west for the conflict, there has not been a similar outburst of nationalism like the one after the annexation of Crimea. “We don’t notice much enthusiasm … the government’s ratings continue to fall, despite the possibility of a large-scale confrontation,” said Denis Volkov of the independent Levada Centre. The events of March 2014 also energised opponents of the clash with Ukraine, a portion of the Russian opposition that risked openly opposing the growing conflict in Ukraine. Liberals “are aghast of President Vladimir Putin’s warmongering, and they are very vocal in their condemnation of the Kremlin revanchism, but the situation in Ukraine itself is not the focus of their conversation,” wrote the journalists Andrei Soldatov and Irina Borogan. Ultimately, there is little in terms of domestic politics to restrain Putin from going to war in Ukraine if he so chooses. The Kremlin has spent years preparing for a broader economic conflict with the west, including building up considerable cash reserves that would insulate it from the economic shock of new US sanctions. And as the experience of 2014 shows, its powerful oligarchs will also be expected to shoulder their burden in the coming conflict. “Personal inconveniences and costs to one’s business can and should be neglected when it comes to the interests of the state,” said Timchenko in the interview. “There can be no compromise here.”Fugitives facing the firing squad have looked more relaxed than David Strathairn does right now. One of the most perspicacious character actors of the past 40 years, he has been exceptional so often on screen that any attempt to list the highlights runs the risk of simply transcribing his IMDb page: Nomadland, LA Confidential, The River Wild, Sneakers, a batch of rigorous dramas by his longtime friend John Sayles (including Matewan and Limbo), a fling with Carmela on The Sopranos, a career-best performance as a predatory teacher in the indie gem Blue Car, and an Oscar nomination for Good Night, and Good Luck. Today the 72-year-old, who resembles a lean, lined Cary Grant, is sitting bolt upright and strangely far from the camera as he talks via video call from New York. Or rather, doesn’t talk. I have just asked him a question that he considers irrelevant, even impertinent, and he has clammed up. To think, it all started so well. Discussing his new movie, Guillermo del Toro’s 1940s-set noir thriller Nightmare Alley, Strathairn is in his element. In this adaptation of William Lindsay Gresham’s novel, filmed once before, in 1947, he plays Pete, a soused, weather-beaten mentalist who performs a mind-reading act with his wife, Zeena (Toni Collette), at an insalubrious travelling carnival. The doggedly cheerful couple have seen better days. “Pete was at the top of his game many years earlier when they were in Paris,” he reflects. “He has this idea that he was once a great mentalist on the most renowned stages. It’s an interesting contrast to where we find him in the film.” Into the couple’s life stumbles Stanton (Bradley Cooper), a handsome but shady sort to whom Zeena takes an immediate shine. Is Pete alert to his wife’s infidelity? “I don’t know,” he says thoughtfully. “Did you get any sense of that? It was talked about but we didn’t want to indulge in it too much. The idea was to make Zeena and Pete one entity. There’s an emotional bond, and they’ve spent so much time together. Was he aware that she has this side? Would she have had other Stantons? I’m not sure.” Even now, the actor sounds grateful to have found himself on the lavish set of a Guillermo del Toro movie. “The production design was extraordinary,” he says. “Then you had the rain, the mud, the boardwalks, the texture of the tents. It was so gritty. That world informs who the people are.” Strathairn trained to be a clown straight out of college. Did making the film take him back to those days? “Uh, it had trappings of that, yeah,” he says. “The sense of community. A bunch of wildly eccentric individuals.” How deep did he get into clowning? “Deep enough to learn how to fall down and get up again.” How does it compare with acting? “Uhhh … I dunno.” He is beginning to wriggle in his seat. “They’re probably similar in essence. Catch the people’s attention and try to transport them into another reality.” Did he see any overlap between Pete and himself? After all, an actor – like a mentalist – needs to be a good reader of people. “Well, you hope you are. Actors are sort of conduits for human behaviour.” Pete maintains that anyone who reads people will have learned the skill as a child. Is that true of Strathairn, too? “I think it’s true of all of us.” All actors or all people? “Anybody. There are so many clues out there.” What sort of child was he? Quiet and reserved or kicking with the fray? He lets out a protracted, agonised sigh. “Ahhh, I dunno,” he shrugs. Then nothing for five or six seconds. “I don’t think I was anything other than a normal kid.” Why the enormous sigh? “I sort of don’t think we should be talking about me,” he says. “We should be talking about the film, really.” Seven seconds pass in silence. Is he uncomfortable speaking about life off screen? “No, I just don’t think it’s a propos of doing PR for a film to talk about ‘what I was like as a kid’.” He treats that last phrase like a stinky sock which must be held away from his face. “That’s not … I don’t think that’s applicable to the film. To the project. It’s not, uh … No.” He reaches for a reference to the psychoanalyst played in Nightmare Alley by Cate Blanchett. “I mean, I’m not in Dr Lilith Ritter’s office!” I protest gently that I wasn’t intending to analyse him; I was trying to get an idea of how someone without an acting background (his parents were both medical professionals) might have been drawn to the business. “I know, I know,” he says softly. I conduct a quick mental inventory of the topics I had hoped we might touch on. Strathairn was superb as Meryl Streep’s milquetoast husband in the action thriller The River Wild but the chances now of him reflecting on his brief, real-life connection to his co-star – Streep’s daughter Grace Gummer married his son, Tay, in July 2019 before separating 42 days later due to “irreconcilable differences” – have become vanishingly remote. It would not be a propos, as he might put it. I cross the subject off my list. We drift back to Nightmare Alley, and to the scene in which Pete warns Stanton of the risks for any mentalist who becomes seduced by his own confidence tricks. Isn’t that a danger for an actor: that one might believe the hype? Strathairn pulls a face as if to say: again with the personal stuff? Another long silence passes, during which he shakes his head and glances away. I joke with him that, for the purposes of the tape, I will at this point need to describe aloud what he is doing: He shakes his head, I say. “‘He shakes his head,’” he repeats dolefully. A few seconds later, however, a switch seems to flick inside him, and he decides that he will answer the question after all. “Actors believing their hype can be a slippery slope,” he agrees. “There are a lot of banana peels out there in that respect.” Was his own head turned when he received that Oscar nomination (his only one so far) for playing the journalist Edward R Murrow in George Clooney’s McCarthy-era drama Good Night, and Good Luck? “Yeah it was kinda like: ‘What’s this all about?’ When I’m working, it’s about the work, not what comes afterwards. It was like an out of body experience. My eyes were wide open all the time taking it in, because it may never happen again. It was like being at a circus.” Only this time he wasn’t a clown. Even when he has been part of a hit (such as his two Bourne thrillers) or an Oscar-magnet (such as Nomadland or Steven Spielberg’s Lincoln), he hasn’t usually been sent out on to the publicity circuit; his more famous co-stars tend to shoulder that burden. Perhaps this explains his discomfort with personal questions. Some character actors may crave the fame and attention that comes the way of their superstar colleagues but Strathairn seems not to be among them. Get him on the finer points of his craft, though, and he unclenches. To rescue the mood before we finish, I ask whether he has read Mark Harris’s recent book about the director Mike Nichols. He has not. Then he won’t know that he is singled out as a valuable influence on Nichols’s 1983 film Silkwood, where he played one of the workers at a plutonium plant alongside – that woman again – Meryl Streep. I read him the relevant passage, which describes how his decision to chew gum and blow bubbles helped to “loosen up the blocking of a static scene”. He seems captivated. “Wow. I do remember that. Probably I was just trying to keep myself busy. And I felt also that there was this lack of awareness about working in the radioactive environment: you were touching food in your mouth, but you didn’t know what was in the shit you were dealing with. It was a disconnect between the toxic surroundings, and this person thinking: ‘I’m just working in a factory.’ Hmm. That’s really a great film. Wow.” All at once, he has been spirited back to the more creative space of the film set or rehearsal room. He looks happy at last. We say our goodbyes. His nightmare is over. • Nightmare Alley is released in the UK on 21 JanuaryCurrys has trimmed its annual profit forecast after a shortage of goods ranging from PlayStation 5 consoles and Apple products to hairdryers and TVs resulted in a 5% fall in sales over the peak Christmas period. The UK’s biggest electrical retailer said sales were hit by problems including the global chip shortage, which is affecting the supply of electrical goods including TVs and appliances and the shipping of products. Demand for some products, including TVs and smart home products such as voice-controlled speakers, was also down as household budgets are increasingly squeezed. “The technology market was challenging this Christmas, with uneven customer demand and supply disruption,” said Alex Baldock, the chief executive of Currys, which formerly traded as PC World, Carphone Warehouse and Dixons. He said there had been problems with “getting hold of people, containers, [lorry] trailers as well as product.” Currys, which has lowered its full-year profit guidance from £160m to £155m, said the overall UK market for sales of technology products was down 10% at Christmas. Baldock said Currys had gained market shares as it had been able to get better supplies than rivals of popular items such as gaming consoles, Dyson hairdryers, Apple computers and iPhones. He said sales of gaming kit for the chain rose 16% despite shortages of key products. “Customer demand for some tech was strong,” he said. “This was a gamers’ Christmas, the year that virtual reality broke into the mainstream, and when consoles flew off the shelves. Oculus Quest 2 and the PS5 were stars. Appliances large and small also enjoyed strong sales, as consumers continued to kit out their homes. Even though everyone may not have got their first choice of product this Christmas, we had plenty of choice for everyone.” However, he added: “We have seen some bumpy consumer demand during Christmas and patchy consumer confidence particularly when buying bigger ticket stuff. That was not helped by Omicron and we did see some concerns about the cost of living.” Baldock said Currys was being “pretty prudent” by trimming profit expectations as there was uncertainty about “what is going to happen to real wages, the cost of living and the housing market.” He said that price rises were “inevitable” across the electrical goods market this year and this might also have an effect on shoppers’ behaviour. “Nobody has got a crystal ball but the market is definitely inflationary. That will contribute to the uncertainty of the outlook as consumers are obviously keeping a close eye [on prices],” he said. Despite those problems, Baldock said he expected the technology market to remain bigger than before the pandemic because of the shift to working from home and towards gaming as a form of entertainment. Currys, which operates 800 stores and sells its goods online, said sales in the UK and Ireland fell by 6% year on year in the peak trading period of the 10 weeks to 8 January. While consumers turned to online sales to avoid going to the high street, with digital revenues up 29% compared with the Christmas of 2019, it was not enough to overcome the company’s overall sales drop during the 2021 festive season. The company said for the 36 weeks to 8 January sales were down 3% year on year but up 11% compared with 2020. Baldock said Currys, which commenced a £75m share buyback scheme on Friday, was focusing on “profitable sales, with good discipline on margin, cost and stock”. Shares in Currys were down more than 6% on Friday afternoon.English clubs spent more on international transfers than those of any country and completed seven of the 10 biggest international deals in 2021, according to new data from Fifa. Fifa’s Global Transfer Report, which excludes domestic deals, also shows that clubs in England sold the most players and recouped the most transfer fees too, as the financial dominance of the country’s football in the world game was confirmed, despite an overall drop in transfer spending. The report shows that $4.86bn (£3.5bn) was spent worldwide in 2021 in recruiting footballers, falling by as much as a third from the record totals set pre-pandemic in 2019. Nearly 88% of transfers did not involve a fee. English clubs’ spending fell too, from $1.627bn in 2020 to $1.386bn last year. At more than a quarter of all spending, however, it was more than $400m higher than the second-highest spenders, Italy. Romelu Lukaku’s £97.5m transfer to Chelsea from Internazionale was the biggest international deal of 2021, with Jadon Sancho’s £73m move from Borussia Dortmund to Manchester United second. Raphaël Varane, Ibrahima Konaté and Martin Ødegaard also feature, but included in the top 10 global deals were some signings who have barely registered in the Premier League to date: Amad Diallo, who joined Manchester United from Udinese, and Bryan Gil, who signed for Spurs from Sevilla. As a transfer within a domestic league, Jack Grealish’s £100m move from Aston Villa to Manchester City does not feature. Tammy Abraham’s move from Chelsea to Roma was the fifth-biggest international move of the year, evidence of English football also being able to recoup money through sales. English clubs took more money in transfer fees than any other country, recouping $548m of the money they spent, and they sold or loaned more players than any other country too. English clubs sold or loaned 885 players, with Manchester City top of the global list with 41, and Wolves also appearing in the top 10, with 30. Fifa’s report shows the vast majority of transfer revenues stay at the top of the game. There were 2,230 transfers that commanded a fee in 2021 (and 15,838 that did not). The top 100 commanded more than 50% of all fees. The overall picture was quite different in the women’s game. In 2021 the international transfer spend grew by 72.8% on the year before, albeit to a total of $2.1m – a level very different to the men’s game. There was also a substantial growth in the number of players transferred, the 1,304 international deals up by a quarter on 2020. Although English clubs were lower down the list of spending in the women’s game, the WSL recorded the biggest international transfer in 2021, when Hanna Bennison joined Everton from Rosengård.Just over 30 years ago, Julia Cameron’s agent gave her the immortally bad advice that no one was going to be interested in a book about creativity. “What on earth are you doing?” the agent demanded. Instead of shelving her manuscript, Cameron photocopied it and started selling it by hand. She got a new agent, signed a deal with mind, body and spirit publisher Tarcher Books and in 1992 they released The Artist’s Way with an initial print run of 9,000 copies. Since then, more than 4m have been sold around the world. It sounds like a fairy story, but this was a book born of struggle. Cameron’s was a life of precipitous highs and lows. Born in 1948, she embarked on a successful journalistic career in her 20s, writing for the Washington Post and Rolling Stone magazine. In 1975, she married the up-and-coming director Martin Scorsese and worked, as she says, as his “live-in-writer” on classic films such as Taxi Driver and New York, New York. But their union ended when Cameron discovered Liza Minnelli’s silk shirts in Scorsese’s wardrobe and found herself in a classic Hollywood downward spiral of addiction. She had begun to see cocaine “not as a problem, but as a solution”, she recalls in her memoir, Floor Sample. She was also an “out of control” alcoholic. “I was,” she writes, “not OK.” It was the subsequent time spent getting sober that helped Cameron develop the ideas that she would turn into The Artist’s Way. Inspired by the Alcoholics Anonymous model, the book offers a programme for “artistic recovery”. Split into 12 chapters designed to be worked through a week at a time, it aims to teach people to unlock their creativity. There are weekly challenges and exercises designed to foster inspiration and overcome the doubts that block creative work. Alongside these weekly tasks, Cameron suggests writing “morning pages” every day. The idea is that you just get words down to help you override your internal censor and develop new ideas and perspectives, by writing at least three pages of longhand, stream-of-consciousness prose before trying any other work. She also invites her readers to take themselves on weekly “artist’s dates”, time set aside to nurture “creative consciousness” by engaging with art, going to a gallery, going for a walk or watching a film – whatever your “inner artist” may appreciate. The book doesn’t offer an easy route to financial reward. Cameron promises her readers “many doors” will open, but these are artistic doors, not the doors of literary agencies. The big claims she makes are all about “creative recovery”. This, she says, is “a teachable, trackable spiritual process”. That’s right: spiritual. Like the AA, The Artist’s Way asks you to put trust in the “Great Creator” – or whatever non-denominational higher being you think will help you unleash your potential. This god talk comes alongside an emphasis on self-care that may strike some readers as solipsistic. “Be particularly alert to any suggestion that you have become selfish or different,” counsels Cameron, not because you may have a problem, but because such suggestions may block you. A chapter entitled Recovering a Sense of Compassion turns out to be about helping yourself rather than other people. Readers should also expect vague, unsubstantiated references to the kind of “brain research” that lets us know that “showering is an artist brain activity”. It’s harder to be sceptical about the practical success of The Artist’s Way. It isn’t just that the book has sold so many copies since Cameron ignored her agent’s advice, it’s that it has generated significant results. Musicians as varied as Alicia Keys, Pete Townshend and Kelly Lee Owens, and writers such as Patricia Cornwell have acknowledged the help that the book has given them. “It completely changed my life,” the actor and director Kerry Washington says on the back of my copy. There’s also a quote on from the multimillion-selling author Elizabeth Gilbert: “Without The Artist’s Way there would have been no Eat, Pray, Love.” Cameron is capitalising on the anniversary with a sequel of sorts, Seeking Wisdom, which promises “a spiritual path to deeper creativity”. But it has to be noted that not everyone is impressed by these kinds of guides. “They are a total con,” says Lucy Ellmann, the author of the multi-multi-award-winning Ducks, Newburyport. “The time spent reading these books should be spent reading Dickens. Or at least writing.” But it’s difficult to deny Cameron’s continuing influence. Her sunny American outlook even resonates here in the rainy UK. While researching this article, I’ve asked several classes of creative writing students if they’ve heard of the book and each time two or three talk enthusiastically about the morning pages. Just after her novel Olive was selected as a Waterstones paperback of the year, author Emma Gannon told me: “I took up The Artist’s Way one miserable Christmas when I’d tried and failed for the umpteenth time to write a novel. There was something about the book, not just the content but the feel of it, the tone of it, how supportive it is, that allowed me to follow my creativity and unblock myself. I absolutely feel indebted to Julia Cameron for helping me get out of my rut.” If the increased attention The Artist’s Way has been getting since the spring 2020 lockdown is anything to go by, Gannon isn’t the only one Cameron has boosted. It was reported that sales of the book doubled in the UK in the first half of the year, and Cameron even found herself being interviewed by Russell Brand on his Under the Skin podcast during that gloomy first April of the pandemic. “Many of us are trapped indoors, we’re restless, we’re feeling claustrophobic, …we’re feeling that events are beyond our control,” Cameron said, “but what we do have control over is taking the pen to the page.” She recommended the exercises in The Artist’s Way as a method of gaining “confidence, security, enthusiasm and hopefully a little bit of frivolity. Right now we desperately need frivolity.” On that score, at least, it’s hard to argue. It feels like a message that might even help us through the year ahead.I was born in 1998, at the tail end of the decade I love. Titanic was in cinemas, Britney Spears released … Baby One More Time, Geri Halliwell left the Spice Girls and Apple released the bright turquoise iMac computer. I was too young to appreciate those things, but my first home in Mansfield was full of 90s decor. I loved the fun of it. The hallway was decorated in tongue and groove wood panelling, with green and terracotta wallpaper. We had a tangerine kitchen with bottle green appliances, and my bedroom was covered in suns and moons. Homes weren’t decorated for Instagram then. People were less self-conscious and weren’t afraid to experiment. I moved house about 15 times during my childhood but anything that harked back to the 90s felt like home. As a teenager, I enjoyed discovering discarded 90s memorabilia in car boot sales and charity shops. I was diagnosed with Asperger’s and came out as gay at 15. I was often painted as different, so toned down my interests. But in the sixth form, I encountered other people with eclectic tastes, so I started having fun and dressing in Levi’s 501s, silk shirts and baggy Sweater Shop and Kangol jumpers – the quintessential 90s uniform. I’d built a collection of 90s tech at home. Dad gave me a Kenwood hi-fi for my 14th birthday – he’d got it for £40 in an online auction. I bought the debut 1998 iMac for £50 on eBay, and an old Sanyo TV after seeing an ad for it in the newspaper. I use them all, although the functionality of the computer is limited. I sourced every Now That’s What I Call Music CD from 1990 to 1999 from record stores, charity shops and eBay, and collected hardback interior books from the decade, including Laura Ashley catalogues for £2 each. I am now an illustrator and much of my work is inspired by the 90s. Two years ago, my boyfriend, Matthew, and I moved into a cottage with my parents in Bakewell, Derbyshire. Mum and Dad gave me free rein over decor. I gave Mum a full Laura Ashley bedroom with pale pink and white floral bedding. The kitchen has 90s yellow appliances, like the ones my gran had. In the living room, there is a CD tower with albums from Blur, the Cardigans, Dubstar and Steps. A Spice Girls calendar hangs on the door and we have an old VHS player. I watch my Vicar of Dibley box set on it. I drive an old blue Austin Metro and recently bought myself a project car, a 1984 beige Toyota Carina, to do up. Matthew wasn’t interested in the 90s when we started dating, but after three years together, my interest has rubbed off on him, too, and we share clothes. Everyone in our small village knows me because of how I dress. When I go into Manchester or Sheffield, I blend in more, especially now the 90s are popular again. I used to get looks that suggest I’ve dropped in from another planet. It’s great to see the resurgence but it’s forced up prices, which is annoying. I saw a shirt I got for £1 in a charity shop bin years ago selling for £60 in a vintage shop. During lockdown, I shared videos of my home on TikTok. I wanted to bring nostalgia and joy during a miserable time. People messaged me saying it reminded them of the homes and relatives they loved; others have offered to send me memorabilia. I’ve met friends online who are into different decades and we send each other charity shop finds. I have one friend who is obsessed with the 70s; I’ve sent him Pyrex glasses and a candlewick bedspread. Socially and politically, we’ve come a long way since the 90s. As a gay man, it’s not a decade that would have been easy for me but I’m happy enjoying its legacy. It still holds relevance. Watching the Free Britney case was upsetting: I like to watch Top of the Pops reruns from when she’s a teenager and it’s sad to think how bad it became for her. But I’ve loved seeing the big comebacks, such as Steps and the Spice Girls. I don’t take my interest too seriously. I have a smartphone, I use the internet, but my personal taste has expanded into a lifestyle I find fun. When people ask me why I do it, there is no other reason than it brings me joy. Isn’t that enough? • As told to Deborah Linton Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.comThe hack Smashed your favourite powder compact? Can’t find a loose powder you like? A homemade version could work, says the online DIY beauty movement. The promise With a torrent of blogs offering recipes, making your own face powder from unlikely baking cupboard essentials like this could replace compacts. The test Of the hacks I’ve tried so far, this one hits closest to home. In my early teens, getting face powder for my skin tone was not happening in Wales, so I tried creating one for my oily teenage skin using Bournville cocoa powder – and was left with a face covered in grim chocolatey paste. I have upgraded my method, applying pure cocoa powder over my foundation with a big brush. The result was patchy and a smidge too dark, so I added a little cornflour and arrowroot powder, as recommended in the online recipe, and that was pretty mattifying – like traditional loose powder. At a push, I could use this, but the cornflower does make me look a little grey and deathly. Even as a goth, I want to look semi-alive. The verdict It works, but not very well. And applying it makes me feel sad for the young me (and others who went through this), because we deserved better back then – and we certainly do now. So for a translucent, non-cakey, setting powder, I prefer MAC Blot Powder (£24).On the day after Christmas, 56-year-old Daryn Worster, a long-haul truck driver, was seriously injured in a crash near Grants, New Mexico. He died from injuries sustained during the crash. Though Worster worked for a trucking firm, his wife Joani said she received no help from the company in bringing her husband home from New Mexico to Cedar Rapids, Iowa, where he would be laid to rest. “I can’t get a hold of their insurance director. I’ve left four voicemails,” said Joani Worster. “Which hurts. I first asked if I could ride down and pick him up as they retrieved their truck, but they never got back to me.” She is one of many surviving loved ones of truck drivers in America who die on the job, and feel left to figure out the logistics of retrieving the body as many trucking companies refuse to offer any assistance. Joani Worster was able to contact Truckers Final Mile, a non-profit dedicated to helping bereaved families coordinate and pay for the costs of transporting a truck driver who lost their life on the road, or helping with travel costs in the case of an injury or illness. “They’ve given me and our four kids some breathing room. We’re paycheck to paycheck with no savings,” added Worster. “I would still be trying to find the money and means to bring him home.” Truck driving has long been one of the most dangerous jobs in the US, with truck drivers experiencing fatalities and serious injuries on the job at significantly higher rates than other occupations. According to data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, 843 truck drivers lost their lives on the job in 2019. Truck drivers killed on the job accounted for more than one in seven workplace fatalities in the US, with a fatality rate of 26.8 per 100,000 workers, compared with the rate for all US workers of 3.5 fatalities for every 100,000 workers. A 2014 survey conducted by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (Niosh) found truck drivers having to work under tight delivery schedules, through fatigue, dangerous weather conditions and inadequate training as contributing factors to high fatalities and injuries among truck drivers. Covid-19 has increased risks to truck drivers and worsened working conditions as drivers have faced reduced access to services such as food and bathrooms. For unionized truck drivers, this issue is non-existent, as language in master agreements covering over 100,000 truck drivers ensures companies are responsible for transporting workers and covering expenses in the case of a fatality, illness, or injury on the job, according to Lamont Byrd, director of the Teamsters’ safety and health department. “With deregulation, there’s been this race to the bottom, and these companies have really made driving being a truck driver really tough – long hours, tough work, not paid for all of the work that’s done, and they’ve really trashed the industry. That’s one of the things as a union, we’re trying to fix,” Byrd said. Today, only a fraction of the more than 3.5 million truck drivers in the US are represented by unions, leaving many workers to rely on the whims of management to assist truck drivers and their families in the case of a fatality, injury or illness on the job. Robert Palm, an over-the-road (long-haul) truck driver since March 1981, started Truckers Final Mile after experiencing several instances through his career when a loved one or himself was abandoned by a trucking company after an accident. In 1993, he lost his stepbrother to a trucking accident, and his family was left to retrieve him and his belongings and bring him home. In 1997, his family had to collect him several hundred miles from home after a collision put him in the hospital and the company he worked for provided no assistance for him or his family. Then in 2010, his appendix ruptured while on the road, and he had to drive himself to an emergency room and experienced the same issue, with the trucking firm he was working for providing no assistance. He was forced to arrange and pay for his own transportation from St Louis, Missouri, to his home in Albuquerque, New Mexico. Shortly after an incident in 2012 when he stopped to assist a truck driver who overturned their trailer into a ravine, he began looking into forming a non-profit to provide assistance to truck drivers and their families who experience accidents on the road and aren’t helped by their employers. “To our knowledge, with eight years’ of experience doing this charity, there’s no law, no statute, no regulation, no mandate to compel any employer or any company to bring any driver home for any reason,” said Palm. “It’s a thing a lot of drivers need to be educated about because they have the assumption they would be taken care of by their employer.” Palm asserted there were several trucking companies that do provide assistance for drivers and their families in the case of an accident. “There are those that can’t, won’t, or they simply don’t help bring a driver home. But they’ll go retrieve the truck, they’ll go get the load,” said Palm. “This happens every day.” Richard Ivey, 53, of Shelby, North Carolina, was at work truck driving in Ohio, when he stopped to assist a mother and her infant child who had been in a traffic collision. While stopped on the side of the road, another vehicle hit them and Ivey was killed on 28 December. “He was going down the interstate, when he noticed a wreck that had already occurred. He stopped and the lady was trying to get someone to help her get her infant son out of the vehicle,” said Ivey’s daughter, Kristen Ivey. “Another vehicle ended up hitting the car with the baby inside. The baby and mother sustained minor injuries. My dad’s were unfortunately fatal. He was killed on impact.” Her father’s employer referred them to Truckers Final Mile to assist in retrieving the body and the expenses required to transport him to North Carolina. The death was a shock to Ivey’s daughters, who had just reconnected with their father after five years and re-established a relationship. “My father was someone who’d give the shirt off his back,” added Kristen Ivey. “He told us he wanted to die doing what he loved and that he did. He was on the road like he wanted, helping someone else. Don’t take your loved ones for granted because we never know what tomorrow holds.”20. Summertime Sadness (2012) Apparently inspired by the suicide of a friend and remixed by Cedric Gervais into that rarest of things – a party-starting Lana Del Rey banger – Summertime Sadness was a hook-laden highlight of her second album Born to Die, later becoming a key text in the #prettywhenyoucry “sad girl” aesthetic Del Rey inadvertently spawned. 19. High By the Beach (2015) High By the Beach sounds superb: shimmering organ, exhausted-sounding washes of synth, a trap rhythm that seems to have been sapped of all its swaggering machismo. It perfectly fits the song’s mood of weariness, an early sign of its author’s wariness about her celebrity: “I can’t survive if this is all that’s real.” 18. Blue Banisters (2021) There was a time when Lana Del Rey singing about riding a tractor in Oklahoma would have seemed no more likely than Lana Del Rey doing a cover of the Hokey Cokey, but here we are. Even by her more recent standards, the music here is minimal, which only adds to the song’s mood of creeping disquiet. 17. Norman Fucking Rockwell (2019) It’s hard not to be cheered by the lyrics of Norman Fucking Rockwell: after umpteen songs in which she pledged undying fealty to some appalling-sounding character, it offers the sound of Lana Del Rey telling one of them where to get off in pleasingly direct terms. Also: fantastic chorus. 16. Wild at Heart (2021) It was probably only a matter of time until Lana Del Rey named a song after a David Lynch movie – Lynch’s 80s collaborations with singer Julee Cruise have clearly been a major influence from the start. Wild at Heart is a striking, hazy imagining of a world without Lana Del Rey in it: a fantasy of escape from celebrity. 15. Terrence Loves You (2015) Lana Del Rey’s favourite song from Honeymoon, apparently because it was “jazzy”. It’s jazzy in the sense that a torch song is jazzy, but – beyond the parched, reverb-heavy guitars that recall Mazzy Star – the most obvious influence is John Barry’s Theme From Midnight Cowboy, echoed in the lovely descending vocal melody. 14. Lust for Life (ft the Weeknd) (2014) Like Dory Previn’s Mary C Brown and the Hollywood Sign, Lust for Life is haunted by the 1932 suicide of failed actor Peg Entwhistle: like the relentless pulsing synthesiser in the background, the allusions to it add a dark undertow to what initially sound like bullish assertions of strength from Del Rey and Abel Tesfaye: “We’re masters of our own fate.” 13. Hope is a Dangerous Thing for a Woman Like Me to Have – But I Have It (2019) A cynic might suggest that, from its title to its lyrics (“24/7 Sylvia Plath”, “spilling my guts with the Bowery bums is the only love I’ve ever known”), this is a song that teeters on the verge of self-parody. But it’s hard to be cynical while it’s playing – just a piano and voice, it’s the model of elegant simplicity. 12. National Anthem (2012) The height of Lana Del Rey in Stepford-Wife-as-pop-star mode, National Anthem pitches her blank vocal delivering satirical sex-and-materialism lyrics – “Money is the reason we exist, everybody knows it” – against jarring musical euphoria: a skyscraping chorus, a string arrangement with a hint of Bitter Sweet Symphony about it. 11. Mariners Apartment Complex (2018) With its song titles borrowed from Neil Young and its lyrical nods to Joni Mitchell, Norman Fucking Rockwell! is an album immersed in Laurel Canyon’s late 60s singer-songwriter scene, an inspiration that finds its fullest expression on Mariners Apartment Complex, a beautifully sullen, icy update of said scene’s folk-based style. 10. West Coast (2014) The first evidence of Ultraviolence’s sonic shift – aided by Dan Auerbach of the Black Keys – into more guitar-driven territory: the initial riff is equal parts Blondie’s Atomic and the Beatles’ And I Love Her, the lyrics a tribute to a mythologised California, the sudden slowing of tempo that announces the chorus is fabulous. 9. Black Bathing Suit (2021) Lana Del Rey’s lockdown song, which captures something of the lockdown experience by being impressively scattered. The lyrics leap without warning from posturing (“Let me show you how bad girls do”) to tearily confessional (“I’m not friends with my mother”), the music from exquisitely controlled – the tempo shifts in the chorus – to unravelled and chaotic. 8. White Dress (2021) Tellingly, Lana Del Rey’s songs have gone from fetishising fame and success to yearning for a life without either. A distant spiritual cousin of Joni Mitchell’s For Free – which she covered – White Dress breathily suggests she was happier as a waitress or unknown singer: ironically it’s set to the kind of irresistible tune that sent her Chemtrails Over the Country Club album to No 1. 7. Love (2017) An ambiguous ode to youth: the lyrical message is be-young-be-foolish-be-happy but the tone of the vocal coolly indifferent, there’s something noticeably ominous about the music. How you take it probably depends on how old you are, but there’s no arguing with the power of the tune, or the sweet reference to the Beach Boys’ troubled ballad Don’t Worry Baby. 6. Ride (2012) Released in the aftermath Born to Die’s success – and appended to the album’s deluxe Paradise Edition – Ride was produced by Rick Rubin and drenched in strings, but beneath them lurks a supremely classy country-soul song: for someone whose vocal abilities were mocked early on, Del Rey’s octave-leaping performance is nervily powerful. 5. The Greatest (2019) Shortly after the release of Norman Fucking Rockwell!, Lana Del Rey shared a cover of Rolling Stone with Elton John. You can hear his influence on The Greatest, a gorgeously elegiac song that could have made it on to Goodbye Yellow Brick Road: its everything-is-screwed mood – “I want everything to feel like it used to” – however, is pure Trump-era America. 4. Brooklyn Baby (2014) Self-baiting autobiography, or bitchy hipster character assassination? It isn’t clear, and perhaps it doesn’t matter: just luxuriate in Brooklyn Baby’s swooning melody, the lovely moments where the beat drops out, leaving just Del Rey, a trebly guitar and the buzzing of an amplifier. Lou Reed was meant to sing backing vocals, but died the day of the session. 3. Young and Beautiful (2013) By some distance the best thing on the star-studded soundtrack to Baz Luhrmann’s The Great Gatsby, Young and Beautiful is Lana Del Rey at her most haunting. Co-opted by rather than commissioned for the film, its saga of fleeting youth and celebrity fits its story perfectly, the melody is exquisite. 2. Venice Bitch (2018) Nearly 10 minutes long, Venice Bitch hypnotises the listener for its entire duration. It shifts, subtly, from tender folk rock – replete with references to Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp; Young’s 1970 album Déjà Vu – to a heady swirl of synthesiser and guitar feedback, to a refrain based on Tommy James’s Crimson and Clover. It’s expansive, experimental and enveloping: a triumph. 1. Video Games (2011) With Lana Del Rey a constant, influential presence in pop over the last decade, it’s easy to forget how striking her first appearance was. She’s written umpteen fantastic songs since, but Video Games is the kind of once-in-a-career song that stops you dead in your tracks: the slow building strings, the funereal beat, the lyric’s unsettling combination of romance and dread, the glassy-eyed vocal, the sense that it was utterly unlike anything else happening in pop at the time. As introductions to a new pop phenomenon go, it may well be the best of the past 20 years: the passing of time has done nothing to dim its potency.As panto season draws to an end, Britain’s theatres are counting the cost of another Christmas wrecked by Covid, with cancelled shows decimating income during a traditionally lucrative period. York Theatre Royal’s Cinderella – whose star and understudy both had to self-isolate – cancelled 12 performances with an estimated loss of up to £200,000. Theatr Clwyd’s Beauty and the Beast achieved ticket sales comparable to pre-Covid times but the Welsh government’s Covid restrictions, introduced on Boxing Day, led the venue to cancel all remaining performances, worth an estimated £500,000. At Scarborough’s Stephen Joseph theatre, almost half of Jack and the Beanstalk’s run was lost because of coronavirus cases in the company; now the theatre hopes to attract viewers to an online version this month. Liverpool Everyman’s rock’n’roll pantomime Robin Hood, which ends this Saturday, had almost a third of performances cancelled, amounting to at least £100,000 in ticket income – never mind the lost ice-cream sales. Christmas was a critical period, said its CEO, Mark Da Vanzo. The financial success of the panto, postponed from 2020, “underpins the rest of the artistic programme throughout the year”. Robin Hood’s first week was cancelled because Covid cases prevented the set from being supplied in time. An additional 15 shows were lost owing to cast and crew illness. “If we get through to Saturday, we’ll have delivered 50 shows out of a planned 71,” said Da Vanzo. “That’s pretty good going considering everything we’ve had to face with Omicron and the isolation rules.” The cast included two “swing” performers, who fill in for other roles when required, and an understudy was available to cover. Without them, “we’d have lost even more shows”, said Da Vanzo. “Once Covid got into the company, it was very hard to stop it transmitting.” The Christmas season at the Everyman and its sister theatre Liverpool Playhouse was supported by a grant of £283,599 from Arts Council England’s Culture Recovery Fund and Da Vanzo noted that last year’s VAT reduction had also helped. It meant the theatre did not need to apply for a share of the government’s £60m emergency funding announced in December to tackle Omicron’s impact. Perth theatre was among the venues to cancel a festive show mid-run when new Covid restrictions came into effect in Scotland on 27 December. Its Cinderella opened in November to rave reviews. Written and directed by ugly sister Barrie Hunter, it became the theatre’s bestselling panto to date and drew an audience from surrounding areas including Dundee, Fife and Stirling, said chief executive Nick Williams. “It’s a huge influx of people and the amount of money they spend is vital not just for us but for the city centre.” But on 14 December, first minister Nicola Sturgeon asked the population to minimise contact with people in other households. A 50% drop in sales ensued, said Williams. The restrictions brought in on 27 December to minimise risk of transmission included one-metre physical distancing and a cap of 200 people in indoor theatres. Cinderella became unviable: “the whole thing just collapsed”. Perth theatre usually seats around 500; its audience would have been reduced to under 80. The theatre was on course to make 22% more income from its panto than in 2019, but ultimately 40% of the run was cancelled. The impact would be felt all year, said Williams, as audience confidence had been dented. The theatre is waiting to see how much assistance will come from the Scottish government’s mitigation fund. New restrictions in Wales – including the same 200 audience cap but a greater social distancing requirement of two metres – led Theatr Clwyd to cancel Beauty and the Beast from Boxing Day to 15 January. With the secondary income that comes from bar and merchandise sales, the theatre projects a loss exceeding £500,000. Even theatres that cancelled relatively few performances have felt the hit. Bristol Old Vic’s Robin Hood lost seven shows from a run of 52. The theatre took 70% of the income that would have been expected pre-Covid. Twelve performances of Cinderella at York Theatre Royal were cancelled, with two extra shows added. But chief executive Tom Bird said attendance had been encouraging and that 64% of this year’s audience were making their first ever trip to York Theatre Royal. Other venues warn of an unstable environment caused by Omicron and the government’s plan B. Manchester’s Royal Exchange cancelled just a handful of performances of its Christmas show but the theatre said audience attendance had become unpredictable, with up to 40% of tickets sold within 48 hours before a performance. Pre-Covid, the peak time for bookings would have been eight weeks before. When a show is cancelled, buyers can generally choose a refund, credit note or to donate the ticket price. Several theatres report a dropoff in donations. “In the first lockdown we had a significant proportion of people donating – that has decreased,” said Caroline Routh, executive director of Scarborough’s Stephen Joseph theatre. In 2019, Covid meant that its planned festive spectacular, The Snow Queen, became a spirited one-woman show instead. In 2020, “we were able to go with a five-hander show, which is our normal size”. Covid cases among the Jack and the Beanstalk cast meant 14 performances were cancelled, including during the busiest week in the run-up to Christmas, with the loss in ticket sales estimated at £35,000. However, a grant from the charitable Weston Culture Fund was used to underwrite risk and the view from this seaside resort is rather different. “A lot of theatres have pressure on their Christmas show,” said Routh. “But we make our money in the summer.”Like a lot of people, for many years I said yes to things I didn’t want to do. This was a combination of conditioning – it pays to be “nice” – vague fear of missing out and basic conflict avoidance. Without giving it much thought, it seemed to me there was no easy way to turn things down without causing offence or running against the grain of my own personality. Hostage negotiators and people in business presumably had workarounds for this inhibition, but whatever their tactics, they weren’t available to the rest of us. All we had, growing up, was the maxim “Just say no” – a slogan so useless it became a universally recognised and decades-long joke. A lot has changed since then. In the past 10 years, a language has developed, mainly from social justice and feminist movements, but also from academia, to describe latterly opaque states of discomfort and the right we have to resist them. Chief among these are terms reaching to describe the more intangible end of labour inequality. If the term “sexism” was popularised in the late 1960s to frame basic double standards between men and women, modern iterations seek out more subtle disparities. Years before the phrase “mental load” took off, I recall a friend describing, via thousands of words, how her husband was “very good” at doing 50% of the childcare, while relying wholly on her as his line manager. (The example she used has stayed with me: he would, she said, “gladly” take the kids to a birthday party at the weekend, but it wouldn’t occur to him in a million years that they had to turn up with gifts, which needed buying and wrapping.) The phrases that evolved to address this imbalance are good, and they work. In fact, “mental load” and its adjacent term, “emotional labour”, work so well, they have been absorbed into common usage and promptly lost much of their original meaning. Emotional labour was, apparently, coined in the 1980s in academia to describe service industry jobs requiring the faking of a cheerful demeanour. It doesn’t mean that now. With trigger-happy application, you can bolt that phrase on to almost any situation, conversation or obligation you’d rather not be involved in, and back out feeling gloriously wronged. I say this without judgment. I do it all the time. My favourite, and by far the most useful, of these newish locutions is the phrase: “I’m not comfortable with that.” It’s just brilliant. It can get you out of almost anything. It hints at some unspeakable trigger event, and as such forestalls most pushback. It also has in its favour that particularly American brand of officiousness that evokes my other favourite word, “boundaries”. One can ditch disagreeable people left, right and centre these days via use of the word “boundaries” while escaping any feelings of guilt. I am not being mean: I am merely protecting myself from your inadequate boundaries. It’s clear that this get-out-of-jail-free card is not how the language was intended to be used, although I’m inclined to think – possibly delusionally – that even in diluted form, the net result is still good. Being able to politely back out of something without tying yourself in knots is useful, particularly for women socialised to comply. Feeling less responsible for other adults’ unruly emotions is a good thing, too. Common use of these terms is also an expression of individualistic self-advancement that has little or nothing to do with the power imbalance the language was created to address. Real-world application of academic language is notoriously sloppy, and can lead to bizarre inversions; this is no different. And yet, once you start, it is almost impossible to stop. You don’t even have to say the words, you just have to think them. A small example that I’m still trying to process. A while ago, I received a very long and angry email from a woman who accused me of slighting her. The offending interaction had occurred two years earlier, and while her email seemed unreasonable, she was clearly upset and I was, in the first instance, alarmed. I’m not obliged to engage with everyone who demands it; on the other hand, the distress was real, and perhaps I could assuage it if I spent enough time on the reply. Dithering, I forwarded the whole thing to a friend, who took one look at it and made a summary judgment. “She’s asking you to do emotional labour,” he said, and bingo: I was off the hook. Not only off the hook, but righteously indignant: I’m not replying; she’s a vampire; case closed. Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnistIt has taken a year and a half but the UK economy has regained the ground lost during the early stages of the Covid-19 pandemic. A better than anticipated performance last November means national output is now 0.7% higher than it was in February 2020. Other countries reached this milestone sooner, with the US, for example, already operating well above its previous peak. Even so, Britain has experienced what economists call a V-shaped recession, with a precipitous drop in activity in March and April 2020 followed by a brisk – if occasionally interrupted – recovery. That pattern is explained by the nature of the Covid shock. Governments imposed lockdowns in an attempt to prevent the virus spreading and, once the restrictions were eased, businesses that had been closed reopened and economies bounced back. The UK economy contracted by less during the financial crisis of 2008-09 than it did in 2020 but took much longer to regain the lost ground. The economy is still smaller than it would have been had the pandemic never happened, and a key question over the coming months will be whether it can get back to its pre-Covid trend or whether there will be a permanent loss of output. The Bank of England and the Office for Budget Responsibility both expect Covid-19 to result in some scarring, even though the resilience of the labour market means estimates of the lasting damage have been gradually scaled back over the past 18 months. The 0.9% monthly increase in output in November was down to a combination of factors: the easing of supply chain bottlenecks that had been hitting manufacturing and construction firms; consumers shopping early for Christmas; and people feeling more confident about going out to enjoy themselves. The arrival of the Omicron variant has muddied the waters. It looks inevitable that output fell in December owing to widespread staff absences, the introduction of the government’s plan B restrictions, and individuals becoming more cautious. January will be another tough month, so the chances are that the economy will fall back below its February 2020 peak. If, as expected, the government decides to ease restrictions in England later this month, output will recover again in February and March. But as Paul Dales of Capital Economics notes, in April the economy will be hit by a double whammy of rocketing energy bills and higher taxes. As is often the case with the UK economy, it will be one step forward, one step back.Britney Spears has hit back at her younger sister, Jamie Lynn, who made allegations about the singer’s mental health and behaviour. Speaking to Good Morning America in an interview to promote her forthcoming memoir, Jamie Lynn Spears alleged that Britney once locked them both in a room while holding a knife. She also claimed that her sister had screamed in her face during the Covid-19 lockdown, and described her behaviour over the years as “erratic, paranoid and spiralling”. On Twitter, Britney responded that she and Jamie Lynn rarely spent time together “15 years ago” – the era in which Spears was experiencing a very public period of mental ill health – and said: “So why are they even talking about that unless she wants to sell a book at my expense?” Jamie Lynn was also asked why Britney had objected to her sister performing a remix of her songs at the 2017 Radio Disney Awards, which Britney said in July “hurt me deeply”. “I was doing a tribute to honour my sister and all the amazing things that she’s done,” Jamie Lynn said. “I don’t think she’s personally upset with me about that. Truthfully, I don’t know why that bothers her.” Britney responded: “It may sound like a silly thing to most people, but I wrote a lot of my songs and my sister was the baby. She never had to work for anything. Everything was always given to her!” She claimed that Jamie Lynn said the performance wasn’t her idea. She sarcastically wished her sister success with her memoir. In a subsequent statement posted to Instagram, Jamie Lynn questioned the veracity of Britney’s remarks. “It’s become exhausting when conversations and texts we have in private don’t match what you post on social media,” she wrote to her sister. “I know you’re going through a lot and I never want to diminish that, but I also can’t diminish myself.” She said it was hard to “rationalise to my oldest daughter why our family continues to get death threats, as a result of their aunt’s vague and accusatory posts, especially when we know she could tell the truth, and put an end to all of it in one second if she wanted to”. She went on: “Sadly, after a lifetime of staying silent, I have come to realise this isn’t going to be a reality, and I may have to set the record straight myself in order to protect mine and my family’s wellbeing.” She denied that her book was all about Britney and that she had ridden her sister’s coattails to fame. “I can’t help that I was born a Spears, too, and that some of my experiences involve my sister. I’ve worked hard since before I was even a teenager, and I’ve built my career in spite of just being someone’s little sister.” Jamie Lynn said she was “speaking my truth” to “put an end to the unhealthy chaos that has controlled my life for so long”. Britney concluded her original post to say that her family had “ruined my dreams 100 billion per cent and try to make me look like the crazy one … My family loves to pull me down and hurt me always so I am disgusted with them.” She also pointed the finger at the media and the entertainment industry, saying it had “always been extremely hateful” to her. “I’ve given enough … MORE than enough … I was never given back what I want.” In November, Britney Spears successfully terminated the conservatorship that governed her life and career for nearly 14 years. She said soon after that she believed her family “should all be in jail” for the “demoralising and degrading” treatment she experienced under the arrangement. Jamie Lynn has made few public comments on the conservatorship and her role in its management is unclear. Posting on Instagram in June, she said: “Maybe I didn’t support [Britney the way] the public would like me to with the hashtag on a public platform, but I can assure you that I supported my sister long before there was a hashtag, and I’ll support her long after”. Jamie Lynn’s memoir, Things I Should Have Said, is published on 18 January by Hachette’s Christian imprint, Worthy Books. In October, the US mental health charity This Is My Brave declined her offer to donate a portion of the book’s proceeds.For three months they were subject to whims of a roaring volcano. Now residents on the small Spanish island of La Palma are wrestling with another dilemma: what do with the millions of cubic metres of lava and ash it left behind. The volcano rumbled for 85 days, ejecting ash and rivers of lava that swallowed more than 1,000 homes, cut off highways and suffocated the lush banana plantations that drive the island’s economy. The eruption was declared over on Christmas Day, leaving residents grappling with the daunting task of rebuilding. “It’s brutal,” said Javier Moreno, one of La Palma’s 80,000 residents. “The affected area looks as if they erected the Berlin Wall, but made of black lava.” In recent days about 2,000 of the 7,000 evacuated residents have been allowed to return home. Many arrived to find layers of powdery ash coating their homes, patios and plants – remnants of the more than 200m cubic metres of lava and ash expelled by the volcano. “It’s a continuous battle,” said Moreno. “You clear it away today, tomorrow the wind blows over a few more centimetres.” In parts of the island the ash buried homes, engulfed verdant plantations and accumulated in metres-high banks. The lava and ash reached beyond the island; lava cascading into the ocean during the eruptions created two new peninsulas, measuring 44 and five hectares, while underwater footage revealed marine life covered in ash. While round-the-clock efforts to clear the ash have succeeded in stockpiling some of it in specific areas such as a former quarry on the island, removal of the red-hot flows of lava that sprawled into neighbourhoods and farmland has proved trickier. “They continue to store heat, with temperatures of more than 500 degrees [Celsius] in some parts,” said Inés Galindo, a geologist who heads the Canary Islands unit of Spain’s Geological and Mining Institute. Once the lava cools – a process that could take months – it might be easier in some cases to build on top of it rather than breaking it up and removing it, she added. As researchers and officials scramble to figure out what could be done with the materials spewed out by the volcano, they’ve looked to history. In the nearby island of Lanzarote, a six-year eruption in 1730 left parts of the island covered in volcanic material. “The particles were porous and able to retain water in the soil … they took advantage of it to plant vineyards,” said Galindo. She and her team are now studying the properties of the ash in La Palma to see whether it could be used in a similar way while another team of researchers are probing whether the mineral-rich soil could be used as fertiliser. Regional officials, meanwhile, are exploring the possibility of using the ash to build homes, roads and bridges across the island. “It’s not an original idea, we’re using the techniques that the Romans used,” said Javier Juvera, an engineer with the department of public works in the Canary Islands. “The Romans worked with the ashes that came out of [Mount] Vesuvius, using them to build their basilicas and buildings.” His team is now working to determine whether the ash scattered across the island is similar to the volcanic ash used by the Romans to bind rock fragments. If so, it could give rise to a durable construction material and play a role in rebuilding the island, where regional officials have estimated the loss of buildings and infrastructure at more than €900m (£750m). Juvera described the ideas as a seemingly natural fit for a for an archipelago hewn from volcanic activity spanning millions of years. “In the Canary Islands we’re used to working with volcanic materials,” he said, citing the longstanding practice of mixing cement and material extracted from volcanic cones to build homes. Both Juvera and Galindo said it would be months before they had any definitive answers on what could be done with the blizzard of dark ash ejected by the volcano. “The quantity of materials is so enormous – there are images of homes that were practically buried in ash,” said Juvera. “But if we don’t find a value for it, it becomes waste.”Calls have been made in York for Prince Andrew to relinquish his title of Duke of York, with the city’s Labour MP calling it “untenable”. The demand by Rachael Maskell, the MP for York Central, echoed sentiments expressed by a senior councillor, Darryl Smalley, who said the association was tarnishing the city’s reputation. Maskell said: “It’s untenable for the Duke of York to cling on to his title another day longer; this association with York must end. There’s a very serious allegation made against this man of privilege and entitlement. I’m working with agencies to tackle sexual violence and misogyny.” Smalley, a Liberal Democrat who is an executive member for culture, leisure and communities on the city of York council, said it had been argued that Andrew losing titles was important to protect the military. “I think the vast majority of people in York feel exactly the same in protecting the reputation of the city.” Smalley said it would require an act of parliament to remove the title but that should not stop it happening because of the shame being brought on Andrew as Duke of York. “York is fantastic, we have got a lot to be proud of and one thing we don’t want is to be so burdened with this link to Prince Andrew.” Given the cost of living crisis and the scandal over the Covid parties in Downing Street, Smalley said he was not going to pretend that Prince Andrew was the number one issue for residents of York. “It is important for us as councillors and city leaders that we raise these concerns, just as servicemen and veterans did in their letter to the Queen. “It’s our duty really to make clear that we are very unhappy that despite him not using titles such as ‘His Royal Highness’ he still somehow retains the title of Duke of York. It seems strange to a lot of us here in York.”Burnley’s game at home to Leicester on Saturday has been called after the Premier League accepted that Covid and injuries had left Sean Dyche with insufficient players. Burnley applied for a postponement on the grounds that they did not have the minimum 13 outfield players and one goalkeeper to contest the match. On Thursday, the Burnley striker Chris Wood moved to Newcastle after his £25m release clause was activated. A league statement read: “The Premier League Board accepted Burnley’s application as the club does not have the required number of players available for the match, due to Covid-19 cases and injuries.” It is the fourth Burnley match this season postponed because of Covid, but the first time the request has come from them. They had another fixture, against Tottenham, postponed at short notice after heavy snow. That has left them with a number of games in hand on other clubs around them at the foot of the table. Their rearranged match against Watford is due to be played next Tuesday though must now be in doubt. Burnley were without seven players due to Covid-19 during last weekend’s 2-1 FA Cup loss to Championship side Huddersfield, a match also missed by Dyche after a positive test. Thomas Tuchel has said he would be fuming if Premier League clubs are trying to bend postponement rules. Chelsea’s request for a postponement because of seven Covid cases was rejected before their goalless draw at Wolves last month. Asked whether he thought some clubs were attempting to push the limits on postponements such as including general injuries and Africa Cup of Nations absentees, the manager replied: “I strongly, strongly hope that’s not the case, because otherwise I would be very, very angry. “Because we are doing everything to make games happen. And we were made to play when we thought we should maybe not. So I can only strongly hope that the rules are the same for everybody.” His Southampton counterpart, Ralph Hasenhüttl, called for more transparency from the Premier League over the issues behind the decisions to call off matches. “They have opened the door and you cannot be surprised that someone is walking through now,” he said. “I cannot say anything about the Covid situation there because this is normally the reason why you cancel games. You have no view, no transparency and you cannot say anything about that; the rest is speculation.” Sunday’s Everton v Chelsea Women’s Super League game has also been called off. “The decision was agreed between both teams and the FA following a number of positive Covid-19 test results and injuries at Everton,” Chelsea said.A total of 270 US doctors, scientists, healthcare professionals and professors have written an open letter to streaming company Spotify, expressing concern about medical misinformation on The Joe Rogan Experience podcast, listed as the platform’s most popular program. The letter asks the platform to “establish a clear and public policy to moderate misinformation on its platform”. It accuses controversial host Joe Rogan’s show of having a “concerning history of broadcasting misinformation, particularly regarding the Covid-19 pandemic”. The letter was first reported by Rolling Stone, which quoted Katrine Wallace, an epidemiologist at the University of Illinois Chicago school of public health, calling Rogan “a menace to public health” for airing anti-vaccine ideology. And, specifically, the letter calls out a highly controversial episode of the podcast from last December that features Robert Malone, a virologist who was involved in the mRNA vaccine technology that led to some of the leading Covid-19 vaccines but has since been criticised for spreading vaccine misinformation. The episode has been widely criticised for promoting baseless conspiracy theories. “Dr Malone used the JRE platform to promote numerous baseless claims, including several falsehoods about Covid-19 vaccines and an unfounded theory that societal leaders have ‘hypnotized’ the public. Many of these statements have already been discredited,” the letter said. In the episode, Malone espoused multiple baseless beliefs, including “mass formation psychosis” being responsible for people’s belief in vaccine efficacy, as well as the false claim that hospitals are financially incentivized to falsely diagnose deaths as having been caused by Covid-19. Rogan said on air: “There’s all these rumors that you would hear about what a hospital gets paid per Covid death and that the government gives them money and that they’re incentivized”, to which Malone replied: “It’s not rumors” and continued with further misinformation on the topic. The experts’ letter countered: “Mass-misinformation events of this scale have extraordinarily dangerous ramifications.” It continued: “As scientists, we face backlash and resistance as the public grows to distrust our research and expertise. As educators and science communicators, we are tasked with repairing the public’s damaged understanding of science and medicine. As physicians, we bear the arduous weight of a pandemic that has stretched our medical systems to their limits and only stands to be exacerbated by the anti-vaccination sentiment woven into this and other episodes of Rogan’s podcast.” The letter further asserts that Malone is “one of two recent JRE guests who has compared pandemic policies to the Holocaust. These actions are not only objectionable and offensive, but also medically and culturally dangerous.” Rogan, who has been described by the New York Times as “one of the most consumed media products on the planet”, has legions of devoted followers but throughout the pandemic has repeatedly spread misleading and false claims. The letter concluded: “This is not only a scientific or medical concern; it is a sociological issue of devastating proportions and Spotify is responsible for allowing this activity to thrive on its platform.” • This article was amended on 24 January 2022 because a heading said that the letter criticising Spotify came from “270 doctors”. As the piece stated, doctors were among the health and science specialists signing the letter.Why will I love it? It’s a fast-growing trailing plant in millennial pink. Its cultivar name, Tradescantia fluminensis quadricolor, means “four colours”, for its beautiful, variegated leaves, striped in green, silver, pale pink and red. Not only can it grow up to an inch a day, but you only need an inch of it to grow a new plant (hence its common name). So that’s a few birthday presents sorted. Light or shade? Bright indirect light. Where should I put it? A shelf adjacent to a sunny window in your kitchen or bathroom, so you can appreciate its attractive trailing stems. How do I keep it alive? It has succulent-like leaves, so you don’t have to worry a great deal about humidity. However, it will be worth misting the plant if you notice the leaves becoming shrivelled or the tips starting to brown. Water little and often and don’t allow the compost to dry out completely. It prefers warm temperatures, with a minimum of 12C. Did you know … Fruits sometimes form, with grey-brown seeds used in parts of Mexico to make a cold herbal tea named matali. The plant is mildly toxic if ingested, and can irritate skin.As the Omicron variant rips through the US, states in the south continue to report record case numbers amid serious concern around hospital staff shortages. In Mississippi, officials warned this week the hospital system was on the verge of crisis due to staff shortages as local media reported most hospitals in the state were at or had reached capacity during the Omicron surge. The state already faces a chronic nursing shortage, exacerbated by the pandemic, with approximately 3,000 positions vacant, according to a survey by the Mississippi Hospital Association. About a third of the state’s hospital nurses have left for other jobs, according to the research, many of them to better paying positions out of state. Last week Mississippi recorded its highest seven day average of new Covid cases, 7,185, since the pandemic began, according to state health department data. As of Thursday the number of people hospitalized with Covid in the state had risen to 1,332 people. Health department data showed that 90% of Covid deaths for the period between 16 December 2021 and 12 January 2022 had been among unvaccinated people. “The game has changed since the Delta wave,” said Dr Alan Jones, chancellor of clinical affairs at University of Mississippi Medical Center, the state’s largest hospital, during a Tuesday press conference reported by Mississippi Today. Jones continued: “The challenges we are facing are really around staffing. Compounding that is that this is a much more infectious variant, taking more staff out that we have in the workforce.” Covid vaccination rates in Mississippi remain among the lowest in the country and well below the national average, with just 49% of the population fully vaccinated. In neighboring Tennessee hospital officials also issued cautions over staff shortages due to infection with the now dominant Omicron variant. In Nashville, one of the city’s largest hospitals was being forced to reassign specialist staff to cope with the Omicron surge. As of Tuesday, Tennessee hit its peak Covid positive seven day average of 14,345 new cases, according to CDC data. “We have tons of employees that have Omicron Covid,” said Dr Todd Rice, associate professor of medicine at Vanderbilt University Medical Center, in an interview with local radio. “They may not be that sick, but they are infected. So, they are quarantined at home and not eligible to work.” Rice added: “One of our biggest problems is just finding employees to take care of patients because we have so many employees that are out sick.” State health officials in Louisiana on Wednesday reported 17,592 new cases of Covid-19, the highest number of new cases since the pandemic began and the fourth time since the end of December the state had set a new record. On the same day, the city of New Orleans reintroduced a mask mandate amid the soaring cases. The move stood in contrast to other large cities in the state that have so far opted against new mask mandates during the latest surge. Earlier in the week, staff at one of New Orleans’ large hospital systems voiced similar concerns around major staff shortages due to illness. The state’s Democratic governor, John Bel Edwards, on Thursday issued a warning about rising hospitalizations as officials noted the Omicron surge in the state had not reached its peak. “We know that the more people that end up in the hospital, the tougher things are going to be for our state,” Edwards said during a press conference. “The hospitals are trying to deliver care for anyone who needs care, not just for Covid patients.” Of the 2,081 people hospitalized with Covid in Louisiana, about 75% were not fully vaccinated, according to the state health department; 51% of the eligible population are vaccinated in the state, according to CDC data. In Alabama, on Tuesday, the state reported a record number of children hospitalized with coronavirus due to the highly transmissible variant. At least 60 children had been hospitalized, with 13 receiving treatment in intensive care. The state has also recorded a number of record case highs throughout January as officials continue to urge all those eligible to receive the Covid vaccine. State health officials told the Montgomery Advertiser they were “extremely concerned” about the rise of hospitalizations among children and urged parents to get their children inoculated. Some school systems in Alabama were also temporarily moving back to remote learning as a result of the continuing surge. Vaccination rates in Alabama also remain low, with just 48% of the population fully vaccinated.This month, How to Eat – the series exploring the best way to enjoy Britain’s favourite foods – must start by making a full and frank public apology. In 2013, HTE declared that (trigger warning: rank stupidity) cookies were: “Big, brash US interlopers – oversweet, over here and utterly dysfunctional.” HTE would like to sincerely apologise for what it now realises was an inflammatory and offensive attack, not just on American food, but on everyone with taste buds. That sentence does not represent the column that How to Eat now is and it hopes to move on from this uncharacteristic misstep. While not seeking to excuse such kneejerk anti-Americanism, HTE would urge you to remember that the early 10s were – the country then drowning in a sweet-’n’-greasy wave of US-inspired “dude food” – a very stressful time in British food writing. It seemed every dish would soon include a Man v Food mountain of pulled pork and bacon jam, washed down with a freakshake. HTE was lashing out at boorish excess. Cookies got caught in the crossfire. It didn’t help that, back then, HTE’s cookie experience was largely limited to pretty mundane, mass-produced versions. Now many serious bakers are making astonishing cookies, and HTE has been haunted by its offhand dismissal every time it eats one. In fact, it now accepts the British biscuit – diminutive, dry, one-dimensional, chocolate-deficient – is pretty drab compared with an XL cookie’s rococo complexity. Biscuits are black and white TV. The cookie is Imax. Sure, they can get over elaborate. Some cookies literally crumble under the weight of their own outrageous ambition. But How to Eat is converted. Consider these words its marshmallow-topped mea culpa*. *Only minus the marshmallow. HTE hasn’t totally lost it. Yet. Defining our terms … is necessary because, both in the US and Britain (where any chocolate chip biscuit presumptuously calls itself a cookie), the term is fuzzy. To clarify, a cookie should be around 10cm in diameter and a good 1cm+ deep at its chunkiest. Befitting its name – derived from koekje, meaning ‘little cake’ in Dutch – the cookie should also be generously packed with ingredients. Imagine a glittering geological seam hiding nuggets of nutty gold, sweet pockets of dried fruit and underground reservoirs of (semi-molten) chocolate. A good cookie will also be incredibly buttery (not so much rich in fat as obscenely wealthy), lightly crisped at its edges and yet moist, gooey and chewy in its interior. It should be dense but pliable. Where British biscuits are brittle and arid, crumbs held together by stiff upper-lip determination, the cookie is relaxed, self-confident and flexible. How to achieve those cake-adjacent textures, clear flavours and layers of caramelised depth in your cookie is hotly contested. As J Kenji López-Alt has written for Serious Eats: “Cookies are fickle and the advice out there is conflicting.” However, there is loose consensus over the wisdom of using, variously: some brown sugar (inherently moist and helps trap moisture); egg yolks over whites; bread flour to create more elastic gluten strands; and browned butter, which you can try melting before adding to your dough. Which should be chilled overnight. Or not. The debate rolls on … Ingredient distribution A cookie is not a pizza. It is not a platform. A little drizzled sauce or, if safely secured, flecks of chocolate or nut are acceptable on top. But most of the cookie’s flavourings should be buried inside. Otherwise, sticky with caramel, loosely festooned with everything from Smarties to granola or teetering with marshmallows, the cookie – its surface somewhere between a rocky, inhospitable planet and a studded leather face mask – can become difficult to handle and eat. Good things to put in cookies Quality chocolate in varieties dark to milk: not pre-packaged chips but exciting, unevenly chopped chunks. Other hazelnut chocolate spreads are available, but Nutella. (Salted) caramel sauce. Raisins, sultanas, dates, glacé morello cherries. Peanut butter. Fudge. Lotus Biscoff sauce. Stem ginger, used with restraint. Nuts soft enough that, used in small quantities (whole, flaked or crushed pecans, cashews, walnuts, pistachios etc), will add a complementary accent to your cookie rather than, as too many nuts will, turning it into an earthy, worthy mouthful. The above are mutually sympathetic ingredients from a broadly similar flavour palette, which will benefit from some arresting contrast, modulation or inversion. Flaked sea salt intensifies flavours in a bracing way, while dried cranberries, citrus zest or even roasted rhubarb offer tart punctuation. Any more than three flavours is confusing overkill. Bad things to put in cookies Marshmallows. It’s like hitting an edible airbag full of cotton wool. All but the tiniest amount of honey for depth. In any greater quantity this floral bully imposes a one-note flavour on all foods. White chocolate: the devil’s work. Mint chocolate, that perennially unwelcome chocolate-toothpaste hybrid. Alcohol, the ruination of many desserts. Mixed spices on a cinnamon-nutmeg tip. Christmas is over, thankfully. Nougat: culinary plasticine. Hazelnuts, peanuts and whole almonds? All too hard. Proprietary sweet brands which, from Maltesers to Rolo, are designed as self-contained snacks. They were never meant to be embedded in cookies where they create textural clashes (eg Twix or KitKat pieces forming dry patches of double or triple-layered biscuit overload). Dried apple, apricot or banana: who are we trying to kid, here? There are no redeeming nutritional benefits to the cookie. When Nauseating before 9am, the cookie is not breakfast. It is not a meal at any time. It is a snack. A de facto elevenses or afternoon tea item, enjoyed with a bucket of tea on gloomy afternoons that need a boost. Otherwise, it is an evening dessert. Process and equipment A biscuit might be eaten over the sink, your cupped hand or rushing around trailing crumbs like Hansel and Gretel. The cookie, far richer and sickly if wolfed, should be lingered over – breaking pieces off over a five-to-20 minute period – and, preferably, eaten off a plate. This is not a matter of cleanliness per se. Your cookie will create a lot of debris which you want contained in one place, to later collect with a wet finger. That final sweep of cookie crumbs is one of this snack’s most pleasurable phases. Dunking You dunk biscuits because they are too dry. A cookie does not need moistening. On the contrary, if you dunk a cookie (high fat content, soluble embedded pieces), it quickly becomes structurally unstable and oddly gluey – a thick indefinite sludge rather than a shiny theme-park of edible attractions. Some suggest the solution is to dunk cookies in cold milk which HTE will not entertain because a) it is not a small child, b) milk does nothing to transform the flavour of the cookie and c) due to the friable nature of the cookie, bits of it are still liable to fall off into your milk. Plus, who drinks milk for fun? Ice-cream Frequent partners, often to each other’s detriment. In particular, the addition of cookie dough to ice-cream (claggy, gritty, provocatively sweet), is one of modern food’s many revolting quirks. A little crumbled cookie is OK as an ice-cream topping. But sticking a whole cookie in there, like a wafer, is too much of too many good things which, beyond sugar content, have little natural affinity. For example, any chocolate in your cookie will be unable to melt smoothly in ice-cream’s sub-zero clutch. It will taste like gravel. For engineering reasons, it is also wise to avoid using cookies to create ice-cream sandwiches. Sandwiching soft ice-cream between stiff biscuit in a way that is convenient and pleasurable – the sandwich must maintain its structural integrity but the cookie must be softly yielding – requires a degree of food science knowhow way beyond most home cooks and pro chefs. The Maxibon is a stroke of genius (see also: its spiritual US cousin, Chipwich), but most DIY cookie sandwiches are disastrous. If you must sandwich something between two cookies, make it something adhesive (jam, Nutella, dulce de leche), rather than something that will frequently burst free in comedic squirts (ice-cream, whipped cream, mascarpone). Drink Tea! Tea! Tea! Strong tea, tannic and iron in its strength. Black coffee (not creamy white) may offer a bitter contrast to your cookie, but it lacks tea’s thirst-slaking, palate-cleansing powers of refreshment. Tea is the obvious reset button when dealing with super-sweet, fat-loaded cookies. So, cookies, how do you eat yours?What counts as an affair? An affair is significant contact outside the committed partnership. That may be oral sex in the photocopier room. It may equally be a secret correspondence, an inappropriate “friendship”, or a bit of sly webcam action. But in all instances, it will involve a breach of trust, says Noel Bell, psychotherapist and spokesperson for the UK Council for Psychotherapy. “Cheating is where you go beyond the confines of what was agreed between two people,” he says. “Even within polyamorous relationships, there can still be the concept of cheating.” The trouble is, in most relationships (and certainly in most monogamous relationships) there is no formal agreement governing, say, whether it’s OK to put a devil-face emoji in an email to an attractive colleague; nor whether it’s acceptable to read your partner’s work emails. Expectations of behaviour vary from one relationship to another and also within a relationship. In all cases, however, trust is the key word. If you want to survive an affair, all efforts should go towards repairing that trust. My partner has had an affair; is this the end? Not if you don’t want it to be. In fact, none of the counsellors and therapists I speak to feel that the affair deserves the tabloid-headline status it has acquired in our judgmental age. Which isn’t to say that the discovery of infidelity doesn’t really hurt – especially the sustained, secret affairs that cause one partner to reassess everything they thought they knew about the other. “What people usually say to me is that the lying and the deceit is worse than the betrayal,” says consultant clinical psychologist, Janice Hiller. “They say, ‘I can’t trust you. You’re not who you say you were.’ That’s the worst thing.” It hurts so much because it hits at the most primal part of our emotional selves. “The connection with an intimate partner re-evokes the earliest parent-child relationship,” she says. “It’s a very strong bond and it’s to do with honesty, security and commitment. We all want to be securely attached. Some people need a lot of daily contact. Some can manage two or three times a week. But we’re all looking for attachment, security and love. And when there’s a committed bond that’s broken in some way, it re-evokes that earliest fear of abandonment you see in little babies.” All of the counsellors I speak to agree: the most important thing is to rebuild that bond – by talking, listening, holding, touching, comforting, patiently restating your commitment, even if it feels like you’re doing it for the hundredth time. Is an affair a symptom of a bad relationship? Not necessarily. “Generally speaking, what motivates people to have affairs is underlying dissatisfaction in their lives,” says Bell. This may be a desire for more romance and intimacy in their relationship. After 10 or 20 years together, couples often end up feeling more like flatmates or colleagues than lovers. While lockdowns had a “honeymoon” effect on some couples, for many it led to feeling stale and short of excitement – and a temptation to look elsewhere (including online) for that thrill. However, Bell challenges the idea that affairs only occur in dysfunctional relationships. Some people in functional relationships are simply more prone to “acting out” their sexual urges than others; and not all dysfunctional relationships occasion affairs. “The popular view is that it’s a symptom of something going wrong, but opportunity, context, someone’s emotional state and social situations can also be predisposing factors for affairs.” Someone who has previously been sexually active with a wide variety of partners may find it easier to have an affair than someone more chaste, for example. Likewise, someone who goes on lots of work trips. The urge to stray might also be rooted in childhood trauma or exposure to infidelity in early life, says Bell. The point is, “It’s really worth stressing that affairs can also happen in excellent, fully functional marriages.” What should the betrayed partner do? Often, the discovery of an affair creates an unequal dynamic – one partner becomes crushed with guilt and accepts their pariah status, the other becomes judge, jury and executioner. But this is not particularly helpful or sustainable. “The betrayed partner will usually have to accept that they had a part in co-creating a betrayal,” says relationship counsellor and author Neil Wilkie. “My experience is that a betrayal never comes out of a clear blue sky. It usually happens because there was something lacking in a relationship. But if the betrayed partner says, ‘It’s all your fault, I had nothing to do with it,’ then the relationship can never recover.” So should we talk it through? Yes, says Dr Abigael San of the British Psychological Society – but she stresses that merely talking has its limits. “A lot of the time, couples counselling will concentrate on improving communication, which is certainly important, but it can be a rather superficial intervention,” she says. “You need to go much deeper than that. Chances are, the root cause of the affair will be something to do with the attachment bond, the absolute heart of a relationship.” This is where your focus should be. “You need to trust each other enough to be able to say what you’re feeling, why you might be feeling it, and to reach out to the other for help and trust that it will get a response. That’s the level of work that needs to be done. It will take sustained effort over time.” Should the partner who’s had the affair hand over their email passwords? Janice Hiller has a don’t ask, don’t tell policy. “If I can get couples early enough [after the discovery of an affair], I really encourage them not to answer any questions about the affair: the where, when, how,” she says. “People say, ‘I want to know everything.’ Actually, you don’t. The less you know the better. When people know more, they start to imagine more. You need to work on the trust and the healing process.” However, Neil Wilkie feels that handing over electronic devices, passwords, Instagram passwords and so on can be a useful way to start that process. “To recover from an affair, you need complete openness and honesty,” he says. “If the partner says, ‘No, that’s confidential’, then that’s effectively saying you can’t trust me.” He stresses, however, that allowing your partner an all-access pass to your innermost thoughts is an emergency measure. “The partner who has had the affair should be prepared to give the betrayed partner what is reasonable to rebuild the relationship. That may be more than they would normally be comfortable doing. However, if, say, two years have passed and one partner is still insisting on seeing absolutely everything, that shows the trust hasn’t been rebuilt – and that shadow of suspicion really dooms a relationship.” Who should I tell about the affair? Perhaps an incredibly trusted friend or two, but no more than is absolutely necessary, says Hiller. “Sometimes, the person who has been at the receiving end will tell everybody and it will be a disaster because friends and family then don’t want the partner back,” she says. “It’s so much better to contain it and work together – and with a therapist. If there’s a real decision to split up, that’s the time to tell people – not before. Nothing good comes out of talking about it.” In many instances, people do end up staying together – which leads to abiding feelings of betrayal and mistrust among friends who felt compelled to take sides. The advice is especially important where it comes to children, she says. “There is no need for your children to know. It’s none of their business. It can be really damaging to a child.” It’s fine to tell your children that you are having a difficult time and that you’re trying to sort things out, but the priority should be to reassure them that they are loved and safe. When should I get the lawyers involved? Only when all other options have been exhausted, says Julia Townend, barrister with family law firm 4PB: “It’s a myth that there are winners and losers in family law,” she says, stressing that it’s a misnomer that the person who has had the affair will always fare worse in court. “Actually, if someone has cheated, it almost never has an impact on any child-contact arrangements or how the money is divided up. It simply won’t be relevant.” Most of Townend’s work consists of stopping clients pressing the “nuclear button” and taking their partner to court. She tries to steer them towards mediation and has recently helped pioneer a “one-couple, one-lawyer” approach at her firm. “Instead of both people hiring lawyers to write aggressive letters to each other, we’ll try to get it sorted without the turmoil of going to court.” How do you rebuild? Neil Wilkie likes to break down relationships into six key areas. The first five (communication, connection, commitment, truth, growth) are fairly predictable, but he feels that the sixth – fun! – is neglected by most couples, particularly in the aftermath of something heavy like an affair. “I ask them: when was the last time you really had fun together? Often there’s nervousness and silence. It’s so easy to forget that we need to laugh and unleash that vibrancy in a relationship.” Find a way you can be silly together – and take it seriously.The US government’s tyrannical reign over a classic condiment is finally ending. For more than 70 years, the Food and Drug Administration has insisted on certain standards for French dressing, even as the condiment has been derided by food snobs and fallen out of favor with the American palate. The dressing, essentially a vinaigrette with ketchup and other flavors, has been called too sweet, too coarse, and not French enough, as the food writer Charles Perry pointed out in a 2000 essay defending the stuff. In a 2017 survey of favorite American condiments, French dressing hardly got a mention; ranch was the clear winner, the New York Times noted. But things are changing for the beleaguered condiment, thanks to a longstanding effort by concerned citizens at the Association for Dressings and Sauces (ADS), an industry group that is demanding an end to the FDA’s salad-dressing surveillance. The FDA maintains “standards of identity” for foods to ensure they meet consumers’ expectations and manufacturers aren’t misleading shoppers – they are “kind of like a recipe”, said Diana Winters, deputy director of the Resnick Center for Food Law at the University of California, Los Angeles. Perhaps authorities got wind of devious behavior involving French dressing, because in 1950, the FDA issued rules saying the dressing must contain at least 35% vegetable oil, along with certain “acidifying ingredients” such as vinegar and citric acid. Salt, sugar, tomato paste, and “harmless seasoning or flavoring” can also be added, according to the Federal Register, the government’s journal. Over the decades, various changes were made to the standards. But “because it’s still on the books, manufacturers who are making anything they call French dressing had to follow that exact prescription”, Winters said. Until, that is, the Association for Dressings and Sauces swooped in. It argued that there were many similar toppings – ranch and Italian, for instance – that weren’t subject to such rules. French dressing “no longer serves as a benchmark for other dressings”, the FDA cited the ADS petition as saying, and the standards served to “restrict innovation”. “The association said other dressings don’t have this and the public doesn’t need this,” Winters said. “The reason to issue a standard of identity is to protect the public, basically, and say look, if you’re buying this, you know exactly what you’re getting.” But the industry group argued “the public knows what French dressing is and if a manufacturer wants to use a different or innovative ingredient or do something like bring down the fat content, they should be able to,” Winters said. It appears not to have been a priority for officials: it took 22 years for the FDA to recommend a change. In late 2020, the FDA signaled it agreed with ADS. Its final rule was published on Thursday and will take effect in 30 days. So what does this mean for enthusiasts – those who, like Perry, understand the “American taste for a big, mouth-filling sauce full of sweet, sour, spicy and aromatic flavors on a rich, long-cooked tomato base”? Could Americans’ newfound freedom to engage in French dressing innovation bring about a renaissance? Probably not. If people are “going to buy a French dressing, it will still be French dressing as they expect it to be,” Winters said. “I don’t expect anything to change in the salad dressing aisle.”They came from countries in west Africa, nearly all of them from the Gambia, and settled in Twin Parks Towers Northeast, a 19-story apartment building full of working-class families from the region and Latin America. Some of them were born here to parents from the Gambia, volunteering in local community groups, attending local mosques, enrolling in local schools and colleges hoping for a future in social work, economics and justice. Those dreams came to an end on Sunday, 9 January, when a fire broke out in the residential tower killing 17 people, including several members of two families. Fire department officials said a malfunctioning electric space heater was to blame. The rapid spread of smoke through two doors left open – despite a law requiring they spring closed – claimed most of the victims’ brief lives. Eight were children; the youngest was two years old. One had celebrated his 12th birthday the day before the deadly fire. Police officials identified the victims of the fire on Tuesday. These are their stories. Sera Janneh, 27 Loved ones described Janneh as a devoted sister and friend – a cheerleader to those around her and “a good person to be around”, her sister Mareama told the New York Times. Janneh was a psychology major at Lehman College and wanted to be a social worker, her sister told the Times. She added that Sera was an active member of the Gambian Youth Organization, a community group located steps from Twin Parks that serves the neighborhood and the borough’s west African communities at large. Janneh collapsed while trying to escape their sixth-floor apartment. She is survived by her parents and three siblings, including the youngest, Aisha, who is still in the hospital battling injuries from the fire, the Janneh family wrote in a GoFundMe post. “She was a nice woman,” her father told the Daily Mail. “She was very caring, helping – she listened to us.” Seydou Toure, 12 Toure was an eighth-grade student at the Angelo Patri middle school, located next door to Twin Parks. His classmate and friend of three years Chanel Álvarez, 13, described him as “a bit of a troublemaker, but a very good kid” at a nighttime vigil in front of the fire-damaged building on Tuesday. That afternoon, more than two dozen students, along with teachers and school staff, walked out in front of Twin Parks to pay tribute to their classmate, wearing laminated badges with his picture, and lighting candles at a makeshift memorial for Toure. “I loved him dearly,” the school’s principal, Angel Ortega, told the New York Times. “He always had that smile.” Haowa Mahamadou, 5 Mahamadou was one of at least four siblings caught in the 9 January blaze, according to an online fundraising page set up by her aunt, Khadidja Timbaye, for the family. Two other Mahamadou children were treated in critical condition, Timbaye wrote. The Dukureh family Haji Dukuray, 49; Haja Dukureh, 37; Mustapha Dukureh, 12; Mariam Dukureh, 11; Fatoumata Dukureh, five Haja Dukureh, 37, and her husband, Haji Dukuray, 49, moved from the Gambia more than a decade ago, settling in the Bronx, according to Fatoumata Dukureh, Haja’s aunt. They had three children in the United States: Mustapha, 12; Mariam, 11; and Fatoumata, five, who shares a name with her mother’s aunt. The couple worked hard to support their children – Haja as a home health aide and Haji at a local Kentucky Fried Chicken, said Fatoumata. They regularly sent money back to relatives in the Gambia. The Dukurehs lived in an apartment on the 19th floor of the ill-fated building on 181st Street, joining an enclave of west African immigrants. “This is a very close-knit community. We are predominantly from one town in the Gambia called Alunghare, so we are all family,” said Haji Dukureh, Haja’s uncle, speaking with ABC News. The family was devoutly Muslim, and Haji frequented a nearby mosque to pray in the mornings. They celebrated Ramadan with the Gambian-style chicken and jollof rice, prepared by Haja and eaten at night, when Muslims break their fast during the holy month. The children displayed distinct personalities, said Fatoumata, Haja’s aunt. “Mustapha was very smart. He would always read and help others with reading … Mariam was very sweet. She looked like her mom and was always helping her mom.” The younger Fatoumata had just celebrated a birthday. She was quiet and shy like her dad, family told the City. The Dukurehs perished attempting to escape the building when it filled with smoke, relative Hawa Dukuray told the New York Times. “I’m heartbroken,” she said. The Drammeh family Fatoumata Drammeh, 50; Fatoumala Drammeh, 21; Nyumaaisha Drammeh, 19; Muhammed Drammeh, 12 Fatoumata Drammeh, 50, and her husband, Ishak Drammeh, 57, moved to Twin Parks from the Gambia and lived on the 15th floor for nearly 20 years. Fatoumata and three of the couple’s children, Fatoumala, 21; Nyumaaisha, 19; and Muhammed, 12, were killed in the fire. They are survived by Ishak and their daughter Fatima, 23, and another son, Yagub, 16, who remains in critical condition. Ishak was out of town on business when the fire broke out on Sunday and the rest of the family had celebrated Muhammed’s 12th birthday the day before, at an indoor trampoline park in Queens, the New York Times reported. Nyumaaisha, who went by Aisha, was set to begin college next month. Her cousin Fatma Barow, 46, said in an interview on Monday that she wanted to become a lawyer. “Aisha wanted to help others, I said, ‘OK, I will pray for you,’” Barow said. “She was a beautiful soul. God, so lovely.” Fatoumala was set to graduate from the University of Buffalo soon and studied political science. A statement from the university issued on Wednesday said she was an active member of the school’s Educational Opportunity Program. She was also the vice-president of Powerful United Ladies Striving for Excellence – or Pulse – an on-campus networking group for women of color, said Brian F Hamluk, the university’s vice president of Student Life. “She was a very good girl,” Ishak, her father, told the New York Times. “Muhammad was a good boy, too. Nyumaaisha was a good girl.” Tawana Davis, a nextdoor neighbor of the Drammehs, said she saw the family grow up and settle into life in the US. “They lived here basically the whole time I lived here. I saw those kids as babies. I taught [Ishak and Fatoumata] to speak English,” she said, adding that Muhammed and her grandson were friends. “Everyone on the floor, we were like family.” “They are a very nice family, very well respected,” she said. “They were just the best people.” Fatoumata Tunkara, 43, and Omar Jambang, six A mother of five, Fatoumata “Chakou” Tunkara, 43, was visiting a friend inside of the Fordham Heights apartment along with her six-year-old son, Omar Jambang, when the fire broke out, killing the pair, according to the Daily News. Native to Soma, the Gambia, a town roughly five miles south of the Gambia River, Tunkara’s family is raising funds to send her and her son’s remains to their homeland, a family member wrote in a GoFundMe. Isatou Jabbie, 31, and Hagi Jawara, 47 Hagi Jawara worked jobs in construction and at a fried chicken restaurant, and his wife, Isatou Jabbie, was a home health aide, his brother Yusupha told the New York Post. The Gambian couple are survived by their four children, ages six to 15, who were visiting relatives in the west African country at the time of the fire, the New York Post reported. They were set to reunite with their parents at the end of the month. Yusupha described his brother as “jovial”. “He was always smiling and laughing with everyone, never had a disagreement with anybody,” he told the Post. Ousmane Konteh, two The youngest of the fire’s victims, Ousmane Konteh, was staying at a relative’s apartment on the 19th floor when the smoke engulfed the Bronx building Sunday, a family member posted on GoFundMe. The toddler was being cared for by a relative while his mom went to work. He is survived by his mother, Fatoumata Sankanu, and three siblings. The City is an independent, non-profit news organization dedicated to hard-hitting reporting that serves the people of New York.Good morning. Prince Andrew has been completely removed from official royal life after the Queen stripped him of his military affiliations and royal patronages amid his ongoing sexual assault case. Intended to distance the monarchy from the Duke of York, the dramatic move means he will no longer use the His Royal Highness royal style in any official capacity. Buckingham Palace said in a statement on Thursday: “With the Queen’s approval and agreement, the Duke of York’s military affiliations and royal patronages have been returned to the Queen. The Duke of York will continue not to undertake any public duties and is defending this case as a private citizen.” Virginia Giuffre, now 38, says she was forced into sex at 17 with the duke by his associates Jeffrey Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell, and has brought a civil lawsuit against Andrew. He denies the allegations. How will the civil case affect the monarchy? Norman Baker, a commentator on royal matters, said the royal family “could not escape the immense damage” the case would bring. The move came hours after more than 150 military veterans wrote to the Queen describing Andrew’s position as “untenable” and asking her to remove his honorary military roles. Sinema and Manchin scupper filibuster reform The senators Kyrsten Sinema and Joe Manchin have thwarted Joe Biden’s efforts to push voting rights legislation through Congress. The president was reportedly in last-ditch talks with the centrist Democrats on Thursday night after Sinema of Arizona said she would not support any changes to filibuster rules. Manchin of West Virginia, praised Sinema and released his own statement confirming he would not do so either. Sinema and Manchin’s rebellion comes at a time of deep concern for US democracy. Republican lawmakers in 19 states have enacted 34 new laws that impose new voting restrictions. Why did Sinema not support changing the rules? The senator said that she “will not support separate actions that worsen the underlying disease of division infecting our country”. Why does it matter? As no Republicans support the voting rights bills or changing filibuster rules, Democrats cannot progress unless Sinema and Manchin vote with them. Supreme court blocks Biden’s workplace vaccine-or-test rules The supreme court has blocked the Biden administration from enforcing a requirement for unvaccinated employees at large businesses to test weekly and wear a mask at work. The court’s conservative majority opposed the rule, but allowed the imposition of a vaccine mandate for most US healthcare workers. The mandate applies to healthcare providers that receive federal Medicare or Medicaid funding, which could affect 76,000 healthcare facilities and home health care providers. More than 80 million people would have been affected by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration’s vaccine-or-test rule for businesses with at least 100 employees. What did the supreme court argue? The conservative majority ruled that the administration overstepped its authority in its attempt to impose the requirement. … and the dissenting liberals? The three judges argued the court was the one overreaching by overruling health experts in its judgement. In other news … Novak Djokovic’s Australian visa has been cancelled again just days before the start of the Australian Open. The move by the Australian immigration minister will likely mean Djokovic is deported and unable to play in the tournament. The House select committee has subpoenaed Twitter, Meta, Alphabet and Reddit for records related to the Capitol attack. The congressman Bennie Thompson said previous requests for cooperation had been ignored. The Republican party has indicated that it intends to withdraw from US presidential debates, after claims that it is biased against it. The New York Times first reported that the Republican National Committee had sent a letter to the Commission on Presidential Debates on Thursday. The British prime minister, Boris Johnson, faces renewed calls for his resignation after further allegations of parties on the eve of Prince Philip’s socially distanced funeral. At the time, outdoor gatherings were limited to six people or two households. Stat of the day: Covid created 20 ‘pandemic billionaires’ in Asia The pandemic has exacerbated a stark wealth division in Asia: while 140 million people fell into poverty after losing their livelihoods, Covid created 20 new “pandemic billionaires”, according to a report by Oxfam. The new billionaires profited from the international response to the crisis, selling pharmaceuticals, medical equipment and services. Don’t miss this: Big Thief on why recording is like sex Big Thief are the exception to the rule: everything that makes them work “could be the undoing of any other band”, writes Marissa R Moss. Frontperson Adrianne Lenker and guitarist Buck Meek are divorced, bassist Max Oleartchik lives in a different country, and the group’s members have separate musical side projects. The “alchemy” of these elements is “what makes Big Thief Big Thief in the first place”, Meek tells Moss in this piece about what makes the band tick, pain and why recording is like sex. Last Thing: French bakers in pain over supermarket baguettes French bakers have accused a large supermarket chain offering below-inflation prices for baguettes of “demagogy”. The Leclerc group vowed on Tuesday to cut into its profit margins to cap the cost of the signature French loaf at 29 euro cents (24p), leading bakers, farmers and millers to accuse it of “launching a campaign that destroys values”. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comMonday It’s the sheer randomness that grinds you down. On Christmas Day, my wife and I were – fingers crossed – congratulating ourselves on everything having gone according to plan. Our daughter, Anna, and her husband, Robert, had managed to avoid the Omicron variant in the US – both were triple-vaxxed – and been able to fly over to the UK; and our son, Robbie, and his girlfriend, Laila, had also managed to get their boosters, escape Covid, and come up from Brighton to stay with us. So we had been together as a family for the first time in more than two years. On Boxing Day, Anna woke up with a sore throat and a headache. She took a lateral flow test that came back clear so we all hung out together. The following morning she still felt ropey but the LFT again came back negative so she and Robert went off to visit friends while Robbie and Laila went back home. It wasn’t until the morning of 28 December that she got the dreaded two red lines and went into isolation. At which point the rest of us assumed we were bound to get Covid. Only we never did. At least not then. Laila got Covid five days into the new year and Robert tested positive last night, a while after he and Anna were back in Minneapolis. Robbie got Covid today. For the second time. Which just left Jill and me to get the virus. Neither of us has a clue why we have escaped so far. Whether we have had it without knowing – unlikely over Christmas as we had both taken regular LFTs, are immune, or just incredibly lucky. Probably just lucky. We try to take each day as it comes and go out as planned but it’s mentally exhausting being in a permanent state of preparedness to get ill. Tuesday When I took over as this paper’s political sketch writer eight years ago, my biggest worry was whether I would ever be able to fill the void left by my predecessor, Simon Hoggart, who died in January 2014. Simon was a brilliantly sharp and witty writer who had been making fun of politicians for more than 20 years and he was a desperately tough act to follow. I remember being acutely depressed for much of the first year when reading the below-the-line comments on the sketch and the verdict was often “Crace is no Hoggart”. But one decision I made early on was to retire the ever absurd Tory MP Michael Fabricant from the sketch. Fabricant – or Micky Fab of the glorious Talking Hair – had for a long while been one of Simon’s personal favourites and it seemed a fitting tribute to discontinue his appearances in print. It was a decision that had an unexpected coda. After a year or so of sketching, I was tapped on the shoulder by an MP. “Are you John Crace?” he asked. I confirmed I was. “Good,” he continued. “Michael Fabricant is very worried. He wants to know when he will next be in the sketch.” “Never,” I replied. Mmm, the MP muttered. Michael is going to be very disappointed. It was then I realised the extent of the vanity of some MPs. They would rather be ridiculed than ignored. Only I haven’t been able to keep to my word, because today Fabricant did something so ludicrous I couldn’t ignore him any longer. While every other Tory MP was trying to steer away from the airwaves for fear of being asked to defend Boris Johnson’s party lifestyle, Michael F, actively volunteered. First off, he declared it wasn’t a party but a group of workmates appearing to have a party: then he followed up by saying they deserved to break the rules as they had been working so hard. Unlike doctors and nurses … It was quite the stupidest take imaginable and deserved a paragraph in the sketch. That one, Simon, was for you. Wednesday After lying low for a couple of days, Boris Johnson was forced out in to the open to appear at prime minister’s questions and was finally obliged to provide an explanation for why he attended the Downing Street party on 20 May 2020. First he gave a half-hearted, insincere apology for any wrongdoing people may have perceived him to make. Not for the breaches of the law and the lying to both parliament and the country. Then he got to the details of the party. Or rather the party that was not a party. What we were asked to believe was that Johnson was one of the stupidest men alive, and had failed to notice he had been at a party until alerted to it by a leak to the press more than 18 months later. Here was the chronology. He definitely hadn’t authorised or read the email inviting everyone at No 10 to the party – why would he bother with anything sent by his principal private secretary? – and the “we” in the invitation in no way suggested it might have come from the prime minister. Then, completely coincidentally, he had wandered downstairs to where the party was being held. Once there he had done a double-take and just assumed it was a “work event”. After all it was completely normal to find trestle tables in the garden stacked with sausage rolls and booze and people getting pissed at work events. That his wife had also been there with two friends had only reinforced his impression it was a work event. As had the complaints from some admin staff the next day at having to clear up the empties from the flowerbeds. Alarmingly, his cabinet – with the exception of Rishi Sunak – are just as dim as they appeared quite comfortable with such obvious bollocks. No 10 was a special case, they said, because it was both a home and an office. Well, so is my mum’s care home and no one had a party there. Thursday If one definition of insanity is doing the same things over and over again and expecting a different result, I’m clearly not mad. Or I’m a special kind of mad. Because this season every time I’ve gone to see Spurs, I’ve had a good idea of exactly what type of game I’m going to see, but have gone along anyway. Last week’s and yesterday’s two-leg semi-final against Chelsea in the Carabao Cup are a case in point. I knew that Tottenham were going to be outclassed and that the only real variable was how much they were going to lose by, yet there was a grim sense of satisfaction in seeing my worst fears realised and enduring the pain of yet another clueless performance. I still can’t quite understand, though, how Spurs have become quite so bad so quickly. We may not have won anything, though we did get to a Champion’s League final, but a few years ago we were playing attractive football which was good to watch. Even when we lost, we would give most teams a good game. Now, though, despite three changes of manager – or possibly because – we are a team that struggles against League One opposition. Our wing backs can’t cross the ball: they either scuff it to a defender or kick it over the bar. Our defenders barely recognise each other, our midfield can’t control the ball, let alone pass it, and no one is more surprised than our attack if they score. Every player we have bought has turned out to be a disappointment, worse than the footballer they were lined up to replace. It’s as if all Spurs can manage at the moment is to turn good players into mediocre ones. What’s more, it’s even getting to Matthew with whom I go to almost all games. On Wednesday I was begging him to let us leave 10 minutes before the end as Spurs needed three goals to take the game to penalties. Matthew refused – he’s old school and never leaves before the final whistle – though he did say we could skip clapping the players off the pitch. A huge moment for him. We will be going to the north London derby together on Sunday against Arsenal, and I have every confidence Spurs will let me down again. I will report back. Friday I’m fairly sure that if I were to wake up in a hospital in the Australian outback after a major car crash with total memory loss, my first instinct wouldn’t be to discharge myself the moment I could almost walk again. I’m guessing I’d be more worried about who I was, what I was doing in the middle of nowhere, and how the hell I was going to find my way round an alien environment of which I had no recollection. I might also wonder how I was going to get by without any money or car. Assuming I remembered what money and a car were. Then if I’d been the leading amnesiac character – the Man – played by Jamie Dornan in The Tourist, the BBC’s six-part thriller, and done the sensible thing by staying put, I’d have been topped in by a 6ft6 Texan in cowboy hat and boots who had turned up at the hospital looking for me moments after the Man thought to leave. There again, the Man wasn’t the only person with amnesia. No one at the hospital seemed to notice he was speaking with an Irish accent when everyone else – except the huge American – was Australian. Something they could have used to try to identify him. Nor did the police bother to investigate the tyre tracks in the dust and the wreckage on the road from where the monster truck had sideswiped the Man’s car. And these were just some of the inconsistencies in the first episode. But none of them spoiled the enjoyment. Harry and Jack Williams seem to have had a field day writing the scripts: almost as if they had a bet to think up ever more outrageous and shocking scenarios and only afterwards tried to work out how to shoehorn them into the plot line. It’s all done with a light touch and is effortlessly gripping. We binged the whole thing inside a week and I doubt we’ll watch a better thriller all year. The trick is to follow the example of the Man and not ask too many questions. Digested week, digested: The parties that weren’t parties. • Join our journalists for a Guardian Live online event on the No 10 lockdown party and Boris Johnson’s future on Wednesday 19 January. Book hereBill Murray’s confirmation that he is to play an unnamed villain in the upcoming Ant-Man and the Wasp: Quantumania isn’t the first time a prestigious star has deigned to join the weird world of Marvel. Glenn Close turned up as a space colony administrator in the Guardians of the Galaxy films, and Jeff Goldblum played the enthusiastically freaky Grandmaster in 2017’s Thor: Ragnarok. Cate Blanchett was the Norse God’s evil big sister in that movie, while Benicio del Toro appeared as the mysterious Collector in three films, culminating in 2018’s Avengers: Infinity War, where Thanos dispensed with him. Murray, the ageing doyen of indie cinema, has of course appeared in blockbusters before. Before becoming the kind of guy Wes Anderson and Sofia Coppola have on speed dial, he was king of 80s and 90s comedy, his leading turns in the original Ghostbusters and Groundhog Day perhaps even marking the commercial zenith of that period. Then there was that awful point in the 00s when Murray agreed to voice the talking cat Garfield opposite Breckin Meyer and Jennifer Love Hewitt (remember them?) The movie was dross, and Murray said he thought he’d signed up for a Coen Brothers movie. (Garfield’s script had been written by Joel Cohen; Murray thought this was the same person as indie darling Joel Coen.) Why did Murray then agree to reprise the role of the curmudgeonly cat for 2006’s Garfield: A Tail of Two Kitties? We have not been told. The point is, Murray isn’t averse to acting in commercially aligned movies. But he famously has no agent, manager, or contactable phone number; booking him is like trying to get hold of the A-Team. Yet it still seems strange that Murray is about to turn up in a Marvel movie, let alone one as fantastical as Quantumania, which will delve into the quantum realm seen briefly in previous Ant-Man episodes. The film’s main baddie will be Jonathan Majors as Kang the Conqueror, described as a “time-travelling, multiversal adversary”. Who will Murray play? His wise-cracking sidekick? It makes little sense. Except, of course, that Murray is also the perfect Marvel villain, because this film series hasn’t taken itself seriously for years. The now-tainted Joss Whedon crystallised the self-effacing, self-reflexive approach to comic book film-making that has become the template for just about everything when he had Robert Downey Jr’s Iron Man describe his first meeting with Chris Hemsworth’s ornately robed Thor (in 2012’s The Avengers) as a bit like “Shakespeare in the park”. Ever since then, it has been open season on all the comic book genre’s most ridiculous conceits, from its obsession with villains of Asian extraction in Iron Man 3 to the Tobey Maguire version of Spider-Man’s icky organic webshooters in the recent No Way Home. In that sense, then, Murray is where he ought to be. In the interview in which he discussed his new part, the actor described his role in the new film as “being a bad guy”. We all know by now that Murray’s superpower is an elegant, mocking contempt from the sidelines; the way his sardonic, effortless one-liners can deconstruct an entire scene yet elevate it at the same time. He’s going to fit in brilliantly.Of all the brilliant things that make one girl happy, music is the most important, especially her father’s vinyl record collection. In this new Abbey theatre production, a rich soundtrack of jazz and blues animates Andrea Ainsworth’s bare-bones staging of Duncan Macmillan and Jonny Donahoe’s play from 2013. Taking a candid and compassionate approach to the subject of suicidal depression, the writing manages to be both heartfelt and buoyant as it portrays a child’s experience of her mother’s suicide attempts. At the age of seven, the unnamed girl (Amy Conroy) hopes that by making a numbered list of “every brilliant thing” that makes life worth living, she can make her mother feel better. With no set, minimal props and only Carl Kennedy’s sound design to assist her, all eyes are on the irrepressible Conroy. It soon becomes clear that she will not be the solo performer: audience members have supporting roles throughout. As well as calling out items on her ever-expanding list of life’s joys – “ice cream” and “water fights” are important at the start – audience members are asked to play key characters in the girl’s story as she grows up. Co-creators to an extent, the audience nevertheless relies heavily on the improvisational gifts of Conroy, whose charm, warmth and spontaneity smooth over some of the script’s awkward transitions and tonal shifts. As she moves from childish playfulness to the guilt she later carries for her mother’s suicide, the young woman keeps adding to her list. It becomes a form of diary, documenting what is important in her life at a particular moment, and helping her recover when she begins to lose her own mental equilibrium. While maintaining a light touch, in Conroy’s direct address to the audience the play comments on media responsibility when reporting suicide. Making a plea for kindness and mutual support that seems particularly timely, her character observes that most people will experience a form of depression at some point in their lives. Or as the closing song puts it, more insouciantly: “into each life some rain must fall”. At the Abbey theatre, Dublin, until 22 January, then touring until 12 February In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.By a 6-3 vote, with liberal justices in dissent, the supreme court on Thursday blocked the Biden administration from enforcing a vaccine-or-testing mandate for large employers. (The court upheld a more modest mandate requiring vaccinations for healthcare workers who treat Medicare and Medicaid patients.) The employer mandate would have required workers to be vaccinated against the coronavirus or to wear masks and be tested weekly (neither employees nor employers were required to pay for the testing). It applied to employers with at least 100 employees. This would include more than 84 million workers, about two-thirds of the American workforce. The administration estimated the rule would cause 22 million people to get vaccinated and prevent 250,000 hospitalizations. In its unsigned order blocking the rule – which had been devised by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (Osha) – the court said that although the risks associated with coronavirus occur in many workplaces, “it is not an occupational hazard in most.” Hello? Not an occupational hazard? Since the outbreak of the pandemic, we’ve seen factories, wholesale distribution centers, meatpackers and hospitals become super-spreader centers. The Omicron variant is now ripping through America like wildfire, especially where people work in close contact. Before today’s ruling, a three-judge panel of the sixth US circuit court of appeals had decided that the Osha rule was “an important step in curtailing the transmission of a deadly virus that has killed over 800,000 people in the United States, brought our healthcare system to its knees, and cost hundreds of thousands of workers their jobs”. Judge Jane B Stranch, writing for the majority of the court of appeals, had noted that as “Covid-19 has continued to spread, mutate, kill and block the safe return of American workers to their jobs, to protect workers, Osha can and must be able to respond to dangers as they evolve.” But today the supreme court disagreed – choosing instead to treat Covid like any “universal risk” of daily life that people voluntarily choose to accept. “Covid-19 can and does spread at home, in schools, during sporting events, and everywhere else that people gather. That kind of universal risk is no different from the day-to-day dangers that all face from crime, air pollution, or any number of communicable diseases,” the court said. This is absurd on its face. People have choices of where or whether to gather when it comes to social events, sporting events or travel. They can decide how much risk to take on from all sorts of day-to-day activities. The workplace is different. If they want a paycheck, most people must report to work. The whole purpose of Osha is to reduce health and safety risks at the workplace, precisely because when it comes to work most people have no choice. The supreme court concluded that permitting Osha to regulate here “would significantly expand Osha’s regulatory authority” without clear congressional authorization. Nonsense. Section 2 of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 clearly states that “Congress declares it to be its purpose and policy … to assure so far as possible every working man and woman in the Nation safe and healthful working conditions [and] assure insofar as practicable that no employee will suffer diminished health, functional capacity, or life expectancy as a result of his work experience.” What’s really going on here? The Republican-appointed majority of the supreme court is intent on gutting the authority of regulatory agencies to interpret federal laws. Their target is the so-called “Chevron deference”, a 38-year-old precedent holding that courts should respect agency interpretations of laws enacted by Congress, even if Congress has not directly spoken to the precise issue at hand. Judicial deference is appropriate if the agency interpretation is reasonable. With Omicron infections and hospitalizations and deaths surging across America, Osha shouldn’t need Congress’s specific authorization to impose a vaccine-or-testing mandate at the workplace – at least according to supreme court precedent. By ruling otherwise, the supreme court’s conservative majority today signals it’s willing to strike down hundreds of regulations protecting the health and safety of Americans. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a Guardian US columnist. His newsletter is at robertreich.substack.comIn 1986, Prince Andrew married Sarah Ferguson at Westminster Abbey to an avalanche of enthusiastic press coverage. Thirty-five years later, he faces a lawsuit for sexual assault from Virginia Giuffre, a woman who was trafficked by Jeffrey Epstein. He is disgraced, stripped of his military titles, will no longer be officially “His Royal Highness”, nor represent the Queen. After yesterday’s summit with his mother at Windsor Castle, Andrew is no longer a working royal in any capacity and must, as the statement from Buckingham Palace made clear, face the lawsuit as a “private citizen”. Giuffre, a survivor of trafficking and abuse, has been courageous. Attacked and slandered by powerful individuals, she has continued to argue her case. She is, her team says, determined to have her day in court. The lawsuit may now go ahead as early as this autumn. In the year of the Platinum Jubilee, which was supposed to be all about celebrating the Queen and her long reign, the royal family are confronting the worrying possibility that attention will now be on the court case against Andrew. The wedding of Prince Andrew was supposed to be the beginning of happy ever after for “Randy Andy”. And yet it wasn’t. By 1999, Andrew had become friendly with Jeffrey Epstein, who died before he could be put on trial. Andrew invited Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell to royal parties. When others swiftly distanced themselves from Epstein, who had been convicted of sex crimes in 2008, Andrew visited and stayed with him in New York. Giuffre, when she says she met Andrew in London in 2001, had Epstein snap a photo on her own camera, a photo that Andrew has claimed was doctored, even though other witnesses say they saw him with her in New York and at Epstein’s private island. Andrew has always denied the charges against him. Few royals have ever had to face the law. To look for a similar situation, we have to go back to Albert Edward, Prince of Wales, the future Edward VII. In 1868, Sir Charles Mordaunt accused his young wife Harriet of adultery with various men, and after finding letters from the prince, believed she had also had an affair with him. The prince had to give evidence to the subsequent divorce, declaring he had never been alone with Harriet, but appeared for only a few minutes and was not cross-examined by Sir Charles’s counsel. Fortunately for the prince, it was decided that Harriet was “insane” and should be put in an asylum – and could not be divorced. Lady Mordaunt was locked away. She was probably suffering from what we would now call postnatal depression. But even this case is not comparable: Lady Mordaunt was an adult. Giuffre was a minor when she alleges Andrew sexually assaulted her. She shows no sign of backing down, and the days when women could be so easily locked away are over. From the catastrophic Newsnight interview with Emily Maitlis, in which Andrew expressed no sympathy for the victims of Epstein, to arguments that delivering papers to his protection officers did not mean he had been served, Andrew’s public response to her allegations has been a vision of entitlement. Throughout the Newsnight interview, he claimed he didn’t know Epstein well, but was good friends with Maxwell, and Epstein came to his social occasions as her “plus one”. He invited Maxwell and Epstein to parties, including his daughter’s 18th and a party at Windsor Castle where the Queen was present; he is even accused of asking Maxwell to bring women to Buckingham Palace for him. After Maxwell’s conviction for sex trafficking, Andrew’s association with her is a serious problem. Since Judge Lewis Kaplan denied Andrew’s bid to throw out the sex abuse case, the damage limitation stories have emerged. One report suggests that Andrew will sell his chalet in Verbier, in the Swiss Alps, to fund legal fees and any settlement, instead of it being paid by his mother; other suggest he will settle out of court. Trying to encourage Giuffre to settle might have been easier had Andrew’s legal team not chosen to publish slurs against her – calling a victim of underage sexual abuse a “money-hungry sex kitten” in legal documents and accusing her of frivolous and inconsistent claims. And a settlement could run into the millions. There is a mortgage on the chalet, so Andrew needs to get more money from somewhere. Sources have explained that Giuffre would also expect an apology. So Andrew’s legal team, who have hardly endeared themselves to Giuffre, have the mother of all battles on their hands to persuade her to take a settlement. Even if she does, the taint will remain. But if she chooses to go to court instead, Andrew losing his military titles will be the least of his problems. A trial would be a disaster for Andrew and the royals. It would involve lengthy questioning, depositions, including possibly his former wife and daughters, and requests for evidence that has hitherto remained unfound, such as the records of Andrew’s protection officers for where he was the night when Virginia claims she met him. He could refuse to cooperate with the process, but the court would still judge in his absence. The comparison had been made by many that Prince Harry had relinquished his military titles when he stepped back to protect his wife and family – and many military sources had expressed sadness to lose him. Prince Harry had no lawsuits against him, no accusations. So, why was it that the royal dogged by controversy still retained all his accolades until now? Harry longed for a statement from the wider royal family backing up his concerns for his wife; Andrew was supported by the palace, which issued statements that “emphatically denied” the claims of Giuffre. But in a swift turnaround, Andrew is now out in the cold, no longer a member of the Firm. And if the case proceeds and the judge finds he was guilty of sexual assault of a minor, he will be found guilty not as a royal, but as a private citizen. Kate Williams is professor of history at Reading University and author of Rival Queens and The Edge of the FallIn New York, some things never change. If you die in a fire, it’s always your fault. When a fire started in a heater and ripped down the hallway of an apartment building in December 1998, killing four people in a blast of heat and smoke, city officials framed the fire as a tragedy that could have been avoided if people had only remembered to close their doors. “People should close the door behind them when leaving a [burning] apartment,” said then-fire chief Daniel Nigro – now the city’s fire commissioner. “They would not have died if they had stayed in their apartments,” said the city’s then-mayor, the now-infamous Rudolph Giuliani, musing that it’s “easier to blame things on mechanisms rather than on what human beings understand, do or don’t do”. When a space heater torched a Bronx apartment building on 9 January and killed 17 people, making it the city’s deadliest fire in decades, New York’s brand-new mayor Eric Adams knew exactly what to say: “Close the door, close the door,” said Adams on Monday, the day after the fire. “Muscle memory is everything, and if we can drill that in, we can save lives by closing the doors, not only in the city but across the entire globe.” Landlords run this town. They always have, and perhaps they always will. So it should come as no surprise that one of Twin Parks’ investors, Rick Gropper, is on the new mayor’s transition team – for housing, no less. Twin Parks is owned by a consortium of investors, including LIHC Investment Group, Belveron Partners and Camber Property Group. Gropper cofounded Camber with Andrew Moelis, the son of one of New York’s top affordable housing developers; housing organizers call Ron Moelis the “gentrification king” of New York. The building management was not at fault, Adams told the nation on Good Morning America; the building had only “two violations that were outstanding in the last few years”. Technically, the mayor was half right: as of Sunday, only two violations remained outstanding with the city’s Department of Housing Preservation and Development (HPD) – out of 13 violations total in the past year alone. But a closer look at city records tells a different story. Over the past 11 months, Twin Parks North West racked up a litany of complaints to the city’s complaint line: no heat in 6K; broken pipe; broken or missing radiator; no heat; broken or missing door; electric wiring exposed; ventilator system missing; no heat or hot water in 6E; no heat in 18E; no heat in 6K; and the list goes on. Gropper and Moelis deserve blame for their poor management of Twin Parks. But the real scandal is that in the landscape of New York City real estate developers, they are not uniquely evil. (After all, this is the world that brought us current Giuliani legal client and former American president Donald Trump.) The Right to Counsel coalition, a group of tenant’s rights organizations, drew up a list of the city’s top 20 evictors during the pandemic. Compared with the others, many of whom specialize in affordable housing, Camber didn’t even rate. And this is perhaps the most stinging indictment of the city’s mega-billion-dollar affordable housing industry. “What exists in New York City, and what has existed in New York City for decades, is a culture of intentional neglect of low-income housing,” said Luis Henríquez Carrero, director of litigation at Legal Services of New York City, which every year handles about a thousand legal cases about bad living conditions in apartments. Contrary to Giuliani’s 1998 musings, it is a lot easier to blame human beings than it is to blame mechanisms. But the real culprit in Sunday’s fire isn’t the mayor, or even the landlords. It’s something more abstract than a broken door, a space heater, or even a bad management company. The fuel for fires like the one in the Bronx is money – specifically, the flood of investment money that is pouring into so-called affordable housing from investors all over the globe. “There are very few asset classes with more proven resilience and staying power than affordable housing, and competition for deals in the five boroughs remains extremely high,” Andrew Gendron of LIHC told The Real Deal last week – announcing his acquisition, in partnership with Camber, of a $68m portfolio in East Harlem. That’s real estate for “there’s gold in them there hills”. The financialization of poverty – and specifically, of affordable housing – has created a gold rush. And when the money floods in, it changes neighborhoods in ways that don’t necessarily benefit people in buildings such as Twin Parks. Follow the money, and you will find a line from the broken doors and heaters in buildings all over the city to the big banks that finance affordable housing deals. “When you make the decision to stop directly funding housing for the poor, and you decide to involve private entities to do it for you, then you introduce market forces into the process of providing affordable housing,” says Henríquez. “And those market forces have created an incentive on many of the landlords to neglect their properties for many decades, to where we see things like the tragedy at Twin Parks.” The result of all this investment, as longtime Bronx resident Eileen Markey points out in a recent dispatch for the New Republic, is that many of the buildings in the Bronx are bearing mortgages worth much more than the net operating income (NOI) of the buildings can produce. Landlords who “bought up buildings at speculative prices, gambling on ever-increasing rents – and quite literally banking on the ability to oust low-income tenants – are faced with declining buildings they can’t afford to maintain and investors they are obliged to serve”, she writes. This is the heart of the problem. If housing vulnerable people is an asset class – not a social good, or a human right – then generating returns for investors will always be in a zero-sum relationship with providing safe housing for those people. Landlords will always be in the middle; and when they’re taking sides, as they must in housing for profit, investors will always win. “When housing is a commodity, and making repairs is a cost – and like any cost, it needs to be minimized so that profit can be maximized – no law changes that basic fact,” says Henríquez. “Providing safe and decent habitable conditions for your tenants falls on the cost side of your balance sheet. And so that already creates an incentive to do as little as possible. To keep that cost as low as possible.” Annia Ciezadlo is a journalist based in New York CityMax Fordham, who has died aged 88, changed the way that buildings in Britain are heated, lit, powered and ventilated more than any other engineer of his generation. Trained in the sciences, he brought a new creative and intellectual rigour to the problems of plumbing and wiring, bringing the disparate building services trades together in a single holistic approach. Tackling problems from first principles, he founded his practice on the idea of engineers embedding scientific knowledge in the art of building design, in a way that has since become ubiquitous. He always instructed colleagues to “start with the edge of the universe as a boundary and quickly narrow down to the specific problem”. While other engineers might reach for the ventilation grille catalogue, Fordham began by asking how air should enter a room, and why. At a time when heating and lighting was usually an afterthought, he worked with architects from the very beginning of the design process, developing practical, elegant, low-energy solutions, pioneering sustainable design long before the term was coined. From the Alexandra Road housing estate in north London to Tate St Ives, to the Contact theatre in Manchester, he championed natural daylighting, passive solar heating and airtight construction in ways that have since been adopted and codified as standard practice. Sustainability should be a given, he thought, if something is designed well. When he set up his practice in 1966 with his wife, Thalia “Taddy” Dyson, it was one of the first firms in the UK to conceive the building services as a single discipline, combining previously siloed trades. As Fordham said in a 2017 interview: “I remember going to meetings with engineers for electrical, public health and mechanical ventilation – it seemed bonkers.” Instead, his would be a one-stop shop. His big break came when the architecture firm Arup Associates, where he had started out in his career, asked him to design the heating system for the 1,000-flat Hulme 5 housing estate in Manchester, for which he came up with a new method of sizing and drawing up pipes. He developed a style of detailed technical drawing that became an exemplar for future projects, presenting the information for the entire scheme on just three sheets of A3 paper. Soon after, he was commissioned to work on Neave Brown’s Alexandra Road estate in Camden, London, for which he designed a novel heating system cast into the concrete party walls. This led to work on Newport high school, by Evans &amp; Shalev architects, completed in 1972, which saw an extraordinary level of detailing for the time, such as conduits threaded through preformed holes in the structural columns, so that sockets appeared to emerge seamlessly from the concrete. Such invention continued throughout Fordham’s career, with solutions such as the glazing apertures at Tate St Ives in Cornwall, designed like a camera iris, to control the levels of daylight reaching sensitive artworks, or the Royal Exchange theatre in Manchester, where the air distribution, seating and electrics were all completely integrated in a high-tech pod worthy of a Nasa landing module. The Joseph Banks building at Kew Gardens, built in 1984, incorporated ground source heat pumps decades before they became mainstream, while the design of the roof lights for the National Trust headquarters in Swindon massively reduced the need for artificial lighting. For the Caspar low-cost housing project in Leeds, completed in 2000 (later demolished over structural concerns), Fordham used airtightness to reduce heat loss, meaning all the heating the flats needed came from the residents’ body heat – and a 50-watt lightbulb. The lessons of Caspar informed the design of Fordham’s own house in Camden, built in 2019, which incorporated automatic sliding thermal shutters designed to cover the windows at night when they would lose the most heat. Prototyped using pieces of Lego Technic, the mechanism was inspired by the seal of car windows, which Fordham noted remain airtight at 80 miles an hour. As the defining building services engineer of the era, he often found himself working for competing teams of architects. A series of Chinese walls had to be erected in the office for the Kew competition, when the firm found themselves working with 32 rival practices. More recently, for the Windermere Jetty Museum competition, they were on 63 different teams. Born in Highgate, north London, Max was the son of Molly (nee Swabey), a journalist at Vogue magazine and the News Chronicle newspaper, and Michael Fordham, a Jungian child psychiatrist. He attended the progressive Dartington Hall boarding school in Devon, which he remembered fondly as having a “completely undisciplined environment”. There was no uniform, classes were optional, and the day began with a period of mandatory “useful work”, where students helped to maintain the school buildings. Fordham became skilled in carpentry and metalwork, learning about push-fit and compression pipework, and made an electric hotplate for the kitchen. He likened his schooldays to an apprenticeship, during which he first discovered a love of designing and problem-solving as well as leadership: he was elected chairman of the pupil-run democracy for several years. The democratic and mildly anarchic structure of the school would go on to have a strong influence on the organisation of his own practice. Following two years of national service as a pilot in the Fleet Air Arm, Fordham read natural sciences at Trinity College, Cambridge, specialising in chemistry, physics, maths and mineralogy. He found the narrow focus of life as a pure scientist unappealing, preferring the company of arts and humanities students. His housemate Simon Nicholson, son of the artists Ben Nicholson and Barbara Hepworth, introduced him to a creative circle of architects and artists, including Sir Leslie Martin, architect of the Royal Festival Hall and head of the university’s architecture department. Martin suggested Fordham consider a career in heating and ventilation engineering, where he could apply his aptitude for theoretical physics to an industry that was then lacking in such skills. Graduating in 1957, Fordham began working as a development engineer at Weatherfoil Heating Systems, a contracting company, which gave him a broad introduction to the building industry. There he designed an innovative fan convection heating system for Martin’s celebrated Harvey Court student accommodation building in Cambridge, and was named as the inventor when it was patented. He met Taddy around this time, marrying in 1960. She introduced him to her landlord, the architect Sir Philip Dowson, founding partner of the Building Group at Ove Arup engineers (now Arup Associates). Dowson offered him a job, and Fordham spent the next five years honing his technical skills, mastering an ability to draw all of the building services in complete detail, expanding his repertoire to include mechanical and electrical engineering, as well as public health, before setting up his own firm. Fordham often said that the design of the practice itself was something he was as proud of as any building. In 1973, motivated by the plight of precariously employed dockers, he turned his company into a co-operative, with the slogan: “Anyone fit to be an employee is fit to be a partner.” The principle was expanded in 2001, when the firm became the first business in the British construction industry to become a limited liability partnership (LLP). “It’s not a profit-sharing scheme,” Fordham said, “but a responsibility-sharing scheme.” In an echo of his schooldays, the majority of the company could decide to overthrow the leadership at any time. As a voracious polymath, he preferred not to employ building services graduates, but hired people with a broad range of backgrounds, from zoology to botany, product design and mathematics. As one colleague recalled: “Max’s skill was to take brilliant people, who didn’t know anything whatsoever about building services, and give them space to think.” He was interested in absolutely everything, they added, “which wasn’t always completely easy for the people around him”. A question about a design problem would often turn into a philosophical conversation long into the night, ranging from thermodynamics to trade winds and the origins of the universe. Alongside the practice, Fordham was a visiting professor at the University of Bath from 1990 until his death, and received numerous honours, including being made OBE in 1994. Taddy died in 2017. He is survived by their three sons, Jason, Cato and Finn, and four grandchildren. • Max Sigurd Fordham, engineer, born 17 June 1933; died 4 January 2022Activists pushing for global reparations for colonialism and slavery are often accused of asking for the politically impossible. At the international scale, however, reparations are more plausible than one might think. That is because an international mechanism to move resources to the formerly colonized world in a politically feasible fashion already exists: the policy instrument of “Special Drawing Rights” (SDRs) managed by the International Monetary Fund. Calls for changing SDR allocation are not new, nor is the idea that SDRs could function as reparations for trans-Atlantic slavery and colonialism. Professor Cynthia L Hewitt of Morehouse College argued for exactly this strategy as early as 2004. What is new is the political possibility opened by growing awareness of the global climate crisis, which requires solutions that are not only practical but historically just. SDR reallocation, as the Barbadian prime minister, Mia Mottley, suggested in her “stinging” speech at Cop26, is both. Introduced in 1969, SDRs are essentially “IMF coupons” distributed to central banks or national treasuries around the world, which can either hold them or exchange them with other member countries for cash. “Adding SDRs to a country’s international reserves makes it more resilient financially,” the IMF explains. “In times of crisis, a country can dip into its savings for urgent needs (eg, to pay for importing vaccines).” Unfortunately, the general allocation of SDRs is unjust and inefficient. That’s no accident. At the 1944 Bretton Woods conference, 44 nations “negotiated” plans for the IMF and World Bank, but only two mattered: the US and the UK, with the latter a distant second. Quota distribution was decided by wartime politics, as Raymond Mikesell, the author of the “formula”, explained 50 years later. No European country expected to lose its empire; India’s presence as the sole colony was the exception proving the rule. Two decades later, dozens of new countries in Africa and Asia had gained political independence from Britain, France and others. By the mid-1960s, third world countries dominated the UN general assembly, but the “economic decolonization” they sought was impossible without equal representation in global economic governance – the IMF made an entirely new “African department” to handle the overflow. It was in this context that SDRs were born. “In 1965, when serious discussions of creating the SDR first got underway, a group of experts … argued that SDRs should be allocated with a view to meeting the development needs of newly independent countries,” explains economic historian Barry Eichengreen. While the former colonial powers and the US enjoyed a fossil-fueled “Golden Age” of capitalism, inequality between rich and poor countries reached new heights. SDRs, some reasoned, would allow poor countries to prioritize the development that colonialism had denied, without risking mass capital flight or default. “But when SDRs were issued in 1970, they were allocated instead in proportion to IMF members’ quotas.” This August, the IMF’s board of governors approved $650bn in new SDRs, its largest allocation since 1945 and more than double its expansion in 2009 at the height of the global financial meltdown. Because SDRs are allocated by quota, however, low-income developing countries received just 1.4% of that massive sum. High-income developing countries such as China did better, at 22%, but rich countries took the lion’s share – over 60%. The US gobbled up an obscene 17%. Moreover, US law requires that the US Treasury consult Congress for large changes in SDR allocations, giving US lawmakers a functional unilateral veto over any new and significant SDR allocations. Of course, the US will never touch its SDRs – the “exorbitant privilege” of the US dollar means the country can print all the money it needs. Other rich countries have similarly low- or zero-utilization rates; reaching into their SDRs would be an admission of failure. On the other end, the vast majority of Small Island Developing States and low-income developing countries – countries that, lest we forget, have never created a global financial meltdown – rely on their meager reserves for emergencies of all kinds. The quota system is worse than a relic – it is a literal representation of how colonialism continues to lock poor countries out of global governance. For the African countries still using the CFA franc currency instituted by the French empire, the connection to colonialism goes well beyond the symbolic: while most of the world’s countries are permitted to use their SDRs unconditionally, the use of SDRs by these former French colonies is assessed by IMF-supported “surveillance consultations” on a “case-by-case basis”. Quota size also determines voting power on the IMF’s board of governors, giving the US a 17% share of the vote. Since major IMF decisions require an 85% share of votes, this gives the US a functional veto over the voting system that SDR allocations are currently based in. The IMF recognizes the need for change, but the US has blocked even marginal reforms, while hoarding SDRs it neither needs nor uses. Yet it is entirely possible for the IMF and international community to turn SDRs into an effective tool for climate reparations, rather than more money-under-the-mattress for rich countries. Here are a few ways that could happen. First is the IMF’s own proposal. As its managing director, Kristalina Georgieva, has rightly acknowledged, Africa contributes “almost nothing” to global warming but is bearing the consequences – and costs – largely by itself. Her idea, endorsed by G20 finance ministers at their October 2021 summit in Rome, is a new Resilience and Sustainability Trust (RST) within the IMF worth up to $50bn. Through the RST, wealthy countries could turn their SDRs into climate finance for low- and middle-income countries vulnerable to climate shocks. But $50bn – less than half of the US’s new allotment – is not only insufficient, it’s unlikely. As a mechanism, not a mandate, the RST cannot compel rich countries to redistribute their SDRs. Even if the target is met, “design flaws” including eligibility requirements and conditionalities “would render the planned RST ineffective for most climate-vulnerable countries”, as members of a Boston University taskforce have noted. The good news is: better alternatives already exist. In fact, most multilateral development banks (MDBs) are prescribed holders, including new climate-focused ones like the UN’s Adaptation Fund and Green Climate Fund could be added with US assent. MDBs have climate knowledge and knowhow that the IMF, late to the climate game, lacks, and, as prescribed holders, MDBs can use SDRs as a normal part of their financial operations. “Rechanneling SDRs to the multilateral development banks will extend [their] reach and power,” explains the Center on Global Development. The African Development Bank and other MDBs have called for just this, but so far the IMF has turned them down. Another option is the creation of Special Environmental Drawing Rights within the IMF, which would help fund national investment plans aligned with a country’s climate objectives. The best option is the simplest and the most just: eliminate the allocation system based on members’ “quota” and build a new one based on reparative principles, as Professor Hewitt argued years ago and as Prime Minister Mottley advances today. Such an alternative ranking system would allocate the most SDRs to the countries most disadvantaged by slavery and colonialism as well as climate vulnerability. International funding for phasing out fossil fuels and adapting to climate impacts is trillions of dollars short of what will be required to avoid the worst climate impacts. More than a decade in, the Green Climate Fund (the world’s largest dedicated climate fund) has managed to raise merely a tenth of a target that was an order of magnitude too small to begin with. SDR allocations can provide an alternative to the broken global climate financing system via an institution that is at least nominally publicly responsible, as opposed to relying on fantasies about the social responsibility of the private sector. Not only are SDRs great climate finance, dollar for dollar, but rich countries have little to lose beyond the IMF “coupons” they don’t need and won’t spend. Ditching the quota system outright may not happen (yet), but redistributing SDRs is a serious and feasible way for rich countries to begin a process of reparations and avoid the worst versions of climate crisis at the same time. Michael Franczak is a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Pennsylvania’s Perry World House and the author of the forthcoming book Global Inequality and American Foreign Policy in the 1970s Olúfẹ́mi O Táíwò is an assistant professor of philosophy at Georgetown University and the author of the forthcoming book Reconsidering ReparationsAnd here’s the snap report on the day’s play, with Ali Martin’s copy to be added shortly: Some reading for you while we await the day one report: Play will start half an hour earlier tomorrow at Hobart to make up for the overs lost today, while over in Cape Town, South Africa seem to have sealed it, needing only another 29 runs. That’s it from me after an intriguing day at Hobart - Australia fighting back from the doldrums on a green seamer and England rather losing their way with an attack shorn of Robinson. A glorious century from Travis Head and wonderful support from young Cameron Green. Have a good day, thanks for all the messages and sorry I couldn’t get to them all. Bye! That’s it for today, England can retreat to lick their wounds and hope that Robinson might be fit to bowl tomorrow and they can rattle through the tail. A superb counter-attack from Australia after being on the ropes early on shows the buoyancy in their camp. Damn, the covers are being pulled back on by the groundmen in shorts and royal blue fleeces. If no more drizzle... “Hello Tanya,” hello Timonthy Sanders, “is the ‘sea mist’ of David Harper’s local knowledge similar to when the sea fret stops play on sunny days at Scarborough ?” It seems to be more soggy than foggy - from ten thousand miles away. Eamonn Maloney refutes my naive idea that the Australian batting cupboard is bulging. “See I think local observers would tell you the cupboard is concerningly bare beyond the incumbents and we won’t be sniffing at 40-odd averages like Head’s over the next ten years. The next cabs off the rank at the moment are the previously tried and unconvincing, with the exception of Pucovski if he can stop getting hit on the bonce.” Interesting. So is there any criticism of the Sheffield Shield as a batting school? It’s lunch in Cape Town, with South Africa needing only another 41, seven wickets in the back pocket. Keegan Petersen’s 82 seems to have done the business. Jasprit Bumrah has apparently been fabulous, but with only one wicket to show for it. Something to chew on while the press corps in Tasmania are getting increasingly cheesed-off by this stoppage. Seems we might get more play now - with 70 mins possible, sorry for the the earlier misinformation. Eamonn Maloney is using the rain break to pick at his heels “England’s inadequacies in this series have masked Australia’s own question marks. One of them was ‘is Cummins a no. 8?’ which the skipper seems here to have answered correctly in my view as a no. Starc every time when he’s playing, not just because of a good series with the willow. Carey has batted like the world is ending and needs someone to calm him down. Meanwhile Travis Head will only ever average 40 odd at test level because of his tendency to play away from the body, but he should play every match for the next ten years and have his central contract restored forthwith because of his ability to change games (see also B Stokes).” Head was just brilliant today. In fact Australia seem to have an embarrassment of riches on the batting front. And it’s still drizzling at Hobart with about 45 minutes left in the day. Local knowledge, thanks David Harper! “Following the second round of England Women’s scheduled PCR tests on Wednesday a member of the England Women support staff tested positive for COVID-19. The staff member has been in isolation in accordance with state COVID management guidelines since the result of the test and will remain in Canberra when the group travel to Adelaide for the IT20 leg of the multi-format series. The ECB medical team have been working alongside their CA counterparts to manage the situation. Additional testing and contact tracing has been undertaken and no additional positive cases have been reported. A further round of routine PCR tests will be undertaken before the team fly by charter to Adelaide on Monday January 17.” “Could you please update the Key Events for those of us catching the OBO on the sly?” asks James Debens. Ok, here we go: At 12-3, (ducks for Warner and Smith) Australia are on the ropes, despite Crawley dropping Labuschagne, going for a catch in front of Root’s nose at second slip. Superb bowling from Broad and Robinson. Then a counter-punch from Labuschagne and Head as England’s change bowlers struggle. Labuschagne falls in a banana-skin manner, but Green picks up where he left off. Runs a plenty, and Head reaches a sumptuous hundred before giving his wicket away, Green falls for the bouncer trick to cheer up Wood’s day and England have a glimmer of a hope. Oh, and England left out Anderson - Stokes can’t bowl and Robinson seems to have injured himself out of the attack. Have I missed anything? Time to top up your coffee. We’re still waiting for news from Hobart but meanwhile Alison Mitchell and Jeremy Snape are talking about mental health in what looks like a dungeon. An email arrives from Finbar Anslow: ‘Morning Tanya, minus ten last night in the hills of Southern Piedmont.Just wondering if Jack Leach has a shelf life on his hat trick? Would it still be valid if he got a wicket with his first ball 2 years later? Is there a record for this kind of thing?” I think they go on forever don’t they? I don’t know what the record is but here is a selection of unusual hat-tricks. The Guardian’s own Adam Collins is not impressed: It looks damp at Hobart. And grey. And lush. The groundsmen have pulled on the covers, but they’re hanging around for further instruction. The radar is apparently showing only spots of rain. Any Tasmanian locals out there to give us a proper forecast? Over in Cape Town meanwhile, South Africa need 55 more to win, with seven wickets left.. 59.3 overs: Australia 241-6 (Carey 10, Starc 0) With great aplomb, Carey squats and square drives another short one from Wood to the boundary. The umpires consult about the rain, dismiss it, let another two balls be bowled, then slowly take the players off. “As it looks like the England XI will be beaten by the Australian lower order,” ponders Kim Thonger, “their top 4 not really contributing, could we adopt this as a permanent new format for Ashes tests? Seven Australians against eleven Englishmen. It evens it up a bit. There’s an obvious sponsor for The 7/11 Ashes in the wings.” Very good. 59th over: Australia 237-6 (Carey 6, Starc 0) Up on the Aussie balcony, we see David Warner holding the pinky-orange ball, and drop advice into Pat Cummins’ ear. Just one from Broad’s over as a little drizzle starts to fall. 58th over: Australia 236-6 (Carey 5, Starc 0) A succession of bouncers from Wood discombobulates Green, who falls for the age-old trap. Smashing innings though, boom-bastic elegance, what a talent he is. Now, can England whittle out the tail quickly? Green slam-hooks a bouncer, but can only top-edge and Crawley is waiting at deep square leg. His third catch of the day. 57th over: Australia 235-5 (Carey 4, Green 74) Miserly from Broad until Green makes that jollygreengiant stride and cover drives with impossible elegance for a man mountain. “Greetings from the Bunker.” Lovely to hear from you Charles Sheldrick. “ My passion for cricket was ignited by the 1981 Ashes, I was 10, so I should be used to this by now. Why does it still get to me after 40 years, the hope, the brief flash, like a glimpse of the sunrise through the fog, when England compete. Then the gloom descends again and reality reasserts itself. Do I need to get out more, or is that the problem?” Charles, you just did need some sunshine. We all do. 56th over: Australia 230-5 (Carey 3, Green 70) All elegance, Green leans and sends a short one from Wood through backward point for four. In pounds Wood and sends down a succession of more short balls that Green ignores. England need a run-out or something here. A Billings stumping perhaps. 55th over: Australia 226-5 (Carey 3, Green 66) Broad sprints in with full-hearted fury Carey picks up a couple, but watches the rest fly safely by into Billings’ gloves. 54th over: Australia 224-5 (Carey 1, Green 66) A couple of dots, then a juicy one on leg stump which Green sends through midwicket for four with a jaunty air. A second follows , a back foot square drive: delicious. 53rd over: Australia 216-5 (Carey 1, Green 58) Ollie Robinson does not seem to have taken the field. Meanwhile James Anderson, resting, watches from the sidelines. The sky is now inky black and the fielders shadows are charcoal. Broad is bowling and Billings collects the ball as they run a single, a bundle of energy, collar up, sleeves buttoned down. He’s not had a good day today but, to be fair, he’s been pretty good for the rest of the series - fast and full-throated, if unlucky. It always helps to be lucky. I’ve just watched the highlights of the morning session and the elation from England to have Australia on the ropes at 12-3....can they pull something from the hat in this final session? The lights are on, the dark is rising. Good morning Guy Hornsby! 52nd over: Australia 215-5 (Carey 1, Green 57) Root signs off the session - his tenth over - and they trundle off for the break. That’s 130 runs in the session, a mature fifty for Green and a glorious hundred for Travis Head before his moment of madness. Time for England to regroup - all is not lost - but Australia counter-punched with dental precision. Time for a quick coffee, but I’ll leave you to ponder this thought from Gary Naylor. 51st over: Australia 212-5 (Carey 1, Green 54) Woakes to Carey: a maiden. 50th over: Australia 212-5 (Carey 1, Green 54) A single through the covers off Root brings Green his fifty - how he’s grown in confidence this series - and the last ball is drilled through the covers, a darling of a shot. 49th over: Australia 204-5 (Carey 0, Green 47) On the balcony the Australians are waiting, and the crowd clap Woakes’s approach to the crease. England polish their boots and scrub their pads, but there it is, a scamper for two through the off-side off just 112 balls. Head gets a big bear hug from Green, pulls off his helmet - his hair heavy with sweat - and grins to a standing ovation from the Hobart crowd. What a rescue act from 12-3. But what is this, he’s just plonked his wicket away with a splodge to mid-on. From elation to desolation in one false shot. From nowhere, Head chips Woakes to Robinson the ball after reaching a glorious, gluttonous, humdinger of a century. 48th over: Australia 201-4 (Green 46, Head 99) I’m not entirely sure whether Robinson is physically unfit to bowl or Root just doesn’t trust him to bowl. Anyway, Root continues, and they pick a few, but Head finishes the over on 99 - tantalisingly close to his second hundred of the series. 47th over: Australia 197-4 (Green 44, Head 97) Woakes gets the nod and celebrates his recall with a juicy one, verging on half-volley, which Head flicks off the pads and away for four. And merrily we roll along. 46th over: Australia 192-4 (Green 44, Head 92) Three squeezed off Root, but narry a boundary. “The last time I saw a wicket this green,” writes Jonathan Taylor, “was on the Hill at Kirriemuir – the only ground where you can watch the fall of the wicket from JM Barrie’s Camera Obscura…….. Much like this one the only difference between the wicket &amp; the outfield was it had a set of stumps at either end.” 45th over: Australia 189-4 (Green 43, Head 90) Broad again, Root doesn’t’ have much choice tbh. The floodlights are on, and on the lush green bank the crowd lounge about. It’s a jumper evening. Just a single comes off it, as England get a breather. Are we close to the witching hour when the lights take over?The commentators seemed to think its approach was why Australia were going at such a clatter. 44th over: Australia 188-4 (Green 43, Head 89) Rejoice, a maiden (Root). 43rd over: Australia 188-4 (Green 43, Head 89) Broad again. Head slaps him through the covers like a bawdy swipe on a night out - and Broad is frustrated by the fielder who doesn’t move, shrugging passive aggressively. He shows the umpire the ball, bits seems to be coming off it - imagine peeling nail varnish - but any request is turned down. Head is now the leading runscorer of this series, leaping Labuschagne. “Good morning Tanya,” Hello Tone White! “from cold, severe, S of France, glad to hear Doh-gi has gathered the blankets to get comfortable, it may turn out to be a long hard day in the field after the initial Australian fake collapse.An exhausted English team sent in to chase 472 tomorrow night?” It’s definitely possible. 42nd over: Australia 184-4 (Green 43, Head 85) Root looks around the field for inspiration.. and bowls himself. Green tickles a single to bring up the hundred partnership in 117 balls. Root eyes betray his feelings. They aren’t joyous. 41st over: Australia 179-4 (Green 42, Head 84) It’s Broad to stem the flow, but Head square drives a fat one right down to the boundary without moving a toe. Green follows suit two balls later and dispatches a full bunger through the covers for four more. 40th over: Australia 169-4 (Green 37, Head 79) Wood doesn’t deliver his first ball, just sprints all the way from the top of his run to mid-way down the pitch. The first genuine delivery though, is a thick edge which flies through the non-existent slip cordon. And so it continues, with Wood not quite finding his line, and Head and Green squeezing and nursing 12 from the over. Frustration is bubbling. “You got off lightly, Tanya,” says Jane Evans. “My dog just disappeared backwards out the dog door with the cardboard box from which I had just unpacked a new standard lamp so that I can follow the blog under lights. This is an enjoyable end to the series - variety being the spice of life and all that.” 39th over: Australia 152-4 (Green 32, Head 67) Head is making it look remarkably easy on an April green-seamer. An ease here, a nudge there. The ball ruffles Root’s trousers as Sam Billings continues to chat away from behind the stumps, bubbling with enthusiasm, like a glowworm in the darkness. 38th over: Australia 152-4 (Green 32, Head 67) Head picks up four more square off Broad, and that’s eight off the over as they take drinks, on a cloudy afternoon at Hobart. Advantage Australia, I fancy. 37th over: Australia 144-4 (Green 30, Head 61) Root again, and Green shovels the ball past square leg where Robinson (back on the field) collects with the ease of a creaking wheelbarrow. 36th over: Australia 139-4 (Green 26, Head 61) It’s Broad, all Ramboesque in his headband, he growls at Green who isn’t ready for his first missive. He stems the flow of runs - but who is going to provide the fire the other end? 35th over: Australia 138-4 (Green 25, Head 61) Root looks tired and thin as he clutches the pink ball. Australia take a couple as my dog steals her second human blanket, the dog blanket being beneath her. 34th over: Australia 136-4 (Green 24, Head 60) Mark Wood, whose day hasn’t gone to plan, throws himself onto the midwicket boundary to save one. You watch through your fingers - that plywood body has been through so much this tour. The partnership stretches to 53. Morning Brian Withington! “If there was one man who should have been first on the England team-sheet when this wicket was revealed, it was surely the legend that is James Anderson Darren Stevens. I’d back him to get a few jaunty runs on it, too. In passing, is Robinson fit enough for Test cricket?In a series of disappointments, I fear this has all the makings of being the cruellest of all.” Indeed. “Stevo’s gonna get you” would have been pinging all over the place. And yes, I think Robinson has work to do on his fitness, but, looking on the bright side, there is room for improvement. 33rd over: Australia 131-4 (Green 21, Head 58) Four singles milked off Root. 32nd over: Australia 127-4 (Head 56, Green 19) Morning everyone! Great stuff Jonathan, you’re a natural, you even nudged England from a position of strength to a careworn Joe Root having a bowl after 32 overs. Head goes to his fifty with a flick to fine leg off Woakes, and another through mid--off two balls later. The ECB report that Robinson is off the field with lower back stiffness, but will be back soon. 31st over: Australia 119-4 (Head 48, Green 19) Head is far from orthodox, but he’s nearing another Test half century in the most challenging of conditions. He and Green are coasting right now. Wood is 50/0 from seven overs, which is less than ideal on this pitch. I dare say it’s pretty chilly in Hobart right now, and some of the locals seem suitably well oiled. 29th over: Australia 107-4 (Head 42, Green 17) Head’s Covid scare hasn’t scuppered his natural dash. He’s 42 off 43 balls after striding to the crease at 12-3. Green thick edges a boundary. 28th over: Australia 102-4 (Head 38, Green 12) Things have settled down a bit after the first session pyrotechnics. I’ll shortly pass the baton over to Tanya Aldred in sunny Manchester. Thanks for going easy on me for my first OBO! 27th over: Australia 100-4 (Head 38, Green 10) I clearly went too hard at poor Ollie Robinson. He’s currently off the field and being tended to. It looks like a side strain but I’m not an MD. Australia reach their century. 26th over: Australia 97-4 (Head 37, Green 8) After a wonderful opening spell, Robinson has come out in trundle mode after lunch, and Green duly sends a loosener where it belongs. Head then follows suit. Ollie’s running in like he’s knocked over about three large steaks at lunch. And worryingly, he’s now left the field. 25th over: Australia 88-4 (Head 33, Green 3) We’re back on board, Novak’s been given his marching orders, and Wood is back into the attack. He’s already roughed up Head, and is noticeably tighter than his opening three over spell. In other news... If you can bear to peel yourself away from the dinner break, you can follow reaction with our liveblog: Warren Skaife asks, not unreasonably: “Was Marnus’ dismissal the ugliest seen at any level of cricket?” I once saw a bloke in park cricket swallow a bee, and get run out mid pitch. By the time he’d trudged, off his face had ballooned up threefold. The poor bloke deserved a call back , surely, but local cricket in Australia is pitiless. And yes, it was ugly for Manus, especially as he was seeing them so well. The crowd is capped at 11,000, and masks are mandatory, but they’re certainly getting value for money. England made five changes, finally had some luck at the toss, and had the Aussies on the ropes at 12-3. But Labuschagne and Head steadied the ship, before Manus completely botched a fuller Broad delivery, fluffing about like a man with six left feet. An entertaining session and an even contest. I’m off for a coffee. 23rd over: Australia 84-4 (Head 31, Green 1) I’m still coming to terms with Marnus’ dismissal. He was bating so well, and tied himself in about a dozen different knots. Super bowling from Broad, but one of the weirder dismissals you’ll see. Extraordinary ball from Broad and Marnus makes a right royal mess of it! England are right back in it now. 22nd over: Australia 83-3 (Labuschagne 44, Head 31) Head keeps slashing, riding his luck, and baffling all and sundry with his shot selection. You’re always a chance, no many how many pies you’re throwing at him. But he’s still going at a run a ball. 21st over: Australia 79-3 (Labuschagne 44, Head 27) The Labuschagne/Head partnership is now 67. The Aussies looked gone for all money after ten overs but they’ve now taken full control. 20th over: Australia 77-3 (Labuschagne 42, Head 27) Marnus steps down a green, seaming wicket and contemptuously flicks Woakes over mid-wicket for six. He’s seeing them a treat. 19th over: Australia 71-3 (Labuschagne 37, Head 26) Wood is quickly taken off, after conceding 31 from three wobbly overs. A much tighter over from the relieving Broad. 18th over: Australia 68-3 (Labuschagne 37, Head 23) The pitch may be green, but the outfield is outrageously quick. It’s clearly a tough wicket to get a start on, but there’s runs to be had once you get your eye in. The lights are now on, the two Aussies are flaying ‘em, and the visitors are getting frustrated. 17th over: Australia 65-3 (Labuschagne 37, Head 20) An hour ago, it looked like Australia could have be bowling by sundown. But Labuschagne and Head have wrested back control here. Stokes and Wood, teammates at county level, need to get their act together. And England will be ruing dropping Marnus on nought. He’s now 37 from as many balls. 16th over: Australia 50-3 (Labuschagne 26, Head 16) Woakes replaces Robinson and immediately cops a pounding from Head. He’s an old school dasher and is very lucky not to balloon a stinker of a shot to Stokes. You certain do take the good with the bad with Head! Marnus then creams a gift from Woakes for his sixth four. England have to be careful not to cough up their early advantage. 15th over: Australia 41-3 (Labuschagne 22, Head 11) A superb boundary saving dive from Stokes certainly tested his beaten-up body. He looked a little proppy pulling up, but when hasn’t he this summer? Head is now having a dash at Wood, who may not be suited to these conditions. These two Aussies are holding up ok here. Marnus has five boundaries and is looking a treat. 14th over: Australia 30-3 (Labuschagne 17, Head 5) Robinson is probing, and the ball is still zinging all over the place. He’s going at 15-2 off seven overs – outstanding bowling. But he’s finally getting the wobbles and may need a rest. 13th over: Australia 29-3 (Labuschagne 17, Head 4) Enter Mark Wood, who, to pardon the worst of puns, has the wood on the Aussie No 3, having sent him packing at their past three meetings. Stuff you, says Marnus, who immediately flicks a half volley off leg for 4. Time for drinks. 12th over: Australia 24-3 (Labuschagne 13, Head 3) Robinson is eyeing off these two like they’re giant pork chops. But Marnus isn’t the circumspect type and immediately dispatches him to the mid-off boundary. Wonderful, entertaining cricket from both men. 11th over: Australia 17-3 (Labuschagne 9, Head 0) It’s hard going for batsmen and it’s hard going for live bloggers! I hope our English readers just emerging from their slumber are enjoying this skittle-fest. These are decidedly English conditions and they’re revelling in it. But Labuschagne, who has a remarkable record in first innings, is showing a lot of pluck with a sumptuous 4 off Broad. 10th over: Australia 12-3 (Labuschagne 5, Head 0) Welcome back to Test cricket Travis Head! The ball is pinging all over the place right now. Robinson gets the star Aussie second ball. He’s moving it both ways, and the Aussies are all at sea right now. Carnage. Broad tempts him, and the skipper gobbles it up. Australia are in all sorts here. Superb stuff from the opening quicks. 8th over: Australia 7-1 (Labuschagne 0, Khawaja 6) Marnus leaves his opening ball that misses off stump by the proverbial bee’s buttock. He’s then flirts at one outside off, which Crawley spills at second slip after leaping right in the way of his captain. Robinson is in his element out there. 7th over: Australia 7-1 (Labuschagne 0, Khawaja 6) Khawaja is starting to get in his groove, punishing a couple of loose Broad ones. We’re half an hour in and we’ve had just the three scoring shots. Slow going. A peach of a ball from Robinson and nice safe hands from Crawley. Warner never looked comfortable and he finally succumbs after 22 scoreless balls. 5th over: Australia 3-0 (Warner 0, Khawaja 2) Yet another maiden. Warner has faced 16 balls without a run, but he’s much better at batting ugly these days. 4th over: Australia 2-0 (Warner 0, Khawaja 2) It’s tight, tough cricket but the pitch is not as treacherous as it may have appeared an hour ago. Nonetheless, Robinson’s fifth ball moves a mile. 3rd over: Australia 2-0 (Warner 0, Khawaja 2) Broad changed boots and immediately tempts Warner well outside off stump, and very nearly has him chopping on several balls later. Runs are clearly going to be hard earned here. We’re going to miss these Broad/Warner battles. 2nd over: Australia 2-0 (Warner 0, Khawaja 2) Robinson starts bang on target, beating Khawaja’s bat straight up. But a lovely flick off leg from Khawaja gets things ticking. 1st over: Australia 0-0 (Warner 0, Khawaja 0) Bit of a wacky start as Broad barrels head-first into the pitch after his first ball. A maiden to kick things off for the quick, in what will surely be his final Test in Australia. What a wonderful cricketer he’s been. A beautiful Welcome to Country, which includes a shout out to Scott Boland (“his success will not only inspire emerging cricketers but give merit to coaches, supporters and administrators who have battled to ensure pathways are created for First Nations people, sporting pathways and pathways to reconciliation”) and then two cracking renditions of the respective national anthems. Ceremonial duties are completed and we’re ready to go. These two gentlemen will take guard shortly. Play to begin at 3:30pm, local time. As expected, just the one change for the Australians, with Travis Head replacing Marcus Harris, and Usman Khawaja moving up the order. He has an incredible record as an opener but this will be some sort of challenge. A host of changes for England. No Anderson, who was born to bowl on pitches like this. Jonny Bairstow didn’t come up. A Test debut for Sam Billings, currently the keeper for the Sydney Thunder, and England’s 700th Test cap. An absolute no brainer. Some extraordinary footage here. If rain persists, I’ll link to the longer clip where Beefy is interrogated for an hour by a bunch of angry 9-year-old Scots - up there with the funniest thing I’ve seen on the internet. In this chilly climes, Brendan from Sydney reminds us that Onslow in Western Australia yesterday recorded Australia’s hottest ever temperature - 50.7 degrees. Not sure how our English readers would cope with that. Not ideal conditions for swing bowing either. It’s raining. It’s Tasmania. But it doesn’t look too nasty. The 3pm start may be in peril, but the weather boffins remain confident the rain shouldn’t be too much of a factor today. Holy heck! Every half-decent seamer from Hobart to Hull just started short circuiting. A rare sight on these shores. And here’s Ali Martin, who’s been in fine fettle throughout the series, on an England team shambling to the end of a rough tour. To kick things off, here’s a wonderfully evocative piece from Geoff Lemon on Tasmania; just how beautiful it is, just how cold it is (by Australian standards!) and just what this Test match means to the locals. Hello all, and welcome to our over-by-over coverage of the opening day of the fifth Ashes Test. Weather permitting, and it rarely permits in this part of Australia, play kicks off in Hobart at 3pm local time - that’s 4am in the UK. “We’re here preparing for the biggest sporting event Tasmania has ever seen,” the State’s Minister for Recreation and Sport said earlier this week. And indeed, there’s lots to be excited about in the Apple Isle. It’s first Test match in the state for five years. It’s the first ever Ashes Test in Tasmania. And it’s Hobart’s first day/night Test. The ball is pink. The pitch is greener than Bob Brown. The skies are temperamental. There’s plenty to look forward to. The rest of the country, it must be said, has other concerns. Covid is rampant, the supply chains are breaking down, the federal government is dithering, and the national mood is bleak. The smirking mug of Novak Djokovic leads the news every night. A Test cricket match, dead rubber notwithstanding, is a welcome distraction from all that. A bruised and battered England side is looking to win its first Test in Australia since 2010-11. The fourth Test was an absolute doozy and the visitors will be looking to go one better and salvage something from what’s been a dire month and a bit. Australia’s record in pink ball home Tests is extraordinary – nine Tests, nine wins. The bookmakers have them as prohibitive favourites. For the rest of us, something resembling the final day in Sydney would do nicely.The Hollywood blockbuster Spider-Man: No Way Home pulled in the cinema crowds in December, driving Cineworld’s box office revenues to almost 90% of pre-pandemic levels despite the rapid spread of Omicron over the festive season. The world’s second-largest cinema operator, the owner of the Cineworld and Regal Picturehouse chains in the UK and Regal Cinemas in the US, said that across its global business, box office and concession revenue hit 88% of 2019 levels in December. In the UK and Ireland revenues hit 89% of pre-pandemic levels, and 91% in the US. Cineworld credited the phenomenal success of the latest Spider-Man film, which has taken £80m in the UK despite the reintroduction of face masks in cinemas to curb the spread of Omicron days before its release and has become the only film to make more than $1.5bn (£1.1bn) globally since the pandemic began. “Spider-Man: No Way Home has shown the importance for studios of cinematic releases,” said Mooky Greidinger, the chief executive of Cineworld. “We are pleased to see continued strong demand among audiences for cinema experiences, supported by a slate of high-quality and high-performing movies.” The London-listed company said October proved to be the best month of the year, with the release of James Bond: No Time to Die sending revenues in the UK and Ireland to 127% of 2019 levels, pushing its global box office and concession income to 90% of pre-pandemic. However, Cineworld said that the pushing back of the release of Tom Cruise’s Top Gun: Maverick to May this year hurt its November income, which was only 56% of pre-pandemic levels. Nevertheless, the performance across the three-month period was strong enough to make the struggling company cashflow positive. Investors welcomed the news, sending Cineworlds’s shares up almost 4% in early trading, making the company one of the biggest risers on the FTSE 250. “This demonstrates that fans are continuing to choose the unrivalled theatrical experience,” Greidinger said. “We are continuing to implement guidelines to ensure our cinemas are a safe environment for our customers. While there are challenges ahead, we are excited to welcome customers to our cinemas to enjoy the highly anticipated slate of movies throughout 2022.” The UK and Ireland box office hit £597m last year, 85% up on 2020, led by No Time to Die, which made £97m, making it the third-highest grossing film of all-time, after the franchise stablemate Skyfall, and Star Wars: The Force Awakens. However, the cinema industry has a long road ahead to reach pre-pandemic levels, with annual box office revenues reaching £1.3bn in each of the five years up to 2019.Villagers gather round kitchen tables, squabbling about the fate of huge trees, some of which have stood for centuries in front of their homes. What does one tree matter if its removal means the roads will be improved, argues a man, while an old woman mutters ominously about payback in the next life. Outside, majestic oaks and limes quiver as bulldozers carve trenches round their roots and industrial pipes are driven beneath their gnarled and mossy trunks. The aim is not to destroy them but to move them to a new home: a lush arboreal Shangri-La that is being conjured up by one of Georgia’s richest and most powerful men. These little back-yard dramas, played out in the Georgian countryside over a period of two years, are the subject of Taming the Garden. It is the second feature film from the TV journalist turned documentary director Salomé Jashi, who was inspired to make it after seeing news footage of a tree floating sedately along the Black Sea coast on a boat. “The sensations that this image triggered in me were something I could have never have imagined before,” she says. “My first thought was that it was a totally dazzling image, it was real-life poetry. But then it was as if I was seeing something that I should never have seen, that should have never happened. It was like some sort of error; a digital glitch in reality that wasn’t supposed to exist.” She has recreated this sensation in a 90-minute documentary that has been hoovering up awards since its premiere at the Sundance festival in January, and which opens in the UK this month. On the surface, Taming the Garden is a faithful record of the tough negotiations and brutal mechanics of tree removal. One family are delighted to sell their tree. They are in debt and have been trying to kill it for years because it blocks the sun from their mandarin orchard. Others are left in grief, with gardens cratered like bombsites. All are unaware that the chosen specimen may not be the only tree to suffer; so will any lesser trees unfortunate enough to impede its transportation, sometimes by two lorries abreast, along roads that have to be specially widened for each journey. From this limb-cracking progress emerges a profoundly moving meditation on power, the vulnerability of nature and the primordial impulse of men to bend the environment to their will. It’s as if Oscar Wilde’s selfish giant is raging away in the background, though we never see him. The selfish giant of this story is the billionaire Bidzina Ivanishvili, who emerged from obscurity to found a new party and become Georgia’s prime minister in 2012 (he voluntarily left office a year later). More than 200 trees were ripped from the Georgian countryside to make his pleasure garden. Getting villagers – and workmen – to appear on camera was the biggest challenge for Jashi, who had to abandon several storylines after people had second thoughts about taking part in the film. Planning ahead was impossible, as filming was entirely dependent on information from workers who often didn’t know how long it would take to complete a job or where they were going next. “Three months, six months, who knows?” they shrug, huddled round a campfire at the end of a long day. Georgia has strong laws on tree protection, Jashi points out, which made the project seem all the more controversial, while also landing local people with the problem of disposing of discarded branches, since they lacked the paperwork to sell them to sawmills. On one occasion, a beloved lime, with the names of generations of farmers carved into its trunk, was accidentally destroyed as it was moved. “That was a huge tragedy,” says the director. “We were sitting in this woman’s kitchen as she told me the story. She was crying, and I was crying as well, because the tree was really like a human being for her.” For all that the trees become the main protagonists of this slowly unfolding drama, there is also a strange heroism in the machinery that is pitted against them: bulldozers doggedly dig round them with crabbed claws, and juggernauts carry them, unblinking, through the night. As a child growing up in the Georgian capital, Tbilisi, Jashi loved watching excavators at work. “They very much reminded me of human gestures somehow. And when we were filming I found it really attractive how this brutal, heavy-duty machinery also made some very tender movements.” Jashi came to film-making late, after being argued out of it as a girl by her engineer father and university professor mother. “It was the 1990s during the post-Soviet crisis. We had no food, no electricity and no money, obviously. And they said: ‘No, you won’t make a living in film-making, plus you are a woman. You should study journalism. This is the profession of the future.’ So I kind of complied with that.” But news formats frustrated her and she started making short films, eventually winning a British Council scholarship to study for an MA at Royal Holloway, University of London, under the documentary-maker Gideon Koppel. “The kind of film I make now is very much because of him,” she says. “I didn’t even know they existed before.” Taming the Garden is far from a balanced two-minute news report; it stands at the junction of documentary and myth, not even mentioning that Ivanishvili’s garden is now open to the public. Although many trees were involved in the filming, their stories are represented by one symbolic journey. Villagers gather with their bicycles to see the tree on its way. A man lights his first cigarette in 30 years. An elderly woman weeps and convulsively crosses herself, while her younger relatives excitedly record the removal on their phones. As the tree is sailed along the coast – in a repeat of the image that inspired the film – two bulldozers await it on a stone mole, their excavator arms lowered like bowed heads at a funeral. And in a rich man’s manicured garden, round the half-buried roots of ancient trees held upright by guy ropes, the sprinklers come on. Taming the Garden is in cinemas from 28 January.When James Slack quit as Boris Johnson’s director of communications to become deputy editor-in-chief of the Sun, he might have hoped to avoid the glare of the media. But now Johnson’s former communications director finds himself as headline news, at the centre of a political scandal which highlights the revolving door between Britain’s political and media elite. Slack’s leaving do at Downing Street, complete with allegations of staff dragging a suitcase of booze into No 10 as lockdown restrictions remained in place, have unleashed further fury. He has already apologised “unreservedly for the anger and hurt caused” and said the event should not have taken place. The matter has been referred to an ongoing investigation into lockdown-busting parties led by the civil servant Sue Gray, which is due to report next week. It is also prompting scrutiny of the Sun’s own coverage of the unfolding Downing Street party scandals and raises the awkward question of why they had not broken the news of this No 10 event, given they employ a witness who was present. Originally from Sheffield, Slack worked his way up local newspapers in the Midlands before moving to London, where he worked for news agencies and the Daily Express. After joining the Daily Mail, he was appointed as the newspaper’s political editor in 2015. Slack’s appointment in 2017 as the prime minister’s official spokesperson – responsible for holding daily briefings with lobby journalists – raised eyebrows as it was technically a civil service job, rather than a political appointment. He became part of May’s inner circle and gained a reputation among lobby journalists for being across detail of the endless Brexit negotiations, aided by this closeness. Slack’s civil service employment contract meant his job was secure when Johnson became prime minister. As a result, he retained his spokesperson job, answering questions on behalf of the man who had caused so much trouble for his former boss. He was ultimately promoted to the political appointment of director of communications in early 2021 – only to quit a few months later to join Rupert Murdoch’s Sun, an event that was marked with the now-notorious leaving party. The Sun has already had to deal with questions about its own staff being involved in boozy lockdown-breaking events. Before Slack joined the newspaper some of its staff held a Christmas party in the newspaper’s office in December 2020. A spokesperson for News UK, the owner of the Sun, said: “The matter was investigated as soon as it came to light and appropriate action was taken as a result.” On Friday, after issuing his apology, Slack was said to be at work in the Sun’s office in News UK in central London. Colleagues claim that other members of the Sun’s management team were only informed about their deputy editor’s Downing Street leaving party when contacted by the Daily Telegraph on Thursday afternoon. His future now potentially depends on the outcome of Gray’s investigation into No 10 parties during lockdown. Victoria Newton, the editor of the Sun, previously said she hired Slack because he knew what issues connected with the tabloid’s readers: “The Sun’s broad readership cares deeply about Britain and James has a strong understanding of our audience.” The issue the Sun is struggling with today is whether a lockdown-breaking party held in honour of their deputy editor – as the Queen prepared to bury Prince Philip at a socially distanced funeral – is too much for their audience.Tom Harrison, the chief executive who has overseen the last seven years of English cricket, has described the one-sided defeat in the men’s Ashes as a “brilliant opportunity” to “reset and recalibrate” the domestic game. Speaking before the day-night fifth Test, Harrison expressed a desire that “fantastic” Joe Root remains as England captain and though Chris Silverwood, the head coach, was not afforded the same endorsement, a consolation victory in Hobart and a 3-1 scoreline in Australia would apparently represent “a better story”. Ashley Giles, the director of men’s cricket, and Mo Bobat, the performance director, are compiling a report on the tour but Harrison insisted they were “not marking their own homework”. This document will be submitted to the ECB’s cricket committee, chaired by Andrew Strauss, with recommendations then going to the governing body’s board. But Harrison, who said he drew satisfaction from England simply completing the tour given the various pandemic-related logistical headaches, has also suggested a wider review of the English game that asks “broader strategic questions” should also result from a 12-month period that returned a record nine Test defeats. “Our priority is Test cricket,” Harrison said. “We want to be successful at white-ball cricket, of course we do. But we absolutely need to be successful at Test cricket. “It feels like this is a moment to reset the importance of red-ball cricket in our domestic schedule and for us to recalibrate how we play first-class cricket in the UK. It’s a brilliant opportunity for us to come together as a game and really sort that once and for all. “There’s been plenty of debate around this, and sometimes the ability to effect change on something as complicated as our schedule is when you have a performance-related issue. And we have one now. “Let’s have the right balance of red and white ball. Let’s look at when we play red-ball cricket. There is a debate about whether we play more red-ball cricket through the summer. Let’s find a way to be able to do that. “We are trying to replicate conditions in Test cricket as much as possible. We do it really well in the white-ball game. We are currently not doing the right thing with respect to red-ball cricket. We have seen that play out over the last 12 months.” This Damascene moment will surprise many given English cricket’s apparent shift towards the white-ball formats under Harrison’s watch, not least the creation of a new short-form tournament, the Hundred, that has been placed on top of an already bulging county summer. The 50-year-old said he did not accept this interpretation of the ECB’s priorities, however, stressing the volume and scheduling of domestic formats was down to the Professional Game Group, which is made up of county chief executives. There is also the issue of the international calendar, which has seen a fixture pile-up caused by pandemic-related postponements and seen mental health shoot up the agenda due to quarantine periods and so-called “bubble” environments. Even if Covid-19 abates, the International Cricket Council has agreed a new broadcast deal with white-ball World Cups every year, while a similar squeeze on windows comes through the expansion of the Indian Premier League from eight teams to 10. Harrison added: “Less fixtures? Domestically, that’s certainly a debate we need to have. Internationally, when we get out of the immediate aftermath of the wake of Covid, we’ve got to look at how we manage fixture workloads. “This is something that the chief execs committee at ICC need to tackle in the round. With an additional few weeks of IPL every year and a World Cup every year ... it is a difficult challenge for world cricket. “I don’t think we’ve lived through a year of a 72-match IPL and a World Cup in the same year. 2022 will provide that and it’ll be interesting how we manage workloads.”Gary Waldhorn, who has died aged 78, played some political high flyers on television in his time – Caulaincourt, the diplomat and Second Empire loyalist, in Napoleon and Love (1974), and the raffish society diarist Chips Channon in Edward and Mrs Simpson (1978) – but his true talent lay in a curious ability to be pompous, boring and funny all at the same time. This was most famously demonstrated in his performance as David Horton, local squire and head of the parish council, in Richard Curtis’s The Vicar of Dibley (1994-2007), which starred Dawn French as the Rev Geraldine Granger, the feisty religious moderniser and chocaholic putting cats among pigeons in a sleepy Oxfordshire village just as, in real life, female vicars started sprouting all over the Church of England. Waldhorn, of a bald and complacent demeanour, was the very embodiment of reactionary disapproval, but there was a twinkle about his bluster that, while no match for French’s joyful steam-rollering of the village idiots and worthies, made him an always watchable last line of resistance. This simple situation was wrung through two decades – there have been subsequent Christmas and charity specials, and “lockdown” episodes during the pandemic – without once going stale or losing its comic brio. Waldhorn commented on how strange it was, after so many years, to be recognised in the street, but took it all in his careful stride, pleased but not unduly excited. He had, after all, played supporting roles on stage in Laurence Olivier’s National Theatre at the Old Vic and with the Royal Shakespeare Company; had appeared on Broadway in 1982 with Alan Howard in CP Taylor’s quizzical play Good, about a “decent” Nazi; and with Judi Dench in a glorious RSC revival by Gregory Doran of All’s Well That Ends Well in Stratford-upon-Avon and the West End in 2004. Thanks to Dench glowing autumnally as the Countess of Roussillon, the notoriously “difficult” All’s Well – made to look not difficult at all –played to packed and enthusiastic houses for 10 weeks on Shaftesbury Avenue. But Waldhorn as the King of France was a subsidiary draw in a cast that also included Claudie Blakley as a delightful Helena, the young heroine who cures the king of a fistula. Waldhorn was born in London, the only child of Viennese Jewish refugees, Liselotte (nee Popper) and Siegfried Waldhorn. Siegfried acted as an interpreter for German prisoners of war in Britain and would become an executive vice-president of American Express. Meanwhile, the money Gary received for his bar mitzvah helped fund the family’s move to New York in 1956. He had already decided to be an actor after seeing Richard Burton at the Old Vic on a school trip. In the US, he was further educated at Ohio state university and the Yale drama school, where he met his future wife, Christie Dickason, a student of the critic and academic Robert Brustein. Dickason directed Waldhorn in student productions of The Knack by Ann Jellicoe and The Birthday Party by Harold Pinter. On graduating in 1967, the couple returned to settle in London, where Waldhorn appeared in Edmond Rostand’s Cyrano de Bergerac in the Open Air theatre, Regent’s Park, and, almost immediately, at the National. There, he was in Peter Brook’s infamous version of Seneca’s Oedipus, which featured John Gielgud, Irene Worth, a huge golden phallus on a plinth and various supernumeraries – of whom Waldhorn was one – lashed to the pillars in the stalls; they were frequently harassed by jovial customers in search of programmes and ice-creams. He also appeared as Jaques de Boys in Clifford Williams’s all-male As You Like It (with Ronald Pickup as the first male Rosalind), in Ben Jonson’s Volpone, and in Tom Stoppard’s Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead. Dickason, meanwhile, was working as a director and choreographer. Although she and Waldhorn married in 1970, they divorced a decade later having lived apart for some time, and she turned to writing novels. By now his parts were expanding, notably as a take-over lead in Anthony Shaffer’s long-running Sleuth at the St Martin’s in 1975. He was prominent at the Royal Exchange in Manchester from the mid-1970s, playing alongside Paul Scofield and Eleanor Bron in Ronald Harwood’s A Family (which moved to the Haymarket in London), the American playwright Larry Shue’s very funny The Nerd (with Derek Griffiths) and Waiting for Godot, with Max Wall and Trevor Peacock, in 1980. Waldhorn went against Samuel Beckett’s stipulations in slowing down Lucky’s great virtuoso speech but was the most comprehensible of all straggle-haired loons, suggesting a lifetime of memory in this one outpouring at the end of his master’s controlling rope. Waldhorn was busy on television before The Vicar of Dibley, turning up in most established serials; as a blazered suitor to his best friend’s widow, Maureen Lipman, in All at Number 20 (1986); and in the first three series of Brush Strokes (1986-89), as the exasperated employer of a cheeky chappy house-painter, Karl Howman. His few films included a bizarre wartime and football oddity directed by John Huston, Escape to Victory (1981), with a host of soccer stars including Bobby Moore, Pelé and Ossie Ardiles – and Sylvester Stallone. Waldhorn was the coach of a German military football team ranged against a team of prisoners of war in an exhibition match in Paris. He appeared on stage with Lipman in a fine production of Neil Simon’s Chapter Two at the Lyric, Hammersmith, in 1981 and, on the same stage in 1983, as the depraved Svidrigailov, exiting coolly to his suicide through a red door, in Yuri Lyubimov’s expressionist version of Crime and Punishment. He exhibited impressive power and range as Malvolio at the Royal Exchange in 1988, as King Henry for the English Touring Company’s Henry IV, parts 1 and 2, in 1996, and as Leonato in a spirited RSC Much Ado About Nothing in 2002. Waldhorn is survived by Joshua, his son with Dickason, and by two grandchildren, Cooper and Bailey. • Gary Waldhorn, actor, born 3 July 1943; died 10 January 2022 • This article was amended on 16 January 2022. Gary Waldhorn appeared in a production of As You Like It directed by Clifford Williams, not John Dexter, as an earlier version stated.I’ve decided to kick things off with a small helping of trauma, and ask: should our most troubling pop culture come with a warning? I’m thinking specifically of HBO’s no holds barred teen drama Euphoria, which returned to screens this week, and – for UK viewers – was preceded by an announcement that the episode contained “depictions of drug abuse, very strong language, some strong violence, scenes of a sexual nature and strong images of nudity from the start”. Elsewhere, there was a more explicit content warning on Instagram, where the show’s star and executive producer, Zendaya, said that season two was “deeply emotional” and “triggering”, urging fans to watch only if they felt comfortable. Indeed, Cassie (Sydney Sweeney) getting covered in wee was far from the most harrowing part of an episode which featured a shooting at a strip club (complete with what will surely be the first of many erect penises we’ll see this series), heroin use, and a bloody beating. Trigger warning While many would have been grateful for the heads up, content warnings – sometimes known as trigger warnings – have been a divisive issue in film and TV. Research published by the British Board of Film Classification in September last year found that 64% of teenagers wanted to be alerted to the potential for distressing scenes in a movie – for example references to suicide, self-harm or eating disorders. However, many others believe that such warnings are unnecessary and a type of censorship, lumping them in with general “woke snowflake” criticism. Writing for right-wing site Spiked, Joanna Williams rallied against any extra warnings in cinemas, adding that “children are bombarded with messages telling them that ‘it’s okay not to be okay’ … adults have taught children that they are emotionally fragile”. But is it about “emotional fragility”, or merely appreciating the profound effects that films and television programmes can have on viewers of any age? It’s A Sin – Russell T Davies’s brilliant, sobering look at life during the 80s Aids crisis – is a case in point. Initially released on Channel 4 and its streaming platform All 4 without any warnings, many viewers were enthralled by the show but startled by its graphic portrayal of the severe illness and death caused by HIV/Aids (a friend of mine said the show had given them nightmares, and that their worries about having already contracted the illness were “debilitating”). Viewers and charities such as the Terrence Higgins Trust asked the broadcaster to look into adding extra guidance. What followed was an excellent example of a programme maker doing a quick 180 to take in the wider cultural conversation, with messages about changes to sexual health and science, and support information added as the series went on. Similarly, Michaela Coel’s I May Destroy You – about a young woman dealing with the aftermath of a suspected date rape – sparked conversations on topics such as stealthing, and came not only with content warnings but a toolkit for audiences, with a special online microsite of workshops which has been visited over two million times. Meanwhile, HBO set up a free 24/7 text crisis line for Euphoria, which has previously tackled issues including drug abuse and gender dysphoria. Wide awoke club Ultimately, it’s important for creators to think about how their work can and does affect people. After all, all the warnings in the world mean nothing if the actual content is potentially problematic (the eating disorder charity Beat, for example, took issue last year not with the lack of warnings around the Princess Diana biopic Spencer, but the fact that the film risked “glamorising” bulimia, and advised those who were currently unwell or concerned about their health not to watch it). As helpful as they are for some, trigger warnings may not work for everyone, which is all the more reason to go beyond them, and for film and TV-makers instead to think about what more they can do to help their viewers. Some may call it wokery but, well, they were probably never going to watch Euphoria anyway. If you want to read the complete version of this newsletter please subscribe to receive The Guide in your inbox every Friday.Rebel Wilson will host the 2022 Bafta film awards, it has been announced. The Australian actor, who has appeared in hits including Bridesmaids, Pitch Perfect and Jojo Rabbit, will take charge of the event at the Royal Albert Hall on 13 March after impressing organisers with comedy bits at previous ceremonies. Amanda Berry, Bafta’s chief executive, said: “Rebel has stolen the show at several previous film awards, and we’re hugely excited to see her bring her fantastic charisma and humour to the whole show.” Wilson reacted with a statement in which she referenced a number of topical issues, including the controversy over her recent weight loss. She said: “It’s going to be so much fun! I don’t wanna put any pressure on this – I know I’m not going to be funny because I am no longer fat. And besides, I’m not going to ‘sweat-it’ with nerves because I have a peculiar medical condition where I can’t sweat … or cause offence to people because of my adorable Australian accent.” She added: “So basically, I’ll just be there to hang out with Dame Judi Dench and together we’ll both try and bond with Daniel Craig. And yes, I do mean ‘bond’. This show will be an anniversary celebration of some important British film franchises such as Harry Potter and not such as Cats. Everybody’s going to love it, I’m sure!” The 2021 edition, hosted by Edith Bowman and Dermot O’Leary, was staged in the Royal Albert Hall with no audience and under social distancing conditions. The format for the 2022 awards has not yet been formally announced but a spokesperson said that, circumstances permitting, the current plan is for an “in-person event” with an audience. Bafta will also have to compete with the Critics Choice awards, which recently announced that it had rescheduled its Los Angeles-based event to the same night as the Baftas, resulting in potential schedule conflicts for a number of film industry figures who are likely to be nominated for both.He lied. He clearly lied. But so what? As Boris Johnson hangs on by his fingertips, we wait to see who will stamp on them. The answer is presumably Sue Gray, to whose final mercies he has desperately handed his fate. Surely nothing she says can rescue him. At question is not his guilt, only his punishment. Johnson can plead that he was “advised” that office parties were within the rules. He can protest they were “implicitly” work-related, but with even more revelations about Downing Street parties on the front pages today, the edifice of Downing Street concealment and deceit is crumbling before voters’ eyes. In that uniquely British political theatre, the House of Commons, the prime minister was subjected on Wednesday to the nearest democracy gets to medieval trial by ordeal. MPs abandoned all dignity, nuance, sympathy or sense of proportion. They gleefully yelled and jeered and hurled insults until hoarse with rage. When in the mood, parliament does not talk truth to power: it screams in its face. The prime minister’s unhappy relationship with the truth is longstanding and embedded in his character. Veracity is trumped by ego. Most of his recent catalogue of woes – Brexit promises, dodgy peerages, sleazy colleagues, flat decorations, lockdown parties – could have been soothed had Johnson simply come clean early on, appeared frank and apologised. He seems psychologically unable to disentangle falsity from half-truth. A life spent in bland denials and upmarket jokes has lent him a high-risk belief in his invulnerability. From each laughable lie he could, in one bound, leap free. Champions of political mendacity make much of its role in democratic leadership. In his study of political hypocrisy, David Runciman argues that fake sincerity, false promises and the fabrication of evidence are tools that have always lain close to the heart of power. He cites leaders from Oliver Cromwell and Thomas Jefferson to Bill Clinton and Tony Blair. The last fought the Iraq war on a lie. Peter Oborne’s The Rise of Political Lying has Blair’s spin doctor Alastair Campbell as its virtual hero, with his boss plumbing constant depths of mendacity. Yet Blair won three elections. Party manifestos are dismissed as “books of lies”. Some would argue that Johnson won the Brexit referendum by the “big lie” of its economic gains, which played much to his advantage at the 2019 election. Runciman argues that democracy requires a degree of cynicism to fuel its optimism, its promise of eternal hope, without which no one would ever vote for any politician ever. Politics thus becomes a mutual conspiracy of mendacity. As Orwell wrote, “Political language … is designed to make lies sound truthful and murder respectable, and to give an appearance of solidity to pure wind.” Johnson’s problem has not been his lying but his inability to manage it, notably when found out. He has no spin doctor, and on Wednesday had to admit himself to spin A&amp;E. His belief that a winsome and “authentic” personality could make up for a rotten command structure and third-class aides exploded on him. His critics might accept that governing a pandemic would be a titanic test for even the most experienced of leaders, requiring superhuman skills of authority and persuasion, an ability to call on an unprecedented degree of public trust. But that is all the more reason not to imperil that trust. The prime minister has delivered some successes, including vaccination and the current holdout against lockdown. But these successes have been swamped by one fiasco after another, leading to a widespread judgment that he is “not fit for purpose”, not up to the job, a charge never made against Blair. A BBC vox pop on Wednesday night was brutal: “I may like him, but enough is enough.” Johnson has tried to fuse Alexis de Tocqueville’s distinction between Britain’s democracy of the club and America’s democracy of the mob. His appeal to the Tory club has lain exclusively in his popularity with the mob. He won elections as a populist. It is conceivable that a newly chastened and apologetic Johnson might try to charm his way back into favour, in the hope that the 10 percentage points now separating Labour from the Tories in the polls might be reversed. Club members might then hold their noses and give him another chance. As it is, any such poll surge seems most unlikely, which is why Keir Starmer is surely unwise to shout for the prime minister’s resignation. He should pray for him to limp on. For Johnson, an ominous parallel is the Tory party’s ruthless ejection of Thatcher in 1990. It cleansed the Downing Street stables of the poll tax toxin, and went on under John Major to win a fourth election in a row in 1992. If, as seems likely, Johnson’s days as a politician are now numbered, Britain’s brief excursion into populist politics will have ended. The moral of the story will be modest: that journalists, for all their vanity, should not be tempted to give up the day job. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistWhile heading over to Carmel in Queen’s Park, north-west London, in the first week of the new year, I’m reminded that January is always an odd time for reviewing. The entire month lends itself to hunkering down and clawing back, with venues closed for weeks on end and others offering the slenderest of hours, sometimes with the radiators off to save on bills. In fact, it often feels like the opposite of hospitality. I’ve sat in many a dead and draughty dining room in January feeling like the only person in Britain who isn’t having a can of Campbell’s soup on the sofa that evening. So it was a welcome sight to reach Carmel, hiding away on a side road close to the tube station, to find the place so damned welcoming and vibrant. It was a freezing cold Wednesday, but the place was busy with folk keen to try this new North African/East Mediterranean opening from the folk behind east London’s Berber &amp; Q. Any customers eager to try anything in the current climate are a joyous sight, and Carmel exudes a sort of low-watt, twinkly joy, with candlelit tables, low-key music and delightful staff. When Berber &amp; Q opened in 2015, I was an instant fan, largely because it felt like a Middle Eastern grill house that had mated with an Ottolenghi cookbook and taken root in an Ibizan beach bar. Berber &amp; Q was loud, very delicious, rather dark, completely unbookable and resided in a former minicab office that had had what felt like only a minor refurbishment. You’d eat the likes of smoked short-rib with date glaze or cauliflower shawarma with beets and whipped feta, and it was very much a case of dig in, get messy and throw everything you were wearing in for a boil wash when you got home. If all of that sounds a bit hectic, you’re in luck, because Carmel is its much more grown-up relative. Or, more accurately, it’s as if someone shook Berber &amp; Q by the lapels, said, “It’s time to have a word with yourself, sonny”, and then gave it a side parting. There’s no loud, pulsating house music at Carmel, although the bathroom does have one of those weird aural soundscapes that made my dining companion Hugh wonder whether it was music or a broken air-conditioner unit; or maybe we’ve just both grown older. Carmel’s dinner menu is lush, laboured over and decidedly finickety. A bowl of silky, high-class hummus, for example, is made grander with a rich, lamb ragu topping garnished with pistachio and curry leaf, while a top-quality cured sardine appears prettily arranged on a bed of ratte potato, piped soured cream and doused in lemon verjus. Both are delicious and clearly painstakingly road-tested, even if they barely scrape the surface of our appetites. We share some charred hispi cabbage – one whole quarter, to be exact – expertly crisped and caramelised, served on a bed of labneh and made irresistible with macadamia dukkah. A bowl of gnocchi is spookily cloud-like, and a million miles from the starchy bullets I make at home. Carmel’s gnocchi come in a vibrant, spring sunlight-coloured turmeric yoghurt sauce with spinach and mizithra cheese; the dish is perhaps a little too delicately seasoned, but the tenderness of those gnocchi lives on in my mind. Three fearsomely large prawns, their shells caked in harissa, arrive in a pan of ’nduja butter with courgette tzatziki, and are beautifully flavoured, albeit a terrific, messy job to deal with. With almost everything at Carmel, the real flavours are in the smears, yoghurts and dressings, with not a whole lot of carbs on hand to bulk out the dishes. Thankfully, though, there are warm, fresh sourdough flatbreads with toppings such as spiced lamb with aleppo chilli or, in our case, tarama with soft sliced potato and rosemary to provide a little heft for hungry diners. Large plates for sharing begin at £25 for the slow-grilled urfa chicken, which turns up on a perilously sweet-bitter pomegranate molasses-soaked piece of sourdough, with some curry-pickled radicchio on the side. The two of us demolish it easily. Other sharing plates include smoked lamb neck shawarma with a shio koji marinade and seared cod with palourde clams. A pudding of dark chocolate tart with tahini cream has a brittle, teeth-shatteringly sweet biscuit bottom, but it’s ridiculously lovely. In being all elegant and adult, Carmel may have lost something of the largesse of its east-London relative, but in cooking ingenuity, it leaves Berber &amp; Q way behind. Carmel is dainty, delightful, good for both a date night and a cold midweek in early 2022, and it’s absolutely heaving. A most promising start to the eating-out year. • Carmel 23-25 Lonsdale Road, London NW6, 020-3848 2090. Open Tues-Sun, noon-11pm (10pm Sun). From about £30 a head for three courses, plus drinks and serviceThe Twyford Code by Janice Hallett (Viper, £14.99) Hallett’s bestselling debut The Appeal, an intelligent mystery set within the deceptively genteel confines of a local am-dram group, was a modern epistolary novel, told in emails. Her second is even better, and presented as audio files, complete with intriguing mistakes made by the transcription software. Recorded on an iPhone by ex-con Steven Smith for his probation officer, they are records of his attempts to find his old English teacher, who disappeared on a school trip to Bournemouth, erstwhile home of Blytonesque children’s writer Edith Twyford. Twyford’s books are catnip to conspiracy theorists; they’re thought to contain a code that may have something to do with their author’s activities during the second world war. Steven, with help from his former classmates and a librarian, sets out to crack it – and, in the process, solve the puzzle of his own life. This fiendishly clever book, which manages to be both tricksy and surprisingly moving, is the perfect antidote to the post-Christmas carb stupor. The Second Cut by Louise Welsh (Canongate, £14.99) Twenty years after Welsh’s award-winning debut The Cutting Room comes the return of gay auctioneer Rilke, now middle aged but still tiptoeing around the edges of Glasgow’s criminal underworld. When old friend Jojo is found dead after giving Rilke a tip-off about a lucrative house clearance in Galloway, the police are inclined to write it off as the result of a decadent lifestyle – Jojo had a fondness for Grindr hook-ups and chemsex parties – but Rilke decides to investigate. The house clearance isn’t quite what it seems, either. There’s the abandoned car in which two people died, the terrified Asian man who may be on the run from people traffickers, the terrier found locked in a chest – and what’s happened to the elderly lady who owned the place? Complex and very atmospheric, with plenty of sardonic humour and sharp observations about injustice, like its predecessor this is a hardboiled gem. The Maid by Nita Prose (HarperCollins, £14.99) If you have already trashed your new year’s resolutions, you could do a lot worse than console yourself with this delightful cosy mystery. The narrator, neurodivergent 25-year-old Molly Gray, works at the Regency Grand Hotel, in an unspecified North American city. Although her tendency to take things literally causes some problems, she loves the anonymity afforded by her uniform and finds comfort in restoring order, especially after the death of the beloved grandmother who raised her. Although some colleagues are supportive, others abuse her trust and, when she discovers the body of tycoon Charles Black in the penthouse suite, she soon finds herself in the frame for his murder. The plot is undemanding, and readers will find themselves several steps ahead of Molly at any given time because of her difficulty in decoding situations and reading social cues, but her bravery, kindness and lack of artifice are engaging enough to have you rooting for her all the way. Wahala by Nikki May (Doubleday, £14.99) “Wahala” means, loosely, trouble, and there’s plenty of it in this entertaining debut. Friends since university, where they bonded over their mixed Nigerian and British heritage, Ronke, Boo and Simi now live in London, where they pivot between cultures. Dentist Ronke wants to settle down with her unreliable boyfriend; Boo, feeling trapped by family life, is contemplating an affair; and Simi, who is making headway in her career, isn’t as keen as her husband on having a baby … but their friendship is rock solid until glamorous Isabel, an old schoolfriend of Simi’s, arrives to drive a wedge between them, homing in mercilessly on each woman’s weak point. Mystery takes second place to character study, and by the end of the story the vengeful Isabel is teetering dangerously on the edge of caricature, but Wahala is a fascinating, funny and nuanced look at identity and female friendship. Real Easy by Marie Rutkoski (Tinder, £18.99) There’s female friendship of a different sort in children’s author Rutkoski’s adult debut: the camaraderie, or lack thereof, among exotic dancers at an Illinois strip club. When Samantha, AKA Ruby, reluctantly agrees to drive new colleague Lady Jade home from the Lovely Lady, they are run off the road – but police officer Victor Amador finds only one body. Real Easy is more than the story of the subsequent investigation: multiple narrators including dancers, their relatives, detectives, club patrons and the killer himself offer a kaleidoscopic view of a morally precarious world where male desire is a whisker away from male violence. With a cast of fully realised characters – the cops have troubles of their own, and life at the club, with its overlay of sleazy glamour, is balanced by domestic vignettes and quotidian concerns – this is a familiar story told in a way that packs a real emotional punch.This lovely concert marked the start of Norwegian soprano Lise Davidsen’s Artist Spotlight series at the Barbican, which runs until the end of the season. Guildhall masterclasses, a programme of arias and duets with tenor Freddie de Tommaso (they share the same record label), and a concert with the Oslo Philharmonic can be heard in the spring. First, however, came this recital of songs by Grieg, Strauss and Wagner with her compatriot Leif Ove Andsnes, a starry pairing, and a really effective one on this showing. Davidsen’s voice is notable for its amplitude, power and fullness of tone, remarkable for a singer still only in her early 30s, and already defining her as a major Wagnerian. What immediately impressed in this instance, however, was her wide dynamic range, subtly deployed and often beautifully controlled. When unleashed, as at the climax of Strauss’s Befreit, the sound is oceanic and thrilling. Most striking here, though, was the comparative restraint of much of her singing, and the intimate sense of light and shade that came with it. Her performance of Grieg’s song cycle Haugtussa (The Mountain Maid), with its sad, sweet evocation of love and heartbreak, was remarkable for its delicacy: the flash of silver in Davidsen’s upper registers when the voice is not under pressure was particularly beguiling here. The brooding introspection of Strauss’s Ruhe, Meine Seele and rapt contentment of Morgen were beautifully captured, while Wagner’s Wesendonck Lieder were for the most part about refined depths of passion rather than self-consciously lofty declarations of feeling, though a telling surge of emotion at the climax of Schmerzen spoke volumes about the music’s underlying intensity. On occasion, Davdisen’s consonants slipped a little, and one wanted more of the words, but much of this was magnificent nevertheless. Andsnes’s playing, meanwhile, was exquisite throughout – wonderfully intelligent and considered, the meaning of every phrase and figuration carefully probed and exposed.England name their squad for the Six Nations championship on Tuesday. With the 2023 Rugby World Cup just over the horizon, here are six key questions for Eddie Jones to resolve. 1) Should Owen Farrell be rushed back? Sporting life can be extraordinarily harsh. A touch of Covid, the rise of Marcus Smith and, most recently, ankle surgery have combined to make Farrell’s future a matter of some debate. Even if Eddie Jones’s captain, now 30, is instantly back on it when he returns for Saracens this month, the management will be conscious of what happened this time last year. Exhibit A will be Jones’s ill-fated decision to keep faith with some rusty Saracens that helped Scotland win at Twickenham for the first time since 1983. Once bitten, twice shy? With Courtney Lawes having impressed as a stand-in skipper, Farrell’s captaincy is also less essential than it was. Given Smith’s autumn promise, it would be a retrograde step not to start the Harlequin at 10. That leaves three options for Farrell: shift him to centre, stick him on the bench or save him up for later in the tournament. If Manu Tuilagi is fit then he and Henry Slade are currently the best English centre combination. But who would not want Farrell’s warrior example, iron will and match-turning goal-kicking? On a dark, cold night in Murrayfield, there could be a case for the bench option. 2) Who starts at No 8? Let’s state the glaringly obvious. The best No8 in this season’s Premiership has been Alex Dombrandt of Harlequins. Those who still consider him a flighty risk clearly did not watch the Big Game at Twickenham just after Christmas. It is not just the way the 24-year-old pops up in all the right places, it is the depth of rugby intelligence when he does so. His attacking angles are beautifully chosen, he holds his depth to make sure he can surge on to the ball and his understanding with Smith appears telepathic. Yet Jones, of late, has picked Tom Curry at eight with Dombrandt on the bench, preferring the defensive excellence of Sam Underhill alongside Lawes in the back row. Against Scotland though, England will need more ball-carrying oomph and Dombrandt’s breakdown skills will also be useful – which is tough on the dynamic Sam Simmonds, Billy Vunipola and, potentially, Underhill. But now is the time for Jones to look forward, not back. 3) Does the scrum need rebooting? In all the excitement surrounding England’s breathless 27-26 win over the world champion Springboks in November, it was possible to gloss over the second-half travails of England’s scrum and maul. Admittedly their propping stocks were diminished by Covid and injury, propelling Sale’s Bevan Rodd into the spotlight, but England have not been ruling the set pieces with the iron fist that Jones is seeking. It would also be stretching it to say Kyle Sinckler and Will Stuart have been ripping it up at club level, even if scrummaging is never a one-man operation. The two standout English-qualified Premiership props just now are probably Joe Marler and Dan Cole but will Jones fancy recalling the latter four months shy of his 35th birthday? Harlequins’ Will Collier would hold an end up but is he going to win a World Cup? This is also a big Six Nations for Matt Proudfoot, England’s scrum coach. While Proudfoot helped South Africa to 2019 World Cup glory his CV is not without its leaner patches. He won four caps for Scotland via his Dumfries-born grandmother without tasting victory and also endured a nasty bout of Covid just prior to the 2021 Six Nations when England finished fifth. He will be keen for a more upbeat start to 2022. 4) What if Tuilagi is not ready? It invariably seems to be touch and go with Tuilagi. All that hard work to make the team in the autumn and he lasted just eight minutes against South Africa before his hamstring went. This time he is aiming to prove his fitness against his old club Leicester on 30 January, just six days before England are due at Murrayfield. Already it feels worryingly tight – the timescale, not the hamstring – unless Jones is truly desperate. This might, as previously mentioned, re-open the door for Farrell or potentially an alternative 12. The Gloucester centre Mark Atkinson has been around numerous blocks, will fancy second-guessing his clubmate Chris Harris in Scotland’s midfield and has a deft kicking game. Failing that, Jones could slide Slade to 12 and keep faith with Joe Marchant, who was influential against South Africa, or quietly recall the criminally underrated Saracen Alex Lozowski. Jones has already picked 20 different centre pairings during his tenure and a 21st may be brewing. 5) Is there any uncapped X factor out there? Flip back to this time last year and who were the squad’s exciting, fresh-faced newcomers? Step forward Paolo Odogwu and Harry Randall who, for assorted reasons, did not play a minute of Six Nations rugby between them. As a result we still don’t really know whether they have “it” or not. It was a similar tale with Louis Lynagh last autumn. This time expect Wasps’ bullocking Alfie Barbeary to be there or thereabouts when the squad list is unveiled. So prodigious is his ball-carrying strength that the 21-year-old has been encouraged to switch from hooker to the back-row and he also loves a challenge, as underlined in his club’s last-ditch stand against Leicester last Sunday. The time has also come for England to identify their preferred choices at scrum-half and on the wing and then stick with them. If Alex Mitchell and Adam Radwan are to be World Cup squad members, now is the time to trust them more. 6) Will Scotland be too good regardless? It is worth stressing that this year’s championship will be as competitive as a sack of hungry ferrets. England fans may also recall Storm Ciara, which made the corresponding 2020 fixture even trickier. Without a costly misjudgment from Stuart Hogg, which delivered the five-metre scrum platform from which Ellis Genge scored the game’s only try, England might now be travelling north having not defeated their hosts in the Six Nations for five years. Scotland’s team-sheet will be well stocked with Lions and last year they won in both London and Paris. In the past England have been ambushed by something they failed to see coming but those days have long gone. And Jacob Rees-Mogg has already written the home side’s pre-game team talk.On the first afternoon of Hobart’s Ashes debut, the knives were out for Bellerive Oval. Australia had lost David Warner, Usman Khawaja and Steve Smith for a combined six runs, while Australia as a team had scored 12. The pitch looked like it belonged to the Emerald City. Accordingly, people online started getting stuck into the surface as no good, a lottery, a disgrace, or anything else they could think of, proclaiming that Hobart had blown its entree to big-league Test cricket and that the city should never get a Test again. Except that over the next hour or so, Travis Head and Marnus Labuschagne produced a passage that featured 71 runs in 69 balls, repeatedly taking on the bowling to great effect. Stuart Broad and Ollie Robinson had been difficult to face at the start of the innings with jagging seam movement, but as soon as Mark Wood came on, his extra pace disappeared to the fence with corresponding speed. Chris Woakes got battered in conditions that should have suited him. The life went out of the pink ball, and began to leak out of England too. After Travis Head’s rapid 152 in the Brisbane Ashes Test, you could wonder how much it had been an innings smiled on by fortune. His attacking range and run-a-ball pace created plenty of close calls, but ones that he survived to produce a surge of runs. Repeating the dose in Hobart made the strong suggestion that Brisbane was not a fluke. There was method to the approach, as Head produced an innings of such counterpunching potency that it reversed a tide. It bears repeating that the score was 12 for three when Head walked in. A No 5, returning after a Test out with Covid, walking on within the first 10 overs. Cloudy skies and a moving ball. So he clipped his second ball for three, and laced his ninth through cover for four. Two balls later, another to the fence with a square drive. There was a tactical point to this, recognising that England’s bowling had been so accurate that defensive play was likely to make him an easier target. Hitting back could disrupt the bowlers, and his best chance to score was to do it before receiving a ball he couldn’t play. But there were no more unplayables. The first batting partnership barrage ended when Labuschagne bizarrely went wandering outside off, leaving Broad an untended set of stumps to knock over. Those bloody green pitches, hey? Undeterred, Head carried on playing a shot a ball. His only defensive response was to those full and straight. Anything outside off stump, he punched off the back foot or drove off the front depending on length. Sometimes he found the field, mostly he did not. By the time it was over he had made 101 from 113 balls, chipping a catch to mid-on the ball after raising his bat. It was a telling intervention from a player whose approach to the game has changed. Always regarded domestically as an attacking type, Head’s batting strike rate in Test cricket before this series was 49. Through the current series he has scored at 87. He looked liberated in doing so at the Gabba, which flowed into a fast fifty in Adelaide and now this hundred. In Hobart, Head played attacking shots to almost half of the deliveries he faced, a rate he has never exceeded before. Across the series he now leads the run-scoring on both sides with 349 from 399 balls. In all of Ashes history, only Ian Botham in his famous 1981 effort has made as many runs in a series at a faster strike rate, with 399 from 428 balls at 93. With an innings to play, Head could yet go past him. There is individual brilliance to appreciate there, but also the fact that a pitch on which he could play that innings was a good one for playing cricket. Teams are allowed to take wickets. Batting is allowed to be hard. Test matches can go for five days, but nothing in the Laws says that they must. Plenty of dull matches go the distance, plenty of interesting ones are over in shorter time. All of those things are OK. Hobart’s lively start made this an exciting contest, which will make people want to tune in on the second day to see where the game has gone. In all those respects, Hobart’s Ashes beginning has gone exactly to plan.Ed Sheeran has applied to construct a crypt under the floor of a chapel on his estate in East Anglia. The singer-songwriter, who was Spotify’s second-most streamed artist of the 2010s behind Drake, gained approval to build the “private place of retreat for contemplation and prayer” in 2019 on his Suffolk estate, which is worth an estimated £3.7m. A further application seeks permission for a crypt in the nave of the chapel. The crypt – typically a burial chamber under the floor of a church – would be a 1.8 by 2.7 metre “burial zone beneath (penetration through slab)” on the chapel’s ground floor. The application was filed to East Suffolk council in December and is awaiting a decision. The chapel will be flint-lined and feature a spiral-stair tower, lead roof and stained-glass windows. Sheeran, 30, has sparked controversy with his Suffolk estate, which is nicknamed “Sheeranville” by some and features a collection of properties, pub, gym and wildlife pond. It is near the town of Framlingham and close to where Sheeran grew up. Sheeran has hit headlines with reports of planning disputes with neighbours, including an incident in which a resident said the “wildlife pond” was a swimming pool. Sheeran rejects this characterisation. He lives on the estate with his wife, Cherry Seaborn, and their daughter, Lyra Antarctica Seaborn Sheeran, who was born in 2020. According to the 2019 planning application for the chapel, people from around the world visit Sheeran’s estate. “Many of these people are from many countries, faiths and customs, including for example the USA, Ireland, Ghana, Nigeria, Asia and Australia,” it said.Large crowds are being allowed to return to outdoor events in Wales and nightclubs are to reopen as the government in Cardiff says the Omicron “storm” has been weathered. The Welsh first minister, Mark Drakeford, also said it would no longer be a legal requirement for people to work from home, though it would still be important for them to do so if possible. Drakeford thanked citizens for obeying the rules, which have been in place in Wales since Boxing Day, and for everyone who has been involved in the vaccination programme. He said: “The actions we have taken together have helped us to weather the Omicron storm. The latest data suggests some positive signs that the peak may have passed. We can now look more confidently to the future and plan to start gradually removing the alert level two restrictions, starting with the outdoors measures. “But the pandemic is not over. We will closely monitor the public health situation – this is a fast-moving and volatile variant, which could change suddenly. I urge everyone to continue to follow the rules and have your vaccines to keep Wales safe.” The latest public health data in Wales suggests cases of coronavirus have started to fall back from very high levels. More than two-thirds of people aged 12 and over have received a booster or third dose of a Covid-19 vaccine. Drakeford said that from Saturday the number of people who could be present at outdoor events would rise from 50 to 500. Then from Friday 21 January Wales will move to alert level zero for all outdoor activities, meaning there will be no limits on the number of people who can take part in outdoor activities. The government said this meant: Crowds will be able to return to outdoor sporting events Outdoor hospitality will be able to operate without additional measures. But a Covid pass will be required for entry to larger outdoor events. If the downward trend continues, from Friday 28 January Wales will move to alert level zero for all indoor activities. Nightclubs will be able to reopen. Working from home will remain important but it will no longer be a legal requirement. Businesses, employers and other organisations must undertake a specific coronavirus risk assessment and take reasonable measures to minimise the spread of Covid. The Covid pass will be required for entry to nightclubs, events, cinemas, concert halls and theatres. The rule of six, table service and 2-metre physical distancing will no longer required in hospitality.Community organisations in NSW and Victoria are calling on their state governments to expand outreach to culturally and linguistically diverse communities, amid concerns of underreporting of rapid antigen tests results. Service NSW, which launched its online system to register positive rapid antigen tests on Wednesday, offers translation options, while the Victorian portal tells users to call the Covid hotline for a translator. But as cases surge across the country, multicultural communities say state governments could do more to engage people for whom English is a second language. Selina Lee from SydWest multicultural services said there has been less communication and fewer resources available to diverse communities in NSW than during previous spikes in case numbers. “There is very limited information that has been developed for diverse communities,” she said. “The rollout of the mandatory registration of RAT results happened fast, and with limited community consultation. “The reality is that there is a genuine risk of positive cases going unreported due to language and digital literacy barriers.” NSW has threatened to fine people $1,000 if they do not register a positive RAT result. Lee said digital literacy was essential to understanding the changes in health advice and the way changes are implemented. “To address these barriers, translation of information is a peripheral solution and needs to be underpinned by community-led engagement, similar to the grassroots community effort to lift vaccination rates,” Lee said. “Some are struggling to keep up with the frequent changes announced by NSW Health. Streamlined and consistent communication is key to minimising confusion,” Lee said. “We have seen community engagement drop with the recent changes, and outreach has not been executed in different languages.” A Service NSW spokesperson said that the NSW government was “continuously” working to produce translated materials on public health measures. “The NSW government continuously produces translated materials for each phase of the Covid-19 pandemic including testing guidance and the registration of positive RATs,” they said. “The RAT registration landing page is available in multiple languages to ensure it is accessible to culturally and linguistically diverse communities.” Eddie Micallef, chairperson of the Ethnic Communities’ council of Victoria, told the Guardian measures needed to be introduced to prevent communities underreporting their cases. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “We need to ensure we don’t have underreported positive tests among sections of the community, particularly vulnerable migrant communities with low levels of English language proficiency and digital literacy,” he said. “Considerable resources need to be put into multiple communication approaches to make the whole community aware of the RAT testing and registration process for positive cases.” Micallef said diverse communities had struggled to keep pace with changing health advice. “We have all been struggling to keep up with constantly changing health advice, regulations and definitions around close contacts, so it is an even greater challenge for many people from migrant and refugee communities,” Micallef said. “The key challenge at the moment is the shortage of rapid antigen tests and people not understanding how to use them and further resources need to be put into community information campaigns.” A spokesperson for the Victorian Department of Health said health advice was translated across 57 languages, but did not mention how communities were being reached. “The Department of Health provides a telephone interpreter service through the Covid-19 hotline to record positive rapid antigen test results. “Information on our website, including health advice, is translated across 57 languages and regularly reviewed as we move through different pandemic stages.”British Vogue has hailed a new era that spotlights African fashion. The magazine’s February issue features nine dark-skinned models of African heritage on its cover, including Adut Akech. Seemingly referencing Peter Lindbergh’s “Supers” Vogue cover from 1990, which introduced the world to the idea of the supermodel, the shot is a challenge to the traditionally white fashion industry, which has, since the murder of George Floyd, been under pressure to change and become more inclusive and diverse. There has been transparency around discrimination at fashion publications and racial profiling in shops, while diversity on the catwalk has increased. According to the Fashion Spot’s annual diversity report, 43% of the models who walked during the autumn/winter shows of 2021 were women of colour. “I know there’s so many little black girls who will look at this cover and feel something. I hope it makes you feel seen, heard and happy as it did me,” wrote Nyagua Ruea, one of the models who appears in the magazine. Ruea and Akech are featured alongside Anok Yai, Majesty Amare, Amar Akway, Janet Jumbo, Maty Fall, Abény Nhial and Akon Changkou. British Vogue’s editor-in-chief, Edward Enninful, who identifies as British Ghanaian, said the photograph was an important statement of anti-tokenism. “No longer just one or two dark-skinned girls mingled backstage, but a host of top models took a meaningful, substantial and equal place among the most successful women working in fashion today. It means so much to me to see it,” he said. The cover photographer, Rafael Pavarotti, called it a “celebration of women, of matriarchy and of the beauty of black women”. The cover represents a challenge to the historically Eurocentric fashion gaze, which has long stereotyped Africa as a continent in need of charity and lacking creative autonomy. Last year the model Naomi Campbell highlighted the regressive attitudes towards African fashion. “There has, in the past, been the wrong perception about the continent and the creativity that comes out of it,” she told the Observer. “Right now, everyone’s kind of got it … but we don’t want African to be considered as a trend.” Enninful said the cover was another step forward in altering those outdated attitudes. “The rise of African representation in modelling is not only about symbolism, nor even simple beauty standards,” he wrote. “It’s about the elevation of a continent. It’s about economics, access, culture, perspective, difference and wonder.” The re-evaluation of the continent’s contribution to the industry continues in June with an exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum, which will feature the work of the trailblazing designers Kofi Ansah and Folashade “Shade” Thomas-Fahm.Dogecoin, the cryptocurrency with a shiba inu dog meme, soared in value by 15% on Friday after the billionaire Elon Musk said it could be used to buy Tesla merchandise. Dogecoin rose to $0.20 after Musk’s tweet early on Friday, and has soared by 5,859% over the past 12 months, according to data from the Coinbase website. Payments in dogecoin went live on Tesla’s website soon after, with items such as an electric quad bike for kids priced at 12,020 doge ($2,368; £1,735) for those with more modest budgets a “Giga Texas Belt Buckle,” for 835 doge ($156) or a whistle for 300 doge ($57). Musk, who frequently writes about cryptocurrencies on Twitter and has previously described dogecoin as “the people’s crypto”, had said in December that Tesla would soon test accepting dogecoin as payment for some merchandise. However, he had called dogecoin a “hustle” during his guest-host spot on Saturday Night Live in May 2021. On the show, Musk appeared as “the Dogefather” and when asked to explain “what is dogecoin?”, he replied: “Yeah, it’s a hustle.” Chris Kline, a co-founder of the investment firm Bitcoin IRA, said: “Elon Musk has been an advocate for the crypto community for many years. His latest announcement will usher in a new era of commerce and trailblaze a path for altcoins to expand their use case.” Musk, the world’s richest person with an estimated $264bn fortune, was named Time magazine’s person of the year for 2021 despite criticism for his attitude to tax, opposition to unions, and playing down the dangers of Covid-19. Describing him as a “clown, genius, edgelord, visionary, industrialist, showman”, Time cited the breadth of Musk’s endeavours, from his founding of SpaceX in 2002, to his hand in the creation of the alternative energy company SolarCity in addition to Tesla, by far the most valuable car company in the world.As legend goes, tossing a coin into the Trevi fountain guarantees a return visit to Rome. When, as a 16-year-old American tourist, Rita Carpenter participated in the ritual and made a wish to one day marry a Roman and live in the Italian capital, little did she know that almost five decades on she would return to marry a prince and her home would be a 16th-century villa stuffed with history, including the only ceiling mural ever painted by Caravaggio. But now Princess Rita Boncompagni Ludovisi is facing the prospect of having to move out of the sprawling Villa Aurora, and the vast treasures it contains are at risk of being closed off to the public. On 18 January the property goes under the hammer, amid a bitter inheritance feud with the sons of her late husband, Prince Nicolò Boncompagni Ludovisi. Hidden by high walls close to Via Veneto in central Rome, the villa is being sold with an opening bid of €471m (£393m), which would make it one of the world’s most expensive homes. “We couldn’t reach an agreement so the judge ruled it had to be auctioned,” said the 72-year-old. “I really haven’t slept much at all.” The princess is sceptical a petition launched this week urging the Italian government to stump up the cash to buy the property will be successful. Since the site is protected by the ministry of culture, once a bid has been agreed at auction the state will have the chance to buy the property at the same price. “I’d like the state to buy it but I don’t know if it’s a possibility as I don’t know if they have the money, that’s the problem. And I’m not the only heir.” The lion’s share of the asking price is attributed to Caravaggio’s Jupiter, Neptune and Pluto mural, which the artist painted in 1597 on the ceiling of a small room tucked away on the villa’s first floor. The 2.75-metre-wide mural was commissioned by the villa’s first owner, Cardinal Francesco Maria Del Monte, to adorn the ceiling of his alchemy laboratory. But the Caravaggio is not the only slice of history that Villa Aurora’s new owner will acquire. The property lies on the site of what was once the home of Julius Caesar. Monuments in the front garden include a sculpture by Michelangelo. The building also contains ceilings frescoed by the baroque painter Guercino, who was commissioned by the Ludovisis, a noble family with close ties to the papacy who bought the property from Del Monte in 1621. The spiral staircase leading up to the Caravaggio and the three floors above was designed by the baroque architect Carlo Maderno, who also designed the facade of St Peter’s Basilica. The 40 or so rooms are packed with relics, including a door that belonged to an ancient Venetian warship, a telescope gifted to the Ludovosi family by Galileo Galilei and a leather box inscribed with a message from the chief of the British Red Cross thanking the Ludovisi family for allowing Red Cross members to reside in the villa for two years after the second world war. Villa Aurora has hosted everyone from Tchaikovsky and Henry James, who penned some of his 1909 classic, Italian Hours, in the villa’s garden, to Bette Midler and Madonna. “This really is a museum,” said Princess Rita. Villa Aurora was off the radar to the public until 2010, when it opened following a restoration project inspired by the princess after she saw it for the first time in 2003, the year she met Prince Nicolò. “It was abandoned, there were birds flying through it and I told Nicolò: ‘We have to open the villa, it has to be seen by Italians and other people, they need to understand the beauty and culture of it all,’” she said. Until the prince’s death in 2018, the villa hosted students of history and small private tour groups. The couple were also behind various charity initiatives. The princess put together a digital archive of 150,000 documents that shed even more light on the history of the villa. The princess had an intriguing life before she met Nicolò. Described by the Washington Post in 1978 as one of the four most dynamic young women in the city, she was married to the US congressman John Jenrette until their divorce in 1981 after his bribery conviction during the FBI’s Abscam investigation. She acted in several films and miniseries, studied at Harvard Business School, wrote three books and twice posed for Playboy magazine. She was a property broker in New York when she crossed paths with Nicolò. “He’d read an article about me in Crain’s Business, and then a mutual friend got in touch and said: ‘You must come to Rome, there’s this prince who wants to put a hotel on one of his properties outside the city.’” She was initially dismissive, but eventually flew to Rome and the pair instantly fell in love. A psychic had previously told her she would marry a European and live in Europe. “I’d kind of forgotten about it, but then there he was. He was a brilliant man in every way, and the least important part about him was being a prince.” In his will, Nicolò gave his wife the right to stay in the property for the rest of her life and, if sold, the proceeds were to be split between her and his sons. However, the sons disputed her right to stay in the villa, immediately prompting a toxic legal wrangle. She said she fears they will also try to prevent her getting her share of the sale’s proceeds. “They want the house to themselves, forgetting how kind I’ve been to them or that their father said I made him the happiest he had been in his life. I don’t know what I’ll do afterwards, but I’ve done all I can, I can’t fight any more.”Novak Djokovic’s Australian visa has again been cancelled days before the start of the Australian Open on the basis his presence could “excite anti-vaccination sentiment”. On Friday, the Australian immigration minister, Alex Hawke, exercised a personal power to cancel Djokovic’s visa, likely to result in the world No 1’s deportation and putting him out of contention for the grand slam tournament barring an against-the-odds court victory. Djokovic is due to have an appeal heard in the federal court on Sunday. The decision means that Djokovic could be effectively barred from re-entering Australia for three years unless he can show in future bids that compelling circumstances exist, such as compassionate or Australian national interest grounds. In a statement, Hawke said he cancelled the visa “on health and good order grounds, [and] on the basis that it was in the public interest to do so”. At an urgent court directions hearing on Friday evening, Djokovic’s counsel, Nicholas Wood, expressed concern at his safety and a potential “media circus” when he is taken into detention after an 8am Saturday interview with immigration officials. Wood proposed a hearing to consider overturning the cancellation on Sunday, arguing that every minute before the start of the Australian Open was “precious” to his client. Wood revealed that the basis for Hawke’s decision was the potential for Djokovic to “excite anti-vax sentiment”, based on his previous statements about vaccines. He noted this was “radically different” from the reason for the first cancellation and arguing there was was “no rational basis” for the conclusion, in part because Hawke failed to consider the effect of Djokovic’s removal. Wood noted the minister was prepared to assume facts in Djokovic’s favour including that he has complied with the law, poses only a negligible risk to others, is of good standing and has a medical reason not to be vaccinated. The government’s counsel, Stephen Lloyd, said the minister proposed that Djokovic would be taken into detention after interview on Saturday. Judge Anthony Kelly made a series of orders including that Djokovic could be taken into detention after interview, and escorted by border force officials to his lawyers officers from 10am to 2pm on Saturday and again from 9am on Sunday. The judge transferred the matter to the federal court, which will hold a directions hearing on Saturday. Earlier, Hawke brushed off the Australian government’s loss in court on Monday, indicating Djokovic had his visa restored only on “procedural fairness grounds”. Hawke said he had “carefully considered information provided” by Djokovic, his department, and the Australian Border Force. “The Morrison government is firmly committed to protecting Australia’s borders, particularly in relation to the Covid-19 pandemic.” The fresh decision to cancel the visa would leave the Australian Open without one of its biggest stars and Djokovic – who was seeking a record-breaking 21st grand slam triumph – unable to defend the title he has won nine times. The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, said that Australians had “made many sacrifices during this pandemic, and they rightly expect the result of those sacrifices to be protected”. “This is what the minister is doing in taking this action today.” Morrison said he would not comment further “due to the expected ongoing legal proceedings”. On Thursday, Morrison had said he expects authorities to apply the policies of the government that non-citizen non-residents must be double vaccinated or have an acceptable medical exemption. Djokovic arrived in Australia on the evening of 5 January. He believed that a visa granted on 18 November and an exemption approved by Tennis Australia’s chief medical officer and a Victorian government independent expert panel would be sufficient to enter Australia. After late-night questioning at Melbourne airport, Djokovic’s visa was initially cancelled by a delegate of the home affairs minister last Thursday, on the basis a recent Covid infection by itself was not sufficient for an exemption from Australia’s strict vaccination requirements. The delegate concluded that, since he was unvaccinated, Djokovic posed a risk to public health. But on Monday, a federal circuit court judge restored Djokovic’s visa, concluding it was unreasonable for the Australian Border Force to renege on a deal to give him more time at the airport to address the exemption issue. Government lawyers immediately put the world No 1 on notice that the immigration minister could still exercise a personal power to again cancel the visa. Djokovic faced a nervous wait, with questions about his travel in the fortnight before arriving in Australia and attendance at events after his positive Covid diagnosis of 16 December. Der Spiegel also claimed anomalies suggested the positive result could have been negative or dated 26 December. On Wednesday, Djokovic conceded his agent made an “administrative mistake” when declaring he had not travelled in the two weeks before his flight to Australia and acknowledged an “error of judgment” by not isolating after he tested positive for Covid.Across 1 gastropod G 
<a>OD 6 mace double def 8 plump for (Prof) PLUM (Cluedo) + PROF (anag) 9 nicely NIC(k) + ELY (bishopric) 10 usance CAN USE (anag) 11 meatiest ESTIMATE (anag) 15 deepened PEN&lt;(barg)E&gt;D on DEE 16 outclass OUT + CLASS 21 cavalier CAV  ER 22,6down Turing machine CHI in GERMAN UNIT (anag) 24,12 Norman Mailer Mormon nailer (Spoonerism) 25 punished PU  SHED 26 dear double def 27 diplomacy DIP + L  ACY [Order of Merit] Down 1 gales AS LEG (anag) 2 seminal SE  AL 3 rifle longerR IF LEg (hidden) 4,19 pyramid scheme PYR amid SCHEME [SCH  EME] 5 dungarees ARE  E [Sebastian Coe] 13 a cut above AC  E 14 realigned IN A LEDGER (anag) 17 charmer C(old)/HARMER 18 strap up PARTS (up/rev) 20 harissa H       </a> 
<a>IS/S(ex)A(ppeal) 22 tango TANG/(rosari)O 23 needy (ma)N/(wag)E/(slav)E/(earne)D/(mone)Y</a>By Christmas 1995, it was moderately common knowledge that a “sex tape” existed of Pamela Anderson and Tommy Lee, privately filmed on their honeymoon that year, after a whirlwind 96-hour romance. As the star of Baywatch, Anderson was so globally famous that other, also famous TV shows had storylines about her. Lee, the Mötley Crüe drummer, was also extremely well known, mainly as a sex, drugs and rock’n’roll poster boy, partly for mooning whenever he went on stage. Their union, and its impact, was a molecular chemistry kind of affair; like oxygen and hydrogen, each, alone, was a powerful element, but combined they were altogether more culturally powerful – her eroticism slightly neutralised by marriage, his trouble-seeking rendered a bit safer beside her all-American (actually Canadian) smile. Let me unpack that a bit: it was the 90s. Women, even if they were gay, and definitely not if they weren’t, didn’t ogle or sanction the ogling of other women’s breasts. Men who took drugs and had tattoos didn’t get asked to endorse sports brands. The highly anticipated forthcoming Disney+ bio-series, Pam &amp; Tommy, shows Lee in a much more unflattering light than he was seen in his heyday, but he was never thought of as a peach. The show is a sumptuous affair, lingering on every luxurious detail of their Malibu mansion, Lee’s tattoos, Anderson’s cartoon beauty, but don’t mistake it for wealth porn (which is, of course, TV gold at the moment). His personality, her rather winning denial and inching disillusionment, tell a tense story. It’s ostensibly a caper about the sex tape and its fallout, but the simmering volatility – of Lee but also of almost everyone – creates a suspense deeper than the presence of all these celebrities would have you expect. The sex tape, plus a load of guns and jewellery, were stolen from Lee’s safe at home just before Halloween 1995. By Christmas, it was in a Daily Mail year-in-review round-up, so everyone knew about it, but nobody had seen it. Fair play – it wasn’t until 1996 that the couple even realised the tape was missing – but there was more going on. In ways that wouldn’t become clear until much later, this was a period of tectonic shifts: from old media to new; from old to new versions of celebrity, privacy, image and brand; and from old norms around sex, porn, exhibitionism and voyeurism to new ones that still aren’t settled. A lot of what used to make sex sleazy was in the detail. The lines between normal and kinky, clean and dirty, were drawn by the conventions of consumption; if this thing you were buying was nice, you’d be able to buy it in a nice place. Likewise, to watch this sex tape, you’d have had to send $59.95 to a Canadian T-shirt company in New York, who would then send you a VHS via Amsterdam. Or if you happened to be in the US, you’d have to know a guy who knew the guy who’d scammed the original thief, who would sell a copy straight into your hands for $175. None of this was the kind of thing respectable people did. You would look dim if you hadn’t heard about the sex tape, but to say you’d seen it, well, you’d at least need a reason. The same couldn’t be said of sex tapes that exploded five or 10 years later – Kim Kardashian’s was leaked in 2007, Paris Hilton’s in 2003. There are so many circumstances under which you might have seen those: someone could have ironically linked to them on a chat forum, or you were just browsing. The point is, you wouldn’t need a reason. You could buy anything, anywhere, and often not even for money. In sex terms, the fundamental collapse brought about by the internet age isn’t so much of privacy or the right to be forgotten (as EU law has it), but in a shared consensus around what sexual decency actually is, who’s allowed to have it, who’s allowed to watch it, who’s exploited by it, who’s enjoying it. The truly amazing thing is how many years have passed without bringing us any closer to a new resolution. The Pam and Tommy story is astonishing in part because of their naivety. The series, starring Lily James and Sebastian Stan, is based on a 2014 Rolling Stone article, Pam and Tommy: The Untold Story of the World’s Most Infamous Sex Tape, which that details how, once they discovered the tape was missing, they sought to contain the leak. They sent heavies round to harass people they suspected of the theft and brought doomed lawsuits against distributors, as if the old rules were still in place and nobody could distribute your film unless you’d signed a release form. This isn’t a dumb-celeb story; their naivety was echoed across culture, subculture and the law – a sincere belief even among pornographers that if you hadn’t signed off on a film, you could prevent it from being seen. It was a first-world problem, sure, but there was genuine crisis in the years that followed about the value of celebrity: if you couldn’t control your own content, you couldn’t monetise it, and if you couldn’t monetise it, what actually was it? Enter Paris Hilton and Kim Kardashian, with a thought experiment. They didn’t personally release their tapes, and threatened lawsuits to prevent distribution, but both ultimately went on to profit from the notoriety, having understood that the rules had permanently changed. If you don’t own the content but still own the identity, flip the equation, so the content is not rationed and the identity becomes obliteratingly large: rather than guard your privacy, show everything. The funny thing about those sex tapes is that they don’t really work as pornography – Hilton’s is very fey, Kardashian’s is all random camera angles. But they’re not supposed to; they’re not really about sex but the body as a means of production: what can it sell? There was considerable debate in the early 00s around whether Hilton and Kardashian were the puppets or puppet-masters of the new age: in retrospect, I think it was misogynistic. If Mark Zuckerberg had done it, nobody would have asked if someone else were pulling his strings; though arguably, there would have been no mileage in him being naked. So there’s that. Anderson and Lee’s video had a distinctive mood, in that it felt private; it was made by two people, for each other, in an age in which mass accidental distribution wasn’t on the horizon. Later, when sex tapes became more common, the question was always whether they’d been released cynically by the subject or somehow finagled by dishonest means. There was a manosphere subset who were always questing after the original Anderson/Lee experience, who didn’t want to be consumers but peeping toms. When the great nude-dumps of the 10s came along, first in Celebgate in 2014, then in the Fappening of 2017, it was no accident they were posted on 4chan, image board of choice for the incel and other far-right misogynist movements. These were naked pictures, mostly of female actors, obtained without consent via a breach of iCloud security, and the point was that they were of stars you wouldn’t typically see naked: Jennifer Lawrence, Kate Upton. Many of the women depicted denied the authenticity of the images. The whole business was about more than naked bodies – which, let’s face it, by the middle of the last decade, you could find anywhere – it was about sticking it to women who wouldn’t put out. The Fappening was basically a metaphor for the incel identity; men who experience sex not as participants but as thieving observers, despised, marginal, illegitimate. Pamela Anderson and Tommy Lee had two sons before divorcing in 1998. A detail that reads like a pub-quiz curiosity is that Anderson went on to marry Rick Salomon – the other party in the Paris Hilton sex video – in 2007. They got an annulment a year later, but remarried in 2014, divorcing again the year after that. (Arguably, Anderson is just very into nuptials; she managed a marriage, an annulment and another marriage to someone different during 2020, which I think puts your sourdough successes to shame.) Regarding her and Salomon, though, it seems likely their sex tapes were an absolutely seismic, defining event for both of them, which gave them a huge amount in common. As interesting as it is, to watch privacy mutate into exposure, self into image into brand, sex into advertorial, it is monumentally asymmetrical: to the many, a curiosity; to two people, essentially the rest of their lives. It’s a reparation the world wide web will never be able to make: to rectify or even acknowledge the scale of that impact, when a billion eyes all turn to glance at the same thing at once. Pam &amp; Tommy is on Disney+ from 2 February.It’s time to downsize your finances. I mean a permanent cutback, not just a post-Christmas squeeze. But this isn’t about tightening your belt; it is about shrinking your wallet. These days, my wallet is more of a wallette. It is a glorified cardholder, really: just bigger than a credit card, with slots for swipecards and driving licence and the few store cards and membership cards that haven’t yet migrated to my phone. There is a press-stud compartment for cash, although I use this infrequently. In lipstick-red grained calfskin leather, with gilt YSL lettering, my wallette still has an air of importance. But it is a shadow of its former incarnations. By the time I got my wallet, its full-size predecessor was falling apart at the seams. I am not particularly thrifty, just too lazy to faff about with the tiresome mini-admin task of figuring out what to do with the flotsam and jetsam of receipts and loyalty cards that had accumulated. What tipped me over the edge to deciding it was time for a new purse wasn’t the scuff marks, but the fact that the wallet had become too big. Big enough to fill an entire jeans back pocket, it was an unwieldy relic, like carting around a brick-size phone. My wallette is small enough to slip into a front jeans pocket. I can take it out in an evening bag, instead of having to decant a debit card and an emergency £20, like I did in the big-wallet days. And it’s not just me. The baby wallet is big news. For Christmas gifts, Zara did brisk business with a £59.99 boxed set of matching leather gloves and mini-wallet. At Matchesfashion, sales of cardholders were up 117% on last year in the run-up to Christmas. Bestselling at Marks &amp; Spencer right now is a diminutive mock-croc cardholder with a starburst snap closure for £9.50. At Selfridges, the mini-wallet range has grown by a third: it reports that Le Porte, a unisex Jacquemus mini-wallet with a strap so that you can wear it cross-body, or lanyard-style around your neck, is a bestseller at £240. At Mulberry, where wallets used to tend toward the size of a chequebook (remember those?), demand has also shifted towards the dinky. Its folded multi-card wallet, a palm-sized 8 x 11.5cm, is a hit, and slim cardholders are popular with those who have completely given up on coins. I have predicted the death of the wallet before. Seven years ago, in fact. I’m not saying this to show off, though, because reading that article back, I realise I got it completely wrong. My outlandish prediction back then seems to have been that the chunky wallet would eventually die off with generation X, since millennials preferred smaller wallets and were daringly experimenting with the concept of paying for sandwiches and train tickets using their smartphones. At that point, it didn’t seem to have crossed my mind that cash would be close to obsolete so soon. For that I can blame the pandemic-hastened demise of cash, and with it the wallet, not just because of the practicalities – dirty notes and all that – but because it showed us that even ingrained habits can change – fast. The rise of the mini-wallet is driven by utility, but is symbolic, too. A fat wallet is no longer a status symbol – not now contactless stealth wealth has come to the masses. A fat wallet once made you look rich; now, it looks like you need to save up for a wallette.He left the meeting in a right old huff, chuntering that it was a bad day for farming and dismissing one of the planning officials as a comedian, after his scheme to build a hilltop restaurant on his Oxfordshire farm was flatly turned down. But Jeremy Clarkson, petrolhead turned farming reality TV show star, may be heartened by the concern and interest in his case that rippled through the Cotswolds this week. Fellow farmers, other food producers and local residents, even some who really don’t like Clarkson’s take-no-prisoners style, argued that the case illustrated a disconnect between planners and the needs of modern farmers to find new, imaginative ways of making a living. “It’s a real shame,” said Pete Ledbury, who farms with his wife, Emma, at the North Cotswolds Dairy just a few miles from Clarkson’s Diddly Squat farm. “We know that we have to diversify to make a living and create more jobs for the countryside. Turning down projects like this doesn’t help. I think it’s pretty shortsighted of the planners.” Emma Ledbury spelled out the pressure that farms such as theirs were under. In recent years they have lost 40 of their 100-strong herd of pedigree holstein cattle to bovine tuberculosis, drastically cutting their chances of turning a profit. It costs 32p to produce a litre of milk, for which supermarket buyers have been paying them about 28p. Selling milk directly to the customer via a vending machine at the Diddly Squat farm shop for a fairer price has helped keep them going and they were hoping to provide milk, cream and butter to the restaurant. Those hopes appear to have been dashed. “British farming is in a mess,” she said. Clarkson argued at a West Oxfordshire district council planning meeting that his restaurant, which he wanted to open in a converted lambing shed, was the sort of diversification project farmers needed to undertake to survive. His scheme, the meeting was told, would create jobs for up to 25 people and give local farmers and other food producers a more lucrative market for their goods than the supermarkets. It would also shorten the supply chain and reduce food miles. Clarkson’s business plan for the restaurant revealed that government subsidy accounts for more than 85% of his farm’s profit but the basic payment scheme income – the current main financial support system for farming – is to reduce from £83,000 a year to zero by 2028. The planning subcommittee rejected the restaurant after hearing complaints that the popularity of the TV star’s Amazon Prime show Clarkson’s Farm had caused traffic chaos as fans flocked to his farm shop – and being advised by officials that its prominent position in an area of outstanding natural beauty (AONB) meant it should be turned down. Max Abbott, who owns the bakery Sourdough Revolution in Lechlade and had hoped to supply bread to the restaurant, was furious. “There’s a huge drive to allow farms to diversify, to attract more people, more money and break down the gap between farm and plate,” he said. “Jeremy is employing people, bringing in money. He’s not everyone’s cup of tea but what the council is doing seems absurd.” In the village of Chadlington, just down the hill from the farm, there are plenty of people fed up with the disruption that Clarkson’s shop has caused and are dead set against the restaurant. But many others, such as Victoria Steffens, who works in a village shop, said it was mainly newcomers who were against the restaurant scheme. “The locals, the people who have been here a long time, realise that businesses that provide new jobs have to be a good thing. Jeremy Clarkson is Marmite but I’m backing him.” Merilyn Davies, a district councillor and one of only two committee members who supported the restaurant plan, added: “I never thought I’d agree with Jeremy Clarkson. He rubs some people up the wrong way but I think his idea of local farmers working as a cooperative to supply the restaurant was interesting. We have to give the AONB weight but it’s not all about bats and newts. We have to remember people live here too.” While there are many very rich people who live in the area, Davies said there were pockets of deprivation and people had to leave for Oxford, Abingdon or further afield to find work. “Farming is an important part of rural Britain. If we want it to be part of our future, we have to be creative.” Like him or loathe him, Clarkson’s televised farming – and planning – adventures are putting the microscope on rural issues. Back at the North Cotswolds Dairy, Pete Ledbury said the show and the planning application had shown at least one thing: “Food is hard to produce and it pays bugger all.”Cryptocurrency firms bombarded Londoners with a record number of adverts on public transport during 2021, fuelling calls for a ban to prevent people being lured into risky investments. The surge in adverts for crypto assets, which are unregulated in the UK, has prompted concerns about the risk of addiction and financial harm, particularly given the wild volatility in the price of digital currencies such as bitcoin, which reached record highs last year before crashing again. It also emerged that Transport for London (TfL) has not implemented a ban on gambling adverts promised by the mayor, Sadiq Khan, allowing the industry to step up its marketing activity in the meantime. Records obtained by the Guardian under the Freedom of Information Act show that TfL services displayed 39,560 crypto adverts from 13 firms in the six months between April and September 2021. Major advertisers include the trading platform eToro, floki – “a “meme coin” named after Elon Musk’s dog – Crypto.com and Luno Money, whose campaign telling people it was “time to buy” bitcoin was banned by the advertising regulator for being “irresponsible”. The promotional drive eclipsed previous years, as advertisers tapped into the popularity of smartphone trading apps and increased awareness of digital currencies such as bitcoin and ether. In 2019, the only advertiser offering crypto services on TfL buses and trains was trading platform eToro, which paid for just five digital displays and 40 “supersides”, long posters on the side of doubledecker buses. Despite widespread working from home in 2020, the volume of crypto ads increased, with companies including Luno Money and Coinfloor buying 1,595 ads between them. Before the recent surge, 2018 was the busiest year for crypto ads on TfL since it started recording data in 2017. Even then, 15,000 were shown in 12 months, compared with 39,560 after just six months of 2021, including promotions for relatively obscure firms such as Hex, Kraken, BOTS, and Puglife. In total, crypto companies have spent £825,245 to advertise on TfL tube and train services since 2018. The organisation does not hold spending data for buses. A separate freedom of information request by the Guardian revealed that the crypto advertising push was mirrored by a significant increase in gambling ads, as Khan’s April 2021 promise to ban gambling ads appeared to stall. In 2018-19, online casinos and bookmakers spent £783,476 to advertise on TfL services, then £1m the following year, followed by £1.16m in 2020-21. But they spent £1.17m in the first three months of the 2021-22 period. While the Euros football championship likely to have fuelled the increase in part, spending was nearly six times higher than in 2018, the year of the last World Cup. Khan pledged to ban gambling ads in his manifesto, published nearly nine months ago, but a spokesperson for the Mayor’s office said it was yet to be enacted. Siân Berry, the Green party’s former co-leader, now its London Assembly member, urged Khan to move forward with the ban and extend it to crypto adverts. “Investment bubbles have always worked by dragging in more and more inexperienced suckers towards the end of the cycle. That’s the stage at which some of these projects may be at with all this public advertising,” she said. “The risk is that they draw in people who are more likely than not to lose money, which is closely equivalent to gambling and I think these promotions should be banned by Transport for London in the same way.” “People are struggling at the moment and they may have had blows to their life chances. They may have lost livelihoods or homes and be susceptible to get-rich-quick schemes.” “Are TfL doing proper checks to establish whether these are legitimate companies?” A TfL spokesperson said all adverts contained a disclaimer stating that crypto is unregulated in the UK and that the value of investments could fall. The transport body is vetting ads before they run and is understood to be refusing any that use similar language to those that have been banned or investigated by the ASA. It has written to both the FCA and ASA seeking further guidance. The managing director of eToro UK, Dan Moczulski, said: “eToro fully supports measures, including regulation, designed to protect and educate investors about crypto and other financial asset classes.” Asked about the concerns raised about their advertising, several of the crypto firms responded, saying any dangers were well flagged and not unique to crypto assets. Floki, one of whose adverts is being investigated by the ASA, said banning crypto ads would be “censorship” and that ads should be regulated and include disclaimers. It also said crypto was “anything but a bubble” and would “change the world as we know it”. Kraken said bubbles “generally don’t last over a decade” with a high degree of adoption by institutions. BOTS said all investments came with risk and pointed out that the financial crisis of 2008 showed traditional finance wasn’t without dangers. Luno Money, whose bitcoin advert was banned by the ASA last year, said it would welcome “more formal guidance”, which it hoped would emerge this year.The Tigray region of northern Ethiopia stands on the edge of a humanitarian disaster, the UN has said, as fighting escalates and stocks of essential food for malnourished children run out. The World Food Programme (WFP) said on Friday that it would be distributing its last supplies of cereals, pulses and oil next week to Tigray, where more than 5 million people are estimated to be in need of food assistance. Fierce clashes between forces loyal to the federal government in Addis Ababa and fighters with the Tigrayan People’s Liberation Front have meant that no WFP convoys have reached Mekelle, the capital of Tigray, since mid-December. Stocks of nutritionally fortified food for the treatment of malnourished children and women have now been exhausted, the agency said in a statement. Fuel to deliver the last of the essential food supplies is also running extremely low, it said. It is also increasingly worried about hunger levels in the neighbouring regions of Amhara and Afar, where more than 4 million people are thought to be in need of food assistance. “We’re now having to choose who goes hungry to prevent another from starving,” said Michael Dunford, WFP’s regional director for eastern Africa. “We need immediate guarantees from all parties to the conflict for safe and secure humanitarian corridors, via all routes, across northern Ethiopia. Humanitarian supplies are simply not flowing at the pace and scale needed,” he said. “The lack of both food and fuel means we’ve only been able to reach 20% of those we should have in this latest distribution in Tigray. We’re on the edge of a humanitarian disaster.” Thousands of people are thought to have died in the conflict between the TPLF and forces loyal to the Ethiopian prime minister, Abiy Ahmed, since it began in November 2020. Several million have been forced from their homes. Health and aid workers say the last few days have been particularly bloody because of a wave of airstrikes, including one on a camp for internally displaced people that is reported to have killed at least 56. A UN human rights office (OHCHR) spokesperson told Reuters on Friday: “At least 108 civilians have reportedly been killed and 75 others injured since the year began as a result of air strikes allegedly carried out by the Ethiopian air force.” The Ethiopian government has previously denied targeting civilian sites, and it reacted angrily on Thursday to condemnation of the situation in Tigray by the World Health Organization (WHO) chief, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, who had accused the authorities of blocking medical supplies to the region. He told reporters it was “so dreadful and unimaginable during this time, the 21st century, when a government is denying its own people for more than a year food and medicine and the rest to survive”. Tedros is from Tigray. The government said in response that it had sent a letter to the WHO, accusing him of “misconduct” and of not living up “to the integrity and professional expectations required from his office”. Through his acts, Tedros had “spread harmful misinformation and compromised WHO’s reputation, independence and credibility”, Ethiopia’s foreign ministry said, according to a statement seen by the Associated Press. WHO had no immediate response to the claims.A handful of monitors to measure air quality in the classrooms of a large Midlands secondary school was nowhere near enough to go round, but sufficient to detect a problem. “Readings in some rooms were well over the suggested clean air limit of 800ppm,” said one teacher. “We asked for action to be taken but nothing was done and now the monitors have been taken away.” The teacher is not alone in his concern over poor air quality, which increases the risk of Covid infection, in schools. Aware of the link, the government sent out to schools in England 350,000 monitors to check the quantity of CO2 in the air, measured in ppm (parts per million), mainly from exhaled breath. But it is providing only 8,000 air purifiers for classrooms. Now a survey by the National Association of Head Teachers (NAHT) suggests that the Department for Education may have underestimated the demand. Of the nine in 10 schools that received the monitors, more than a third – 34% – found classrooms with consistently poor levels of ventilation, the survey found. Of those, more than half – 53% – said even after taking action they continued to have rooms with a red reading, denoting consistently poor air quality. It also showed that only a tiny 2% of schools are using air filters and cleaning devices provided by the government. A further 8% are using ones they bought themselves. Three-quarters of the 1,625 schools in the survey said they could not afford such devices – the government recommends two filters suitable for a classroom, priced at £425 or £1,170 a unit, plus the cost of filters. Paul Whiteman, the NAHT’s general secretary, says the survey suggests 8,000 air filters are unlikely to satisfy demand from the more than a quarter of a million classrooms in England. “We will encourage government to monitor demand and to make more available as required, to ensure all schools that need one, get one. Adequate ventilation in classrooms should not be limited to first come, first served,” he said. Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, told the Commons this month that “the majority of schools didn’t report any issues with the atmosphere in the classroom”. The government had ordered 8,000 purifiers because the feedback suggested that was all that was needed. To provide them for all schools would be a waste of taxpayers’ money, he said. However, Munira Wilson, the Liberal Democrat education spokesperson, says schools are missing out because the DfE has set the bar too high. Only those with rooms consistently above 1500 ppm of CO2 could get free filters, nearly twice 800 ppm, the widely agreed safe level. “The government has completely failed teachers, pupils and parents alike with their botched air purifier scheme,” she said. “Not only do their own criteria fail to keep most classrooms safe, the earliest a school can access equipment is next month. This snail’s pace is frankly unacceptable.” “Conservative ministers are spending twice as much on a royal yacht than it would cost to provide an air purifier for every classroom,” she added. “They are making schools compete for equipment to help keep their pupils and staff members safe.” In Bradford a study of air quality in 30 primary schools is seeking to identify the most efficient way of achieving clean air in the classroom and the link between CO2 levels and Covid transmission rates. One group in the study uses the conventional method of opening windows, the next also uses air filters and the third group has ultra-violet lamps that kill the virus. Catherine Noakes, professor of environmental engineering at the University of Leeds, one of the researchers, says 800 ppm or 1500 ppm should not be seen as hard measures. “If your levels are 800 or below then that’s healthy and you don’t need to do anything. If levels are routinely above 1500 ppm then your ventilation is poor, you have a problem and you need to do something about it,” she says. “Between 800 and 1500 a lot of other factors have to be taken into account. You could get a school routinely getting 900 because of variations caused, for example, by the position of the sensors, or the number of people in the room.” The Department for Education said its statistics showed 99% of state-funded education settings had received a CO2 monitor. A spokesperson added: “Air cleaning units are not needed in the vast majority of classrooms – only where there is poor ventilation that cannot be easily improved. Based on feedback from schools that there are only a small number of cases where good ventilation is not possible, we are supplying up to 8,000 air cleaning units from next week.” Schools, nurseries and colleges have until 17 January to apply for 7,000 of the air cleaning units. Special schools and alternative provision settings have already been offered 1,000 units. “Together with mass testing, bringing in supply staff and the hard work of schools and teachers, we are confident that our measures will maximise classroom time for students,” the spokesperson said.For over 30 years, Sharleen Spiteri’s carefree and soulful voice has lit up a string of radio-friendly hits both solo and as the frontwoman of Texas, who are heading back out on tour this month – and before they begin, she will answer Guardian readers’ questions on her life and career. Before selling tens of millions of albums, Spiteri grew up in suburban Glasgow and worked as a hairdresser, forming Texas in 1987. Their debut single I Don’t Want a Lover went Top 10 in the UK and charted in the US, with its appealing combination of slick soft rock and Spiteri’s country-ish vocal melody. Their success waned a little in the early 90s but they built towards their biggest hit, the 1997 album White on Blonde, which went six times platinum in the UK. The band’s versatility became their strength as they wrote a variety of defining songs: Say What You Want nodded to the moodiness of trip-hop, Halo channelled the grandeur of late-period Britpop and Black Eyed Boy resurrected the sound of northern soul. The Hush album in 1999 was equally massive, reaching No 1 and spending over a year in the chart. They were never exactly cool, but Texas were arguably more adventurous than some of their supposedly edgier peers – their version of Say What You Want with the Wu-Tang Clan, memorably performed at the Brit awards with real chemistry between Spiteri and Method Man, was a seamless and inspired mash-up. “We’ve never really followed any trends. We’ve just always tried to make relevant records, sometimes we have gotten it very right and sometimes we have got it very wrong,” Spiteri said last year. She went solo after 2005’s Red Book – having turned down a part in Baz Luhrmann’s musical Moulin Rouge – and her debut album Melody spent five weeks in the Top 10. Texas returned in 2013, and have retained a sizeable chunk of their peak 90s fanbase: 2021 album Hi, which reconnected them with the Wu-Tang Clan’s RZA for the title track, was another Top 3 hit. It’s a remarkably enduring and multifaceted career, and next week Spiteri will answer questions on it. Post them in the comments below by 11am on Tuesday 18 January. Her answers will be published in the 21 January edition of the Film &amp; Music section, and online.Downing Street was forced to issue an unprecedented public apology to the Queen on Friday over parties held in No 10 on the eve of her husband’s funeral, amid mounting fury from grassroots Tories. Conservative MPs will hold crisis talks over the weekend about how to respond to allegations of a party culture in Westminster while the rest of the country was in lockdown. The civil servant Sue Gray, who is investigating the allegations, is now understood to be looking at three more events, two held on the night before Prince Philip’s funeral on 16 April 2021 and one held on 17 December 2020. In total 13 parties held on government premises while coronavirus restrictions were in place – most of them in Downing Street – have been disclosed. However allegations in the Mirror have said that events in No 10 became so regular they were dubbed “wine-time Fridays” and staff bought a drinks fridge to store their alcohol. The paper claims that Boris Johnson attended a “handful” of the events at a time when indoor socialising was banned. Senior figures in a string of Conservative constituency associations told the Guardian that support for the prime minister was draining away. Mark Rowley, chairman of the Kettering Conservative Association, said: “At a local level, we’re losing members. People are just not renewing their membership, or they’re actively cancelling their membership. So people are starting to talk with their feet.” “Personally, I think he should resign,” he said, adding that he had written to the Conservative chair, Oliver Dowden, to express his members’ “dismay”. Martin Trollope-Bellew, chair of the Grantham and Stamford Conservatives and once a staunch supporter of Johnson, said “it appears the wheels are coming off”. “Some of the members, the longstanding members, are being very vocal about saying he ought to go,” he said, although added he would be waiting until the result of Gray’s investigation before taking a stance. Richard Clewer, the Tory leader of Wiltshire council, said: “It’s critical we follow the guidance that public health put out as leaders and politicians – no questions asked, we should. “There has clearly been a significant failure of management inside No 10. I don’t know who that sits with, but I guess leadership comes from the top.” On Friday night a poll released by Savanta Comres gave Labour a 10-point lead, on 42 points against 32 for the Conservatives. Johnson chose to make no public statement on Friday, after news emerged of two leaving parties held in No 10 on 16 April 2021. Instead, his deputy spokesperson told journalists: “It’s deeply regrettable that this took place at a time of national mourning, and No 10 has apologised to the palace for that.” He declined to say whether Johnson would apologise in person to the Queen at his next private audience with her, but said the prime minister recognised the public’s “significant anger”. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, said: “An apology isn’t the only thing the prime minister should be offering the palace today. Boris Johnson should do the decent thing and resign.” The monarch mourned alone at her husband’s funeral because Covid rules at the time prohibited indoor mixing. Two leaving parties in No 10, details of which emerged in the Daily Telegraph, involved a case of wine bottles, and continued into the early hours of the morning in the Downing Street garden. The prime minister did not attend the parties, and his spokesperson said he was not aware they were taking place. Johnson has not appeared in public since prime minister’s questions on Wednesday, when he apologised for attending a “bring your own booze” gathering on 20 May 2020, but insisted he believed it was a “work event”. The prime minister’s spokesperson has suggested Johnson is exercising caution after a close family member tested positive for Covid – though government guidance no longer obliges double-vaccinated people to isolate. It also emerged on Friday that Johnson “commuted” back and forth between Downing Street and Chequers in the first few days of lockdown in March 2020, when the public were being told to “stay at home”. Tortoise reported that the prime minister travelled between his two residences until 27 March, despite ordering a full lockdown on 23 March. A Downing Street spokesperson said: “At that time Mrs Johnson was heavily pregnant and had been placed in a vulnerable category and advised to minimise social contact. “In line with clinical guidance and to minimise the risk to her they were based at Chequers during this period, with the prime minister commuting to Downing Street to work.” Several MPs including the Scottish Conservative leader, Douglas Ross, and the backbencher Andrew Bridgen have called for Johnson to resign. Johnson’s cabinet colleagues have agreed to wait until Gray’s report is published before deciding what action should be taken. One minister said it could still go either way. “If Sue Gray doesn’t come up with anything more than we already know, and it concludes the events were not illegal, then maybe he could still find a way of recovering his mojo.” But the minister said equally Johnson was at a point of “very great danger”. Backbench Conservative MPs said on Friday that his departure had most likely been hastened by the latest revelations. “I suspect it will bring forward the ‘when’,” said one former minister. MPs said they would be having calls and Zoom meetings over the weekend to discuss strategy. News of yet another party emerged on Friday, with the Daily Telegraph reporting that leaving drinks were held for the head of the Covid taskforce, Kate Josephs, on 17 December 2020. Josephs, who is chief executive of Sheffield city council, issued a statement saying she was “truly sorry”. Dave Penman, general secretary of the FDA trade union, which represents senior civil servants, expressed concern that what he called the “selective leaking” of incidents was “increasingly designed to push the blame on to civil servants.” “Everyone has to take responsibility for their own actions, but clearly those in leadership positions set the tone and expectation,” he said. “I would hope – and expect – that the investigation will ensure responsibility and accountability are reflected fairly and proportionately, regardless of position.” James Slack, Johnson’s former head of communications, issued his own apology on Friday after it was reported that one of the 16 April events was a leaving party to mark his exit as he left to take up a post as deputy editor of the Sun. He said: “I wish to apologise unreservedly for the anger and hurt caused. This event should not have happened at the time that it did. I am deeply sorry, and take full responsibility.” * Additional reporting by Mark BrownNovak Djokovic’s visa was cancelled for a second time today on the basis his presence could “excite anti-vaccination sentiment”. His legal team are appealing today’s decision. In just a few hours’ time he is scheduled to be interviewed by Australian immigration officials (at 8am Melbourne time). The proceedings have been transferred to Federal Court, and the full hearing will take place on Sunday morning, the day before the Australian Open begins. If the decision by Alex Hawke, the immigration minister, to cancel the visa stands, that will of course prevent Djokovic from playing at the Australian Open, and also lead to him being put on a plane home at the earliest opportunity. Novak Djokovic’s diary this weekend (courtesy of our reporter Paul Karp): 8am Saturday – interview with Border Force Then detention, including 10am-2pm at his lawyers offices on Saturday; then From 9am Sunday, also at his lawyers offices, this time for the hearing Thanks for reading today and we’ll see you very soon for the latest instalment of the Djokovic saga. Here is the latest report: Bye for now. As we mentioned earlier, the opinion of the Australian public law expert Associate Professor Janina Boughey is that, if there have been no procedural errors, the discretionary powers of the minister means Djokovic’s appeal will fail. In a video posted online by the University of New South Wales, Boughey explains that there are now fewer avenues of appeal for Djokovic: Under the section that gives the minister personal discretion, there are fewer avenues of appeal so Mr Djokovic could not appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. All he could do is seek judicial review in the courts. And what the courts doing judicial review is determine whether the power has been exercised lawfully. So, it would all depend on how the minister exercises the power and whether he does so in a manner which is lawful. The discretion that the minister has is very broad, so realistically, unless the minister makes a procedural error, doesn’t comply with the terms of the Act, or unless the decision is ... really has no basis ... then Mr Djokovic is unlikely to succeed. In case you missed it yesterday: Novak Djokovic has been “playing by his own rules” and has put his bid for a 21st grand slam title at risk by not following Australia’s Covid-19 vaccination requirements, according to the world No 4, Stefanos Tsitsipas. This is from a couple of days ago, and serves as a useful reminder of the timeline of events leading up to this week’s drama: Novak Djokovic’s Australian visa has again been cancelled days before the start of the Australian Open on the basis his presence could “excite anti-vaccination sentiment”. A reminder that one of the reasons stated for cancelling Djokovic’s visa today is that he could ‘excite anti-vax sentiment’ ... which, to a non-legal person like me, would seem to open the decision up to a challenge. But, again, if the minister has the power to do whatever they like, then Djokovic’s appeal will surely fail. It certainly felt like there was an amount of straw-clutching going on by Djokovic’s legal team in that hearing, but it was enough to put the judge on the back foot, and visibly annoy him with the way it was all unfolding. So, after a brief adjournment, the parties agreed to clarify the orders so that Djokovic can be taken into detention after his interview tomorrow at 8am at a location of the parties’ choosing. This is to avoid a “media circus” at the Lonsdale St offices identified in the hearing. Djokovic’s diary is: 8am Saturday – interview with Border Force Then detention, including 10am-2pm at his lawyers offices on Saturday; then From 9am Sunday, also at his lawyers offices, this time for the hearing Via Reuters, various reactions to the decision to cancel Djokovic’s visa for a second time. Former Australian PM Kevin Rudd reckons the timing, late afternoon/early evening on Friday in Australia, was to ‘win the weekend media cycle’. Australian PM, Scott Morrison: “I note the Minister for Immigration’s decision in relation to Mr Novak Djokovic’s visa. I understand that following careful consideration, action has been taken by the Minister to cancel Mr Djokovic’s visa held on health and good order grounds, on the basis that it was in the public interest to do so. This pandemic has been incredibly difficult for every Australian but we have stuck together and saved lives and livelihoods.” Former PM Kevin Rudd: “What a surprise! Morrison’s govt cancels Djokovic’s visa to win the weekend media cycle - showing us all how hairy chested he is. Why on earth did they issue the visa in the first place? One big political distraction from empty shelves &amp; the national shortage of boosters &amp; RATs.” Andy Murray: “It’s unfortunate that it’s ended up in this sort of situation, and who knows? I don’t know what route he goes down, if he can appeal that and, you know, how long that takes, and can he still be out practicing whilst that process is going on or still competing in the tournament? Just want it to get resolved. I think it would be good for everyone if that was the case. It just seems like it’s dragged on for quite a long time now, and yeah, not great for the tennis, not great for the Australian Open, not great for Novak.” Justine Henin: “I think it’s the best thing he doesn’t play at the moment. When something is so complicated, I don’t say that Djokovic doesn’t have to fight, because he thought it was the right thing to do, but I think now it’s been proved that so many Australian people don’t want him to play. “So maybe it’s better for everyone, for tennis, for the tournament, and maybe for him, that he doesn’t play the tournament.” Darren Cahill, coach and former player: “Fault lies everywhere here. It’s been a mess. Novak, TA, Vic Gov, Federal Gov. It should’ve been a hard rule entering this country considering what the folks have been thru. Get vaccinated and come play the AO, or if not maybe see you in 23’. No wiggle room.” Former player Janko Tipsarevic: “Toxic Shame on each and everyone involved in this process...” Tennis fan Lou Ricciardi at Melbourne Park: “I do agree with what the government has done. Rules are rules. If you break the rules there are a lot of consequences. It’s unfortunate for the Open but ... the Open is bigger than just one man. The other players have got to just put up with what’s happened and hope there’s no distractions. What more could Djokovic have done to avoid all this? Quite a bit, as it turns out, writes Paul Karp: The hearing has now restarted ... the judge thanks those present for their efforts, and says he will publish his decision(s) tomorrow morning. And with that he says ‘adjourn the court’ – and that would appear to be it for the night. Earlier in the hearing, Djokovic’s lawyers mentioned that he had a ‘medical contraindication’ with regard to vaccination. This (Paul Karp tells me) is legalese for the fact that Djokovic tested positive for Covid-19 last month. Anyway, the court is due be back for more in a couple of minutes, but we are effectively no closer to a final resolution to the issue of Djokovic’s visa and his participation at the Australian Open. As stated below the judge has transferred the case to Federal Court, and Djokovic is due to attend an interview with immigration officials at 8am tomorrow. Which is only nine hours from now. The hearing has just been adjourned for another five minutes. It’s now a few minutes before 11pm in Melbourne where the hearing is taking place. Judge Kelly looks frustrated and even angry with the direction – or directions – in which Djokovic’s lawyers are taking this hearing. The Judge Anthony Kelly has also ordered the proceedings to be transferred to the Federal Court, that’s a slight setback from Djokovic, whose lawyers had urged it to stay with this court (Federal Circuit), to speed things up. Nicholas Wood, Djokovic’s counsel, has expressed concern about security and “a potential media circus” if Djokovic is taken into detention at his solicitors’ offices, a location identified now publicly in the hearing. Wood said: “I can’t see any practical disadvantage for him to be taken into detention at a location agreed between parties but not one announced to the world.” The judge’s orders are as follows: Djokovic to serve as soon as is reasonably practical an originating application, an affidavit attaching Alex Hawke’s reasons and submissions for decision The minister will not take any step to remove Djokovic from Australia Djokovic will attend an interview at 8am Saturday with immigration officials, then will be supervised by Border Force officers from 10am to 2pm on Saturday at his solicitors’ offices Djokovic may continue in detention from 9am Sunday 16 January, at his solicitors’ offices Judge Anthony Kelly is now reading a fairly lengthy statement on the way forward from here ... details to follow shortly. The current state of play is that Novak Djokovic’s visa has been cancelled for a second time. Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, announced earlier that he cancelled the visa “on health and good order grounds, [and] on the basis that it was in the public interest to do so”. A late-night (in Australia) hearing is ongoing, and has just restarted ... The hearing remains adjourned. As soon as it restarts, we’ll bring you the details. Elsewhere in tennis: Andy Murray has defeated American Reilly Opelka at the Sydney Tennis Classic to reach his first ATP Tour final for more than two years: In “I am not a lawyer, but ...” news: It seems to me there is plenty of ambiguity and potential for legal argument in Alex Hawke’s statement regarding his reasons for cancelling Djokovic’s visa for a second time. But that said, if his ministerial powers allow him to make such a decision and legal procedure has been correctly followed in all other ways, then Djokovic’s lawyers seem destined to lose their second appeal, and he’ll be on the plane home. We shall see. And here’s our video explainer on how this saga has unfolded: Here is Paul Karp’s story from a little earlier on the immigration minister Alex Hawke’s decision to revoke the Serb’s visa for a second time: Rather than the main court hearing on the key issue of Djokovic’s visa, the one taking place now is more procedural. Our reporter Paul Karp explains what the current hearing (which must be bringing in record numbers to the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia YouTube channel) is all about: “It’s mainly just which court will hear it, timetabling, interim orders re: whether he’ll be in detention ... It sounds like main hearing will be Sunday.” So we’ve got at least a couple more days of this to look forward to. Thank you Mostafa and greetings, everyone. Novak Djokovic’s lawyers continue to fight this with the same stubbornness that the Serb brings to a baseline rally. Today’s hearing – taking place late on Friday evening in Australia, and now late morning in the UK – has been adjourned for now ... we’ll bring you updates as and when things resume. The hearing is available to watch on YouTube here: OK and with that, I will hand over the blog to Luke McLaughlin. Thanks for reading. At an urgent court directions hearing on Friday evening, Novak Djokovic’s counsel Nicholas Wood confirmed that he is not in detention tonight and is due to attend an interview with immigration officials at 8am on Saturday. The Australian government’s counsel, Stephen Lloyd, said the immigration minister proposed that Djokovic would be taken into detention at that time, taken to the offices of his solicitors for the hearing. And with that, the court has been adjourned after the parties made their submissions, and with a decision on the coming timeline still up in the air. Novak Djokovic’s lawyer Nicholas Wood says he doesn’t anticipate cross-examination or subpoenas, and he anticipates narrow grounds of appeal. Wood says the immigration minister Alex Hawke’s reasons stand in “stark contrast” to the ones used by the Australian Border Force delegate. He says: The delegate said Mr Djokovic may infect other people because he’s unvaccinated. The present set of reasons is starkly different. The minister assumes in Mr Djokovic’s favour every single fact that might have been in issue previously, that he’s complied with the law, that he poses only a negligible risk to others, Mr Djokovic has a medical reason not to be vaccinated, and that Mr Djokovic is of good standing. Wood says the central thrust of the case is that Hawke had a “binary” decision: that Djokovic could stay in Melbourne leading to potential “excitement” in the anti-vax community; versus the forceable removal of a man of good standing who has a medical contraindication. Wood says there is a “clear jurisdictional error” of “irrationality” in that the ground of “exciting anti-vax sentiment” is premised on Djokovic only having that impact if he remains in Australia. “He has no rational basis to say” Djokovic staying would cause more anti-vax sentiment, Wood submits. Nicholas Wood has proposed he will make submissions by midday Saturday, with the minister’s to follow by 10pm tomorrow, ready for a hearing on Sunday. Wood says: Mr Djokovic may be scheduled to play on Monday night or Tuesday night ... In those circumstances we’re very concerned about time. Wood is blaming the government for giving the decision “shortly after 6pm on a Friday”, four days after the federal circuit court decision and more than a week after the original decision. He’s laying into media reporting that the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, was “burdened” by lengthy submissions from Djokovic. Wood reveals Djokovic’s material included scholarly articles about natural immunity, and reveals that Hawke’s decision said he hadn’t read them! Well this is going swimmingly. Nicholas Wood has confirmed that his client, Novak Djokovic, has not been taken back into detention. He says an Australian Government Solicitor lawyer has advised “it is not proposed to re-detain my client tonight”. Djokovic’s interview tomorrow is at 8am. Nicholas Wood is explaining why Novak Djokovic is in such a hurry – “every minute before the tournament commences on Monday” is “precious”. Wood is suggesting that Judge Anthony Kelly could retain the matter in the federal circuit court to prevent the loss of time to transfer it to the federal court. Wood argues that there is no issue of Kelly having apprehended bias, despite having heard the earlier case, because the second visa cancellation is an “entirely separate process” to the first. Nicholas Wood SC, on behalf of Novak Djokovic, has just asked the court for an injunction preventing his removal. He undertakes to file a written application as soon as practical – suggesting he will be able to do so by 10.15pm tonight! Much sooner than the 4pm tomorrow the judge offered. So the suggestions that Djokovic’s lawyers are ready to go seems to be borne out. Judge Anthony Kelly notes the last time this case was run, the parties were able to agree to preserve the status quo, and the same might be required again tonight. Kelly says this could include a brief interim injunction to 4pm Saturday 15 January preventing Djokovic being deported. Kelly notes that Novak Djokovic has been invited to an interview on Saturday. Judge Anthony Kelly is noting the possibility the case will have to be transferred from the federal circuit court to the federal court. Kelly says: While I have what it seems is an unappealable power to transfer this matter to another court, it is qualified by the requirement ... that the federal court of Australia confirms the order I make. Kelly says this ought to be decided now, and directions would be taken up by the federal court. Oh great, so we’re here for a preliminary discussion of which court is going to hear this, before it moves to a docket of another judge, before we get directions. The entree to the entree. The hearing has started. Judge Anthony Kelly starts by noting that the government’s counsel, Christopher Tran, had informed the court on Monday that the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, was considering cancelling Djokovic’s visa. There’s a bit of housekeeping about how the court can get the facts in front of it when no originating application has been made. Kelly makes a number of observations: In an urgent circumstance if it is necessary a party can make an application before the formal process starting the court case. The court may be prepared to accept an undertaking from parties to file and serve an affidavit which exhibits material documents at soonest opportunity. Kelly is outlining the documents he has: the immigration minister Alex Hawke’s decision cancelling Djokovic’s visa; and a government submission. There’s also a document titled “sensitivities” that the judge won’t read. We want him to read it. Judge Anthony Kelly has opened by going through the history of proceedings leading up to this point. We will continue to bring updates from the Federal Circuit Court. The hearing appears to be delayed, but it is interesting to see that over 12,000 people have tuned in to the live feed. Clearly some interest in the outcome. Have just spoken to Prof Jack Anderson, professor and director of sports law at the University of Melbourne, who has explained what we are likely to see in the next few minutes. “A directions hearing is about getting the formalities sorted for a further hearing,” he says. Djokovic’s lawyers will be pushing for an expedited hearing – saying that they can put in short written submissions and get this done quickly ... High stakes! As we wait for the hearing, I’d recommend this searing analysis on the situation from Paul Karp as essential reading: And in breaking news, a directions hearing will be conducted tonight at 8.45pm before judge Anthony Kelly in the federal circuit court. Australian public law expert Assoc Prof Janina Boughey says the decision by immigration minister Alex Hawke will very likely stand up to any appeal, due to the wide powers the minister has. In a video posted online by the University of New South Wales, Boughey explains that there are now fewer avenues of appeal for Djokovic: Under the section that gives the minister personal discretion, there are fewer avenues of appeal so Mr Djokovic could not appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. All he could do is seek judicial review in the courts. And what the courts doing judicial review is determine whether the power has been exercised lawfully. So, it would all depend on how the minister exercises the power and whether he does so in a manner which is lawful. The discretion that the minister has is very broad, so realistically, unless the minister makes a procedural error, doesn’t comply with the terms of the Act, or unless the decision is ... really has no basis ... then Mr Djokovic is unlikely to succeed. Novak Djokovic will not be removed from the Australian Open draw until it is certain that he is unable to compete at the tournament. Should he be deported, the Australian Open draw would face a minor reshuffle. Andrey Rublev, the fifth seed, would move into Djokovic’s place at the top of the draw, Gael Monfils, the 17th seed, would take Rublev’s spot and there would be a new 33rd seed, Alexander Bublik, who would take Monfils’ previous spot. A lucky loser, one of the defeated players in the final round of qualifying, would be added to the draw. It is not a dramatic change and top players do occasionally withdraw from major tournaments after the draw is made. However, all of these players, plus Djokovic’s scheduled first round opponent Miomir Kecmanovic, are affected as they will not be certain about their first round opponent until this is resolved. I can confirm that arrangements have been made for Djokovic to attend an interview with immigration officials tomorrow The Australian Lawyers Alliance has released a statement saying that the government’s decision highlights Australia’s “arbitrary and unfair border policies”. Greg Barns SC, spokesperson for the alliance, said the decision demonstrated how political decisions about borders and migration are in Australia. The broad discretion given to the Minister means that political considerations drive decisions that can seriously impact people’s lives. It is astonishing that we have allowed one person to have this level of unchecked control and extraordinary power. The powers given to the Immigration Minister and our border officials have been increasing over time with no corresponding increase in transparency or accountability. In many cases, there are no rights to appeal the Minister’s decision or any meaningful scrutiny of these decisions. Most people don’t have the resources that Djokovic has to engage legal teams to defend them. This government’s obsession with harsh border policies combined with its arbitrary approach to visa cancellation and detention has created a debacle this week but, more importantly, has destroyed the lives of thousands of people for many years. And if you’d like to watch an explainer as a refresher on the week-long drama, you can watch the video at the link below: And we’re hearing reports that a black Mercedes van has pulled up to Djokvic’s lawyers’ office in Melbourne. The van, with tinted windows, drove into the office car park around 6.30pm. The van reportedly left about five minutes later with a passenger, although it is unclear if Djokovic is the passenger. Prime minister Scott Morrison has spoken out on the decision, backing his immigration minister and saying it was done to “protect” the sacrifices Australians have made during the pandemic: I note the Minister for Immigration’s decision in relation to Mr Novak Djokovic’s visa. I understand that following careful consideration, action has been taken by the Minister to cancel Mr Djokovic’s visa held on health and good order grounds, on the basis that it was in the public interest to do so. This pandemic has been incredibly difficult for every Australian but we have stuck together and saved lives and livelihoods. Together we have achieved one of the lowest death rates, strongest economies and highest vaccination rates, in the world. Australians have made many sacrifices during this pandemic, and they rightly expect the result of those sacrifices to be protected. This is what the Minister is doing in taking this action today. Our strong border protection policies have kept Australians safe, prior to COVID and now during the pandemic. Due to the expected ongoing legal proceedings, I will be not be providing any further comment. The former deputy secretary of the Department of Immigration, Abul Rizvi, was on the ABC earlier, outlining what he thinks will happen next, including the return of Djokovic to detention: What that means now is that Novak Djokovic must be taken into detention. I assume he’ll go back to the same detention hotel that he was at previously. I assume his lawyers will now seek judicial review of that decision. And, the court will need to consider whatever application Mr Djokovic’s lawyers make. I assume the applications will be for Novak Djokovic to be released in some way, probably directing the minister to release Mr Djokovic on a bridging visa to allow him to play in the Australian Open. The judge would consider that and make a decision Further on what happens now, there are multiple reports that Djokovic’s legal team has indicated it will immediately take the decision to court. It is understood the tennis star’s lawyers would seek to have a potential case fast-tracked by minimising the length of their submissions. They’d also be hoping to have the case heard over the weekend and finalised soon, allowing him to take part in the Australian Open early next week. The decision has also thrown the Australian Open draw into chaos, with Djokovic drawn as the top seed earlier this week. Djokovic was eyeing a record 10th Australian Open and the men’s record for most grand slams at the upcoming tournament – all hopes that have been dashed. According to the Grand Slam’s rule book, Djokovic’s withdrawal after the completion of the draw means his slot in the draw will go to No. 5 seed Andrey Rublev. It is unclear as of yet how Tennis Australia will react themselves though. So, what does that mean now? Firstly, it means Djokovic, the No 1 men’s tennis player in the world, is banned from Australia for three years. The cancellation issued by Hawke is classified as an adverse decision under section 133C(3), which means Djokovic cannot be granted another visa while offshore for the three years. There are exceptions granted in “certain circumstances,” and the Serbian star is sure to appeal the decision, so that may come into play in the coming days. The Australian immigration minister, Alex Hawke, has re-cancelled Novak Djokovic’s visa. We begin with Hawke’s statement, saying he “carefully considered” information provided to him: Today I exercised my power under section 133C(3) of the Migration Act to cancel the visa held by Mr Novak Djokovic on health and good order grounds, on the basis that it was in the public interest to do so. This decision followed orders by the Federal Circuit and Family Court on 10 January 2022, quashing a prior cancellation decision on procedural fairness grounds. In making this decision, I carefully considered information provided to me by the Department of Home Affairs, the Australian Border Force and Mr Djokovic. The Morrison Government is firmly committed to protecting Australia’s borders, particularly in relation to the COVID-19 pandemic. I thank the officers of the Department of Home Affairs and the Australian Border Force who work every day to serve Australia’s interests in increasingly challenging operational environments. The Australian immigration minister, Alex Hawke, has again cancelled Novak Djokovic’s visa. Djokovic’s visa was first cancelled by a delegate of the home affairs minister last Thursday, on the basis a recent Covid infection by itself was not sufficient for an exemption from vaccination requirements and, since he was unvaccinated, Djokovic could pose a risk to public health. The visa was restored by a federal circuit court judge ruling in Djokovic’s favour on Monday, but government lawyers immediately put the world No 1 on notice that Hawke could still exercise a personal power to re-cancel the visa. On Wednesday, Djokovic conceded his agent made an “administrative mistake” when declaring he had not travelled in the two weeks before his flight to Australia and acknowledged an “error of judgment” by not isolating after he tested positive for Covid on 16 December. Hawke’s decision, announced on Friday evening, indicates the minister is satisfied cancellation was in the public interest.Four Windrush generation descendants have lost their high court battle for the scheme for victims to be widened to include them. Yvonne Williams, Yvonne Smith, Jennifer Ulett-Hall and Damian Gabrielle argued in the high court that the Windrush scheme should be extended beyond its current parameters to include descendants of the Windrush generation such as them. The current rules state that children who arrived as adults over the age of 18 after 1988 are excluded from the scheme. This group do not have a path to citizenship through the Windrush scheme even if they have been resident in the UK for many years. All four made applications to the Windrush scheme, which were rejected. Reviews of the rejection decisions were also unsuccessful. All are at risk of removal from the UK as they are not eligible to remain here under the Windrush scheme. They plan to submit ordinary (non-Windrush) applications for leave to remain under the immigration rules. All four have Windrush families who they came to the UK to join. The three women in the case are all grandmothers. Lawyers for Gabrielle, 39, who arrived in the UK two months after his 18th birthday to join his father, argued it was because of the problems his father experienced due to Windrush generation discrimination that he was unable to bring Gabrielle to the UK to join him until after his 18th birthday. His father came to the UK in 1961 and has lived here continuously since then. Smith and Williams were detained in Yarls Wood immigration detention centre in Bedfordshire for several months because the Home Office planned to deport them to Jamaica. Grace Brown, counsel for the four claimants, said discretion should be exercised based on the individual facts of the group, who arrived in the UK over the age of 18 to join Windrush generation family members. But Edward Brown, counsel for the home secretary, argued that none of the claimants fell within any of the Windrush categories and that they had not suffered the injustices of the Windrush generation. Mrs Justice Ellenbogen rejected the judicial review application made by the four and said none of the proposed grounds of challenge were arguable. Gabrielle said: “I am absolutely devastated by today’s decision. Most of my adult life has been in limbo. For me, the UK is my home. It’s where my mum, dad, brothers, sisters and extended family all live. I thought that today would have given me – and other Windrush descendants who are in a similar predicament – hope. But that has been taken away from us.” Karen Doyle of Movement For Justice, which has campaigned for inclusion of Windrush descendants in the Windrush scheme, said: “The damage done to the Windrush generation was not just to the individuals. It was damage done to whole families separated across borders. Families who came to rebuild Britain and were subject to brutal discrimination and racism. Many had to leave children behind they would otherwise have brought. “Reuniting and offering security to those families now in the wake of the Windrush scandal would have been putting the government’s apologies into action. Yet this government continues to fail the Windrush generation and their families at every stage. We are deeply disappointed in this decision but will continue to fight for the recognition and status of Windrush descendants.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “We’re pleased the court found in the department’s favour. The Windrush scheme was designed to recognise the existing status and connection to the UK of members of the Windrush generation and their eligible children. The home secretary and the department remain steadfast in our commitment to members of the Windrush generation.”The French government will force EDF, the state energy giant, to take an €8.4bn (£7bn) financial hit to protect households from rocketing energy costs by limiting bill hikes to 4% this year. The company lost a fifth of its market value on Friday after the French government set out plans to cap rising energy bills, which include forcing EDF to sell electricity generated by its fleet of nuclear reactors to rival home suppliers at well below the current record high market prices. The move underlines pressure on governments across Europe to help households squeezed by the cost-of-living crisis. The UK chancellor, Rishi Sunak, has been accused of being “missing in action” over soaring energy bills. He has been in talks with MPs and companies to agree a package of measures to soften the blow of the national energy crisis, but no decisions have been made. In Spain, the government introduced a windfall tax on electricity generators and gas producers that are able to profit from the record market highs to help keep home energy bills low. In Germany, the government has slashed a surcharge on bills used to support renewable energy schemes, which will instead receive extra state subsidies drawn from higher carbon taxes. EDF also told investors that its nuclear power generation for the year ahead would be about 10% lower than initially expected due technical problems at a handful of its nuclear reactors. The French government, which faced fierce public protest against fuel price hikes in 2018, has already cut some electricity taxes to help slow the rise in home energy bills at an estimated €8bn cost to the state. Governments across Europe are under pressure to intervene in the energy market to protect households against an unprecedented surge in wholesale market prices, driven by a global gas supply crunch that has lifted markets to all-time highs. Under the French government’s new measures, it has kept a tight lid on the regulated price that EDF is allowed to charge for its nuclear electricity, which will rise to €46.2 per megawatt-hour, from €42/MWh, despite a record surge in electricity market prices across Europe in recent months. EDF said the plan could hit its earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation by between €7.7bn and €8.4bn based on market prices in December and January. Barbara Pompili, France’s environment minister, said the government planned to help EDF withstand the blow but has offered no details on this. The nuclear power giant also told investors that its reactors would generate less electricity than expected this year. This is because of a string of faults at five of its nuclear plants which will require downtime to undertake maintenance work. EDF estimates that it will generate 300-330 terawatt-hours this year, down from 330-360 TWh previously. The company’s share price tumbled from €10.35 at Thursday’s close to €7.92 on Friday morning.The owner of Facebook and Instagram has said it will “assess the feasibility” of conducting an independent human rights study related to its work in Ethiopia, after the company’s oversight board urged it to investigate how its platforms have been used to spread hate speech and unverified rumours in the country. Meta was asked by its oversight board, which reviews the company’s content moderation decisions and policies, to conduct the study after it upheld the removal of a Facebook post alleging the involvement of ethnic Tigrayan civilians in atrocities in Ethiopia’s Amhara region. Because the platform had subsequently reinstated the post after an appeal by the user who posted it, Facebook was required to take it down again. As part of the ruling, the board recommended that Facebook’s parent conduct an independent human rights due diligence assessment on how Facebook and Instagram “have been used to spread hate speech and unverified rumours that heighten the risk of violence in Ethiopia”. Writing in December last year, the board said the study should cover a period from June 2020 “to the present” and should take six months to complete. While the board’s decisions on content moderation decisions are binding, its policy recommendations are not. Responding to the board’s recommendation on Thursday, Meta said human rights diligence projects can be “highly time intensive” and run for a year or more. It added that it would consider the feasibility of such a move. “We will continue existing human rights due diligence and dynamic risk management processes and assess the feasibility of a related due diligence project. We anticipate providing an update within the next few months,” Meta said. Meta’s moderation efforts in non-English language speaking countries have been under scrutiny ever since it was found to have facilitated violence against the Rohingya, the Muslim minority in Myanmar. Facebook admitted in 2018 that it had not done enough to prevent the incitement of violence and hate speech against the Rohingya. An independent report commissioned by the company found that “Facebook has become a means for those seeking to spread hate and cause harm, and posts have been linked to offline violence”. Frances Haugen, a former Meta employee who blew the whistle on moderation practices at the company, has warned that the social media company is fanning ethnic violence in Ethiopia. In testimony to US lawmakers, Haugen said that although only 9% of Facebook users spoke English, 87% of the platform’s misinformation spending was devoted to English speakers. Thousands have died and millions have been displaced during a year-long conflict between the Ethiopian government and rebellious forces from the northern Tigray region. Meta added in its statement on Thursday that it had “invested significant resources in Ethiopia to identify and remove potentially harmful content” as part of its response to the board’s recommendations in December. An oversight board spokesperson said in a statement: “Meta’s existing policies prohibit rumours that contribute to imminent violence that cannot be debunked in a meaningful timeframe, and the board made recommendations to ensure these policies are effectively applied in conflict situations. “Rumours alleging an ethnic group is complicit in atrocities, as found in this case, have the potential to lead to grave harm to people.”A high-profile UK fracking company has been taken over by a green energy group and now has an anti-fracking campaigner as a director. Yorkshire-based Third Energy was at the forefront of efforts to produce fossil gas and intended to use high-pressure fluids to fracture shale rocks under the county. But it was hampered by permit delays and fierce local opposition. Now the company has been taken over by Wolfland Group, a renewable energy company. It has halted all fossil fuel production from its conventional gas wells and has no plans for further exploration or development. Instead it will focus on green energy, including solar farms, and the use of existing wells for geothermal energy and the burial of captured carbon dioxide emissions. Steve Mason was a leading figure in the anti-fracking campaign in Yorkshire and is now a director of Wolfland Group. “The current energy crisis has shown that we must be energy independent as a nation and that fossil fuels need to be urgently replaced by clean renewable energy supplies, which will lead to cheaper energy and help us tackle climate change,” he said. “We believe we’re now a real-life example of walking the talk and turning stranded fossil fuel assets into green energy solutions.” Mike O’Shea, chief executive of Wolfland Group, said: “Taking a dirty fossil fuel fracking company and flipping it into a green energy beacon [is] an amazing opportunity.” Russell Hoare, managing director at Third Energy, said: “Our [previous] shareholder was actively pursuing oil and gas development in the US and Ukraine. It was difficult to find green investment with the balance still swinging towards fossil fuels. Now we can say we have absolutely no interest in fossil fuels and we can move forward to a sustainable future.” Nevertheless, the company will not be changing its name. “Third Energy perfectly describes the energy transition that needs to take place in the UK,” said Mason. “The first energy was fossil fuels, the second energy was nuclear and now the third energy is renewables. It’s a perfect brand for renewable energy.” Gas prices are currently very high and rising energy bills have sparked fears over the rising cost of living for many families. A few commentators have called for increased gas production in the UK, but experts say this would do nothing to reduce dependence on the fuel or its cost, the price of which is set by international markets. Instead, campaigners are calling on Boris Johnson to provide home insulation for people on low incomes and a windfall tax on fossil fuel companies to fund emergency support for vulnerable people.Three activists who targeted London’s public transport network to raise the alarm about the escalating climate crisis have been acquitted by a jury. The three Extinction Rebellion campaigners disrupted rush hour services for more than an hour in east London in 2019, with two of them climbing on top of the train and a third gluing himself to one of the carriages. On Friday at the Inner London crown court a jury found them not guilty of of obstructing the railway at Shadwell station. During the trail the jury were presented with a set of facts – accepted by both the prosecution and defence – about the scale and severity of the climate crisis. Zoë Blackler from Extinction Rebellion said the verdict showed that when a jury hears “the truth … with the depth and seriousness they won’t get from the government or the media, they understand the urgent need to act.” The three defendants – the Rev Sue Parfitt, 79, Father Martin Newell, 54, and former university lecturer Philip Kingston, 85 – said they were strongly motivated by their Christian faith – with Kingston adding the futures of his four grandchildren also prompted him to take part in the protest. Blackler said: “The real criminals here aren’t three committed Christians risking their liberty to sound the alarm on a threat of existential proportions, but a government failing to do what’s necessary to safeguard the future of the human race.” The action led to delays for thousands of people with 15 trains affected. The activists said they had planned the demonstration to ensure there was no risk to public safety by targeting a station above ground and having 10 more Extinction Rebellion activists on the platform to ensure violence did not break out. The verdict is the latest in which juries have acquitted protesters. Earlier this month four people were cleared of criminal damage over toppling the statue of slave trader Edward Colston in Bristol and throwing it in the harbour. In December six Extinction Rebellion activists, whose protest halted transport links serving London’s financial district, were also acquitted by a jury. And in April last year, six others were cleared of causing criminal damage to Shell’s London headquarters despite the judge directing jurors they had no defence in law. Mike Schwarz, solicitor at Hodge Jones and Allen who represented the defendants, said: “There is mounting evidence from the courts and in particular from juries that the public is taking the climate crisis and the increasingly urgent need to focus on it far more seriously than government and business. This verdict is part of this escalating pattern.”Chan Marshall is sitting cross-legged on a bed, crying. It’s a sniffly, unselfconscious kind of crying, tears smudging sooty eyeshadow. Thirty years into her often wayward career as the US singer-songwriter Cat Power, she is crying because in a few weeks’ time she is 50 and she can’t believe she made it, that life turned out OK, that she’s happy. At least, happier than she was when she turned 30, the day her then boyfriend “stood me up”. Or her 40th, when she felt controlled in the relationship she was in. “He was involved with this church,” she explains. “I wasn’t allowed to have friends. Or a party. So … hmm. I’m so sorry.” She shakes her head, reaches across the bed and clutches my hand. “It’s heavy, dude.” She takes a bolstering tug on a cigarette. “The 20s were so fucking difficult, like: ‘Oh, now I gotta do this some more?’” she carries on. “Turning 40 was: ‘Uuuurgh, well I made it this far, but it’s got to get better.’” She stubs her cigarette out. “Tell me about Shirley Manson!” she suddenly shouts, grinding back into the top gear she was in seconds before her emotional implosion. “Have you met her? Cunt! That’s what she calls me; we call each other cunt. The first thing she said to me was: ‘I fucking love ya!’” Walking into her almost comically dimly lit hotel room in east London, Marshall is the personification of chaos. She is barefoot on the crumpled bed, wearing a navy boilersuit with one underarm seam completely fallen apart. She crackles with kinetic energy, is talking compulsively in silly accents (mine, her PR’s, the waiter bringing peppermint tea) while rummaging through packages of medical paraphernalia, not the drugs you might have once expected but a Covid PCR test (“Is this the one that goes right up to your brain?”). There are no seats so I join her on the bed, a socked foot inadvertently heading straight for her nose. “Oh, my son loves sticking his foot up my nose!” she cackles. Hers is a warm personality, overfriendly even, bearing zero resemblance to the spectral sound of what the press once referred to as the “Queen of Sadcore”. Even if she has just yelped, when questioned over the lack of light, “I like the dark!” Since her sonically stark debut album Dear Sir in 1995, Marshall (full name Charlyn, Chan pronounced Shawn), has been a singular presence in US alt-rock, her musical evolution mirroring that of her inner life, from sparse, gloomy 90s grunge (she howled more than sang), to the haunting vocal depth of her multilayered atmospherics today. This year she releases her third covers record, Covers (her 11th studio album), her most compelling collection yet, a poignantly reimagined spectrum from Frank Ocean’s poetic hymnal Bad Religion to Billie Holiday’s devastating I’ll Be Seeing You to Iggy Pop’s masterclass in woozy hypnosis, Endless Sea. In her early years, she laughs, “I couldn’t sing”, but it wasn’t just that; hers was the sound of psychic trauma. On Covers she has also rewritten her 2006 song Hate, its most famed lyrics now in the past tense: “I hated myself and I wanted to die.” No more. It’s what we hope to hear from the damaged: progress. It wasn’t easy. “It’s not easy for anybody, though,” she urges. “Some people have no chance at all.” Marshall’s upbringing was chronically insecure, breadline working class in Atlanta, Georgia, the youngest daughter of two in a family riven by hereditary alcoholism. She constantly moved home and schools, largely brought up by her much-adored grandmother with her blues musician dad mostly absent. “I met my mom when I was four and a half; she left when I was born and came back.” Does she know where she was? “No one does.” Was this alcohol-related? “A few different things,” she says. “I can’t say on the record because” – she eyes the recorder between us – “technology sends messages to certain companies that … Uuuuuuuh.” She changes the subject to recollections of her beloved “father figure”, an African American neighbour called Patrick Kelly who would go on to become a renowned fashion designer in Paris in the 80s and died of Aids in 1990. He looked after Marshall and her sister when no one was home. “He’d dress me up with braids and afros and the black, beautiful, skinny models would come and I was wearing my mom’s platform high heels.” Kelly had good reason to watch over the girls, which causes Marshall to suddenly stammer. “W… w… w… we lived in the city and men would come to the window, and try the door, and get in the apartment,” she remembers. “We had five locks on the door. I’m five, six. I was terrified. Every single day. I was frightened of getting murdered. The bedroom door was always locked. To this day I sleep with my bedroom door locked. It’s hard growing up as a child when there’s addiction in the home because there is no sense of security, y’know? It breeds this need to constantly create security.” Nonetheless, Marshall forged an insecure working life as an alternative rock musician, honed on the Atlanta rock scene of the early 90s. She withstood countless personal tragedies (she lost friends to Aids, cancer, suicide), and struggled with depression, psychotic visions, alcohol and prescription drug addiction. She’s always been honest about her mental health problems. She had a dramatic breakdown in 2006, still heartbroken from losing the love of her life to another woman at 27, an unnamed man who became “paranoid schizophrenic, addicted to drugs, bulimic, institutionalised many times, jailed many times”. She’d been hiding from the pain in booze, drinking from morning till night (she first drank beer aged five and smoked cigarettes aged six, because everyone else in the room did). Rock bottom arrived on tour, when she discovered he was now living with his latest girlfriend. “I was gonna end my life that evening,” she nods (she’d written goodbye letters to her friends and family). “It was always clear to me as a little kid, I knew exactly how to do it. My mom had a shotgun.” She was saved by a vigilant friend, who took her to rehab, where sobriety and therapy “saved my fucking life” (she stopped drinking for 18 months and, through therapy, has learned to drink casually). That year she met Karl Lagerfeld during a promotional tour for her album The Greatest, the pair becoming friends, leading to modelling work for Chanel. Lagerfeld told her: “You have class, working class.” That year she also had stalkers (“Cat Power fucking wackos”). With her neighbours’ help, she physically ousted four different men who broke into her apartment. The home she has had in Miami for the past 15 years has a security system and shatterproof glass. I inquire whether there have been other shady experiences with men, in the music industry, over her 30 years as a touring musician. “More than I can remember,” she scoffs, alarmingly. “Besides murder? Everything else.” She lights another cigarette. She tells me about an incident in her 20s that she didn’t report at the time, “because women are like, the divine forgivers, y’know?” Eleven days later, her PR emails saying the normally heroically open Marshall is no longer comfortable about the specific details being made public. She did say that if what happened to her then, happened to her at 25 now, in these zero-tolerance times, “Oh, he’d be dead, I’d be in jail.” For Marshall, in 2022, life is almost stable, finally, despite ongoing financial instability. “It’s very hard,” she says, “that’s why I tour.” A musical lifer, she describes her vocation as “a worker in song, as Leonard Cohen said”. She is a strident champion of young, progressive people, “who understand everything is fucked on a global scale”, whose sheer numbers nonetheless, she’s certain, makes them poised to overthrow “the motherfuckers in power who don’t give a shit about anything except a dick in space!” She lives with her six-year-old son, Boaz, in Miami (she has never named the father), and says the happiest moments of her life today are “just playing with my son, he’s so funny”. She is single, open to romance, and five months ago had “a reconnection” with her first love, a boy she “held hands with once when I was 14 for three seconds”. “I hadn’t been with a man in seven years, and I had a … little lovin’,” she twinkles. “It was so sweet. That’s what I really needed, sweetness. We all need sweetness. What about you? When did you last … D’you get it often?” Taken aback, I blurt out that I’m now at an age where the biggest thrill in my cohabiting life, this week at least, has been the installation of an induction hob in the kitchen, to which she roars: “Awesome!” I am halfway out of the door when her voice peals one last time through the gloom: “You gotta tell your man: ‘Tonight, you’re gonna fuck me on the stove, baby!’ Right? With a little weed … ” Covers is out now via Domino. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.If you’re merely having a damp January, rather than a dry one – that is, you are cutting down instead of cutting out – you may well be more attracted by low-alcohol than by no-alcohol drinks, which I wrote about last week. So far as wine is concerned, at least, there’s a lot to be said for it, too. There are some more than drinkable wines out there at 12% ABV or under – mainly whites and sparkling wines, it has to be said, although a number of producers are now making reds at 9%, among them the charmingly named Sunny With a Chance of Flowers pinot noir I’ve recommended below. Unlike most low-alcohol reds, it’s not too sweet, either, the usual downside to lower alcohol being higher sugar, though that matters less with riesling, where that’s generally offset by a crisp acidity. A small glass of 8% Mosel riesling, such as Dr Loosen’s delicious Erdener Treppchen Riesling Kabinett 2019 (£16.99 Rannoch Scott, or £35 by the magnum from Waitrose Cellar), for example, is just one unit. (Incidentally, you can work out the number of units in your drink by multiplying the ABV by the volume of the drink in millilitres, then dividing that by 1,000, so, 8 x 125 ÷ 1,000 = 1.) So-called “small” or “table” beers, meanwhile, have been around for a while, spearheaded by the likes of the Kernel Brewery and the Small Beer Brew Co, but an increasing number of others are now also offering beers that come in at less than 4%. And they manage to pack a lot of flavour into the bottle or can, too, and are a particularly easy way to cut back on your consumption. More surprising, to me at least, it turns out there is also an equivalent in the cider world – small cider, or “ciderkin”, according to RK French’s The History and Virtues of Cyder. As well as the extraordinary Templar’s Choice in my choices below, I love Pilton’s Pomme Pomme (£6.95 a half-bottle from their websitepiltoncider.com), which at 4.8% is slightly higher, and deliciously infused with quince. You can, of course, also get low-alcohol spirits, though part of me wonders why you would, given that they can be more expensive than the full-strength version. Granted, they make life easier, plus it’s less tempting to have a lower-strength spirit to play with. Maybe they’re more for budding mixologists than for those of us who like our drinks neat, but I can’t help but feel that having a single instead of a double of your usual bevvy might not be a better solution. Five low-alcohol drinks to keep your units down Templar’s Choice Late Harvest Cider £7 for 750ml templarscider.co.uk, £8.50 cideriswine.co.uk, 3%. Made by a British couple in Normandy, this deeply flavoured, off-dry cider is an extraordinary drink, almost like liquid tarte tatin. Newtown Park All Day Long Table Beer £3.50 for 440ml Two Belly, £3.65 Hop, Burns &amp; Black, 3%. Yet another quirky Bristol brewery doing its thing. They also have a 3.9% pale ale called Yelling at Inanimate Objects. As you do. Sunny With a Chance of Flowers 2019 £10.75 (on offer) Booths, £12.50 Aitken’s of Dundee, 9%. Who can resist a wine with name like this? Light, but with a proper pinot character. The Doctor’s Riesling 2019 £13.95 Frontier Fine Wines, £10.99 New Zealand House of Wine, 9%. Crisp, limey, off-dry riesling from Forrest, the Kiwi pioneers of the 9% wine. Perfect for Thai food. Cut Classic Premium Light Spirit Drink made with Aged Caribbean Rum £30, 20%. Decent, low-alcohol dark spirits are few and far between, so this is welcome, if a bit pricey. • For more by Fiona Beckett, go to matchingfoodandwine.comI left my husband last summer. We have three young children who live with me, but see their dad regularly. Things are cordial and he is financially supporting us. However, the separation has highlighted the distance there’s always been between us in our decade-long relationship. My husband is a hard worker but emotionally distant and can be blind to my needs and those of the children. We’d been living abroad, very rurally, for nine years, doing up a house – and I home-educated the children. I have become increasingly depressed since the separation and am kicking myself for decisions I’ve made and gone along with. During our relationship, I kept trying to convince my husband that we should move to a town, but he was adamant we couldn’t afford it. That had been dragging on for years, with him insisting on doing the renovation work himself. Eventually I cracked, moved into town and enrolled the kids (one of whom I think has special educational needs) in schools. My husband says he wants to move in with us again at some point, to keep the family together. What I want is time and space to get settled in this next stage, to support my children through all the big changes and prepare for a return to work. He’s very focused on keeping the family and marriage together. I just wonder if I’m making a huge mistake. I’m doubting every decision, having intrusive thoughts and feel out of control. I want to be a strong, stable parent, but I feel lost and wonder how I’ve ended up like this. First things first: when you have these dark thoughts, please contact the Samaritans in your country (they do operate there, I checked). But going back to the letter, you ask if you’ve made a mistake, but not about what. Leaving your husband, or possibly letting him back into your life? In your original, much longer, letter, you told me about your traumatic childhood and emotionally distant father; your lack of sex life with your husband; your dalliance with another man just to “feel something” again. But you have made incredible progress these past few months and do have a road map for the next stage (whatever that ends up being). You’ve moved into town to have contact with people, you’ve got your children into a school and are having more of their needs – and, hopefully, yours – met. I contacted couples psychotherapist Murray Blacket, who observed: “A difficult and protracted house renovation in a remote location in a different country does not sound like a very emotionally connected project. Did you share this dream?” I wonder if you hoped that if you kept trying you’d get some warmth from your husband, but this seems to have come at the expense of your mental health. It’s time to think about your needs. Blacket felt you had made some “big, decisive choices, none of which can have been easy to do or accomplish. It also sounds as if you’ve not been happy anywhere along the way.” Would you say this is true? I think you know what you want but you don’t trust yourself. Your husband wanting to keep the family together is a laudable aim, but I think you both need to decide, and agree, what a marriage actually is, and I think this is at the heart of your issues, because you seem to have very different needs and expectations. I would urge you to get some counselling (together if possible), and sit tight on any decisions – including whether your husband should move back in – until you know what you want. You clearly feel very unhappy and must listen to these feelings even if they seem to defy logic.Fashion-conscious Italian police are in revolt after receiving batches of pink face masks to wear on duty, arguing that the “eccentric” colour is ill-matched with their uniforms. Police units in six cities were sent the FFP2 masks from the office of Italy’s Covid-19 emergency commissioner, Francesco Paolo Figliuolo. After opening the boxes, many of the officers refused to wear the “inappropriate” masks, prompting Stefano Paolini, the chief of a police union, to write a letter to the head of police at the interior ministry, Lamberto Giannini. Paolini wrote that the decision to approve the purchase of pink masks for the police force was puzzling. He claimed the colour was “eccentric” in respect to police uniform and risked jeopardising the image of the institution. “We ask you to take immediate action to ensure that the police carry out their duty wearing masks of a colour (white, blue or black) which is consistent with the uniform of the state police,” he wrote. The masks were sent to police units in Bologna, Pavia, Varese, Ferrara, Venice and Syracuse. In a subsequent statement, Paolini said the problem did not arise because of prejudice against the colour pink, “but from the fact that the uniform is regulated”. “On the basis of the oath made, the uniform must be worn with decorum,” he added, while stressing that “during a period of rising aversion towards the police, it’s necessary to adopt sobriety and respect”. Corriere della Sera reported that the face masks were among a batch also sent to staff at other public institutions, including schools, hospitals and the civil protection office. In late December, Italy reintroduced the requirement for face masks to be worn outside amid a surge in coronavirus infections driven by the Omicron variant. It was already obligatory to wear masks in enclosed public spaces, including on public transport.There is a reason so many discussions about tackling the climate crisis have become discussions about finance, investments and pensions. The global effort to avert the most catastrophic effects of global heating is in one sense an emergency mission to reallocate financial resources. This has prompted a fundamental shift in the world of investing. Your pension savings and other investments may well be supporting businesses that can make a big difference to the global climate effort – whether through their actions or their inaction. Likewise, those businesses are also key to addressing other social issues, such as growing inequality and a lack of diversity. Your money can influence the direction these companies take. After all, businesses are answerable to their shareholders and investors. However, being a responsible investor is arguably very different from being a responsible consumer. When you swap out items in your shopping basket for more ethical or eco-friendly substitutes, you already know the difference between, say, laundry detergent and fabric conditioner. The same might not apply to investing, particularly if you’re a novice. More importantly, unlike ethical consumerism, responsible investing isn’t always as straightforward as substituting items in your shopping basket for more sustainable alternatives. That’s because investors can exert influence on companies in different ways – and are therefore faced with different considerations and questions. So, to make the world of responsible investing easier to navigate, we’ve produced an online guide exploring the issues, the dilemmas, the jargon and the watchouts. The aim is to help you to become as savvy at responsible investing as you are at responsible shopping. Here’s an overview of some of the issues explored in the online guide: The new language A shift towards valuing companies against their impact on the planet and people, rather than valuing them solely against their profits, has introduced new words and acronyms to the world of investing. For instance, investors and pension holders are paying increasing attention to how companies perform against so-called ESG criteria, which stands for environmental, social and governance. Other acronyms refer to different types of ESG targets, standards and disclosures. But there’s no need to be put off, thanks to our handy guide. Guarding against greenwashing Vague and imprecise language can leave room for misleading or unsubstantiated claims about a company’s climate credentials – otherwise known as greenwashing. For instance, what do words such as “green” and “eco” actually mean? Corporate greenwashing can make it more difficult for people to make informed decisions. It also undermines genuine efforts by companies to clean up their acts and tackle the climate crisis. So, whether you’re a consumer or an investor, the ability to call out corporate greenwashing is fast becoming a key life skill. Our online guide therefore examines how investors can guard against it. Divestment or engagement This has become a key dilemma. Should responsible investors sell their stakes in companies that fall short on ethical or environmental issues, or should they instead retain their holdings and use their position as shareholders to influence those companies that need to do better? The debate is often couched as the “divestment versus engagement” dilemma, and there are strong feelings on either side. One problem with divesting is that there will likely be less-scrupulous investors out there happy to step in. “Ditching and switching” can therefore all too often entail offloading polluting operations to less- accountable or responsible owners. Divesting from heavily polluting companies can also make it harder for them to raise funds to finance their transition to cleaner ways of operating. Retaining an investment means retaining a seat at the table, which allows investors to put pressure on boardrooms to change. This can often lead to more effective results. We explore why it’s useful to move beyond the divestment versus engagement dichotomy and instead view divestment as a threat of last resort that can strengthen shareholders’ position when engaging with companies. The art of influencing So how exactly can investors persuade a company to reduce its carbon footprint or tackle the mistreatment of workers in its supply chain? From gently nudging to headline-grabbing public confrontations, we explore how shareholders can put pressure on companies to step up. Engagement can be undertaken by individual investors and pension holders, or by shareholder action groups. But it can carry even more weight when undertaken by asset managers who work for pension and investment firms. These asset managers invest and manage investment funds on behalf of individuals, pooling their resources, and so they typically control much larger stakes in each company they invest in. Shareholder engagement can require a great deal of perseverance and expertise. In the online guide, we ask several asset managers how they go about it, and how their roles have changed as a result of the industry’s shift to more responsible investing. Scale and impact It can be tempting to focus on smaller startups that offer exciting solutions to sustainability issues. They may well be deserving of investment, but it’s worth considering that while larger, more established companies may be less exciting, their actions can potentially be more impactful thanks to their market clout. Shareholder engagement with them to accelerate their shift to greener, fairer ways of operating can often have an outsized impact on wider global efforts by dint of their scale and the size of their supply chains. Put simply, they have more room to improve. They may also have a greater imperative to do so, given that they will likely be more exposed to the financial fallout of the climate crisis, as well as to future regulations and the prospect of reputational damage. This illustrates how, for businesses and investors alike, the financial case for responsible investment and the moral case have become increasingly linked. Learn more about responsible investing by heading to Royal London – The Invested GenerationSouthampton were excellent in their 4-1 stroll past Brentford and will arrive confident they can continue their rise up the table with another win at Molineux. However, Wolves are also enjoying a nice run of form and will hope Roman Saïss’s departure to the Africa Cup of Nations does not harm their ironclad defence. Only 14 goals conceded after 19 games is remarkable and Manchester City are the sole side who have a better record, with 13. Ralph Hasenhüttl will be meticulously planning how to break his opponents down and he can focus his side on this task as Wolves’ achilles heel is a lack of creativity. They have also scored only 14 goals and again only one side beat their tally, Norwich with eight. Graham Searles Saturday 3pm Venue Molineux Last season Wolves 1 Southampton 1 Referee Michael Salisbury This season G1 Y6 R0 6 cards/game Odds H 11-8 A 5-2 D 9-4 WOLVES Subs from Ruddy, Moulden, Cundle, Hoever, Traoré, Campbell, Silva, Aït-Nouri, Giles, Jordão, Lembiska, Sanderson, Kawabe Doubtful None Injured Mosquera (hamstring, Feb), Jonny (knee, Feb), Neto (knee, feb), Hwang (hamstring, Feb), Boly (calf, unknown) Suspended None Unavailable Saïss (Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y32 R1 Form DLLWDW Leading scorer Hwang 4 SOUTHAMPTON Subs from Lewis, Stephens, Long, A Armstrong, Small, S Armstrong, Elyounoussi, Diallo, Valery, Walker-Peters Doubtful None Injured McCarthy (hamstring, 22 Jan), Smallbone (calf, unknown), Livramento (knee, unknown), Walcott (Covid, unknown) Suspended None Unavailable Djenepo (Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y38 R2 Form DLDWDW Leading scorers Broja, Ward-Prowse 5A second big energy supplier has been forced to apologise to thousands of British households after offering unwelcome advice on how to keep warm during the national energy crisis – with a pair of socks. E.ON Next said it was “incredibly sorry” after sending pairs of polyester socks branded with advice to turn down heating to help reduce carbon emissions to about 30,000 households that had taken part in an energy saving campaign last year. Many of the new E.ON Next sock owners took to social media to criticise the “pitiful package”, which was delivered to homes in the same week that Ovo Energy was forced to apologise for a customer letter urging households to cuddle a pet or perform star jumps to keep warm. British households face some of the highest energy bills on record this winter because of record high market prices that could drive fuel poverty levels to the highest since records began. E.ON Next said on Twitter: “If you recently received a pair of socks from us, we would like to say we are incredibly sorry for how we have made some people feel. In light of the seriousness of current challenges that many people are facing, this mailing should have been stopped and we are sorry.” The apology comes days after Stephen Fitzpatrick, the boss of Ovo Energy, which bought SSE’s supply business two years ago, was forced to apologise for a “ridiculous” email that urged customers to enjoy “hearty bowls of porridge” or a “hula hoop contest” to help stay warm this winter. “It’s really upsetting and embarrassing for me to come on air and apologise for something that we really should never have written,” Fitzpatrick told the BBC. A spokesman for E.ON Next, part of the German energy group E.ON, said the socks were “in no way designed to detract from the seriousness of the current energy crisis” and the work the company has been doing “to lessen its impact on our customers”. He added: “This campaign originally went ahead last year and was intended as a fun way to encourage people to think about ‘lightening your carbon footprint’ and isn’t meant to be anything to do with the current challenges many people are facing.”The government is in dispute over millions of surgical gowns supplied by the PPE business awarded £203m contracts via the fast-track “VIP lane” after a referral by the Conservative peer Michelle Mone, it has emerged. The health minister Edward Argar broke with more than a year of secrecy over the surgical gowns supplied by the company, PPE Medpro, telling Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, this week that the government was “in mediation” with the company. Previously, the last solid information provided about PPE Medpro’s products was in December 2020, when the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) said: “The gowns delivered by Medpro have not been distributed to the frontline.” DHSC sources said then that the gowns – delivered by PPE Medpro under its second contract, for £122m – were still being “evaluated” to ensure they met safety and quality standards. The Guardian recently reported that Lady Mone and her husband, the Isle of Man-based financier Douglas Barrowman, appear to have been secretly involved in the business of PPE Medpro, despite their repeated denials that they had any “role or function” in the company. The government revealed in November that Mone had originally referred the company in May 2020 to the office of her fellow Conservative peer Theodore Agnew, a minister responsible for procurement in the Cabinet Office during the pandemic. Agnew referred PPE Medpro to the VIP fast-track process for politically connected firms, and within weeks the DHSC awarded the company contracts totalling £203m. The VIP lane was ruled unlawful by the high court this week, after a challenge by the Good Law Project, with Mrs Justice O’Farrell ruling that it breached the requirement to treat potential suppliers equally. Argar refused earlier this month to tell Rayner whether the gowns supplied by PPE Medpro had been used, saying this was “commercially sensitive”. Asked by Rayner to clarify how this was deemed to be the case, the minister provided his answer on 11 January, saying: “The information is considered commercially sensitive as the department is currently engaged in a mediation process with PPE Medpro concerning their products, which involves confidentiality undertakings.” Mediation is a method of resolving contractual disputes to avoid litigation in the courts. Anthony Page, a director and the sole registered owner of PPE Medpro Ltd in the UK, who works for Barrowman in the Isle of Man, confirmed that mediation was ongoing over the gowns, saying via a lawyer that “a dispute was raised many months after delivery”. The lawyer said: “Our client vigorously defends its position in relation to the supply of the gowns that were supplied on time, at a very competitive price and fully in accordance with the contract.” He said the face masks supplied by PPE Medpro – under its first contract for £80.85m – “was all carried out without any challenge whatsoever at any time”. Rayner said: “This government has wasted millions on crony contracts doled out through the VIP lane, which the high court found was not just dodgy but outright illegal. “No wonder they are desperate to cover up the facts. But hiding behind the cover of commercial sensitivity just won’t wash with the public, whose money they were spending. We need to know if this PPE was actually used to protect NHS staff and what the government is doing to recover taxpayers’ cash if any of it was not.” A DHSC spokesperson said: “All PPE must undergo rigorous checks so they meet the safety and quality required. The department is undertaking work across the entire portfolio of PPE contracts to identify all instances of supplier non-delivery or product quality failure, and to recover the costs of undelivered or substandard PPE.” The spokesperson clarified that this referred broadly to all PPE, “not specifically to Medpro”, and declined to answer questions about the mediation or the PPE Medpro products, saying these details were “commercially sensitive”.Liz Truss said there was “a deal to be done” over the post-Brexit arrangements for Northern Ireland after “constructive talks” with her EU counterpart raised hopes of less rancorous relations with Brussels. The notably sunny prognosis followed a first meeting between the UK foreign secretary and Maroš Šefčovič, the European commissioner responsible for Brexit issues, at Chevening, the cabinet minister’s official country residence in Kent. In a joint EU-UK statement, a rarity in recent years, Truss and Šefčovič said intensive talks would begin next week to deal with the outstanding issues relating to Northern Ireland’s place within both the EU and UK’s internal market. “We’ve had constructive talks with the EU,” Truss said in a later interview with the BBC. “We’re now going to go into intensive negotiations to work towards a negotiated solution to sort out these very real issues for the people of Northern Ireland.” The foreign secretary played down the previous threats of triggering article 16 of the so-called Northern Ireland protocol, under which the UK would suspend parts of the deal previously agreed with the EU. She said: “What I want is a negotiated solution. I think there is a deal to be done. We have had constructive talks over the last day. “Of course there is more work to do, and that is why we are intensifying the discussions. I will be seeing the vice-president again in a week’s time, and I do want to make progress. Clearly if we don’t make sufficient progress we will have to look at the alternatives, but my absolute desire is to get a deal that works for the people of Northern Ireland.” The attempt to build strong personal relations with Šefčovič at Chevening, where the two politicians walked around the estate and dined on Scottish smoked salmon, Welsh lamb and apple pie, offered a clear sign that the government is seeking to reset relations after the resignation of Lord Frost, who often clashed with his opposing numbers in Brussels. Major differences remain between the sides over the future implementation of the protocol, which keeps Northern Ireland in the EU’s single market for goods and draws a customs border down the Irish sea. The EU has offered to cut in half the number of customs checks and reduce health and safety checks on meat, plant and dairy products by 80%. The UK is insistent that the plans proposed do not yet live up to that promise and is pushing for a more radical overhaul that would ensure there are no checks on goods from Great Britain destined to stay in Northern Ireland. Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, the leader of the Democratic Unionist party, which leads Northern Ireland’s power-sharing executive, has demanded a timeline for enforcing the UK’s protocol demands. Northern Ireland goes to the polls in May and there is an expectation that the two sides will seek to strike a deal ahead of that election. Ireland’s foreign secretary, Simon Coveney, welcomed the improved mood music around the talks. He said: “I think it is a good thing that the Brexit issues and the protocol issues are back in the Foreign Office in London rather than in a separate unit led by Lord Frost.”About one in 10 people in north-west England had Covid-19 last week, data has revealed, while infection levels have risen in those aged 50 and over. According to figures from the Office for National Statistics based on swabs collected from randomly selected households, the Omicron wave has continued to sweep the UK. Infection levels appear to have peaked in London, falling from one in 10 at the end of 2021 to one in 15 in the week ending 6 January, but they have risen in all other regions of England except the east. The north-west recorded the highest levels. The ONS estimated that 3,735,000 people – or about 1 in 15 – in England had coronavirus during the week, while the figure for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland was about one in 20. The study also reveals that while there was no clear rise in infection levels in those under the age of 50, the percentage testing positive for Covid-19 remained highest for older teenagers and young adults, at about one in 10 of those in school year 12 to age 34. There was an increase, however, among those aged 50 and over testing positive, at about one in 20 of those aged 50 to 69 and one in 30 of those aged 70. That compares with about one in 25 and one in 45 respectively the previous week. The rise in older age groups is of particular concern given age is a risk factor for more severe coronavirus. Vaccine uptake in these age groups has been high, but many received their boosters early, meaning their immunity may since have waned to some degree. As a result, it remains uncertain what the impact of high levels of infection may have on older adults, and – as a result – healthcare services. According to official case data – which is based on infections among those who chose to come forward for testing – the number of new cases a day is falling in the UK, with 109,133 new cases reported on Wednesday, down from a his of more than 218,000 earlier in the month. As experts have previously noted, however, the ONS data covers a slightly earlier period of time, and picks up both new and ongoing infections, as well as those without symptoms. Sarah Crofts, the head of analytical outputs for the Covid-19 infection survey, said Omicron continued to be the dominant variant while Delta declined. “Infections in the under 50s are increasing more slowly than in recent weeks, while infections in the over 50s have been increasing more rapidly,” she said. “It’s important to note that older age groups still remain the lowest infected and we will continue to monitor the data closely to see how this changes.”Exhibition of the week Wang Gongxin: In-Between Multimedia installations that explore by modern means the ancient painterly problems of light and shadow. • White Cube Mason’s Yard, London, from 19 January to 26 February. Also showing Alison Katz: Artery Autobiographical art in an installation that suggests the insides of the human body. • Camden Art Centre, London, until 13 March. Betsy Bradley: Chasing Rainbows Subtle and contemplative abstract paintings and sculptures including a swing to imaginatively escape on. • Ikon Gallery, Birmingham, until 13 February Emily Speed: Flatland Video inspired by the Victorian fantasy novel Flatland and its vision of a two-dimensional world. • Tate Liverpool until 5 June Fragmented Illuminations: Medieval and Renaissance Manuscript Cuttings Beautiful images cut by brutal 19th-century book dealers from some of the greatest medieval manuscripts. • V&amp;A, London, until 8 May Image of the week A staff member at the newly opened Monet’s Garden immersive multimedia exhibition, dedicated to the work of the painter Claude Monet, at Alte Muenze, Berlin. The show runs until mid-March. What we learned A bitter inheritance feud is raging over a Roman villa An Eric Gill sculpture on BBC Broadcasting House in London was allegedly damaged during a protest over the artist’s paedophilia A masterpiece by René Magritte is expected to fetch £45m at auction Art historian Christopher Wright discovered his £65 painting may be a Van Dyck Cotswolds residents want Damien Hirst to fix up his crumbling country pile Photographer Masterji’s portraits of immigrant life in Coventry will go on display … … while West Midlands police artist in residence Kay Rufai hopes to reduce youth violence and racial stereotyping A show of work by US landscape painter Winslow Homer opens in London in September Senegal has some of the most arresting architecture in Africa … … and artist, poet and singer, Dieynaba Sidibé, AKA Zeinixx, is the country’s ‘first lady’ of graffiti Soviet avant-garde film posters were as bold and innovative as the movies they advertised Photographer Alec Soth is one of the most compelling chroniclers of American life Foster + Partners’ architecture firm almost doubled its profits in 2020, thanks to Middle East expansion Masterpiece of the week Jacopo de’ Barbari: A Sparrowhawk, 1510s Nothing could be simpler or more directly observed than this Venetian Renaissance slice of life. It is not an allegory, a reference to myth or any other kind of symbol – as Renaissance art is so often assumed to contain – but just an act of observation. The artist looks clearly and carefully at a hunting bird on its perch. He captures its bright, fierce eye and tiger-striped breast feathers, the leather bracelets on its feet and bell to sound the alert if it takes flight. It waits alertly against an undecorated, meaning-free wall. This is an art of describing of the sort we associate with northern European rather than Italian painters. In fact, Jacopo de’ Barbari moved between north and south, working in Nuremberg as well as Venice. His sparrowhawk anticipates by about 150 years The Goldfinch, the painting by Carel Fabritius made famous by Donna Tartt’s novel. It’s a memorial to a nameless bird of prey that lived half a millennium ago. • National Gallery, London Don’t forget To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. Sign up to the Art Weekly newsletter If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here. Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comHospitals in nearly half of US states are nearing capacity, according to the Department of Health and Human Services, as the Omicron variant has triggered a record number of cases across the country. In 18 states at least 85% of adult intensive care unit beds were in use, while in 24 states at least 80% of staffed hospital beds were occupied, HHS data shows. Alabama, Missouri, New Mexico, Rhode Island, Texas and Wisconsin are among the states suffering a particular shortage of ICU beds. In Texas, which this week set a new record for Covid-19 cases reported in a single day, with 75,817 total new cases, more than 92% of ICU beds are occupied, according to HHS, 34.3% of the beds occupied by Covid-19 patients. In Wisconsin 90.6% of ICU beds are occupied, 41.4% of those with Covid-19 patients. Rhode Island and Alabama each has more than 91% of ICU beds occupied. The New York Times first reported on the HHS data. The south has been hit particularly hard by the new variant, with states continuing to report record case numbers amid serious concern around hospital staff shortages. On Thursday Joe Biden said 1,000 members of the military will be dispatched to help mitigate staffing crunches at hospitals across the country, with many facilities struggling because their workers are in at-home quarantines due to the virus at the same time as Covid-19 cases have surged. The US leads the world in the daily average number of new infections reported, accounting for one in every three infections reported worldwide, according to a Reuters tally. Data suggests cases may be beginning to plateau in New York and the east coast after extraordinary surges. However, Texas has reported a test positivity rate of more than 35% over the past week, WFAA.com reported, as the Texas department of state and health services said “Covid has never spread this fast” in the state. Alabama state reported a record number of children hospitalized with coronavirus this week, due to the highly transmissible Omicron variant. At least 60 children had been hospitalized with 13 receiving treatment in intensive care. The state has recorded a number of record case highs throughout January as officials continue to urge all those eligible to receive the Covid vaccine. State health officials told the Montgomery Advertiser they were “extremely concerned” about the rise of hospitalizations among children and parents to get their children inoculated. Vaccination rates in Alabama also remain low, with just 48% of the population fully vaccinated. On Thursday, the supreme court blocked the Biden administration from enforcing a requirement that employees at large businesses be vaccinated against Covid-19 or undergo weekly testing and wear a mask on the job. The court’s conservative majority concluded the administration overstepped its authority by seeking to impose the Occupational Safety and Health Administration’s (Osha) vaccine-or-test rule on US businesses with at least 100 employees. More than 80 million people would have been affected. Biden has pledged to deliver 1bn free at-home test kits to Americans, as a test kit shortage across the country continues to hamper efforts to control the Omicron variant. Biden said a website where people can request tests will launch next week. The White House said Friday that 500 million at-home rapid tests would be available to order online on 19 January and would be mailed directly to American households free of charge. In New York City, the number of new cases has flattened in recent days, the New York Times reported, while New Jersey and Maryland have seen a slight decrease in the number of infections. “Every case is one too many, but if you watch the trend line, it looks like we may be cresting over that peak,” Kathy Hochul, governor of New York, said in a briefing this week. “We are not at the end, but this is a glimmer of hope when we desperately need that.”Emmanuel Macron is facing growing political divisions over Covid rules in the run-up to the spring presidential election, after his proposed vaccine pass was delayed and teachers took strike action, amid ongoing street demonstrations and a rise in violent threats against politicians. With an increasing mood of fatigue among French voters after two years of the pandemic and a significant mistrust of the political class, the president –– who is likely to hold off declaring his re-election bid for several weeks as the coronavirus health crisis continues –– wants to be seen as reliable but firm. France has been hit by a fifth wave of Covid infections, with more than 305,000 daily cases reported on Thursday, just as campaigning for the April presidential election was due to begin in earnest. Macron has ramped up his rhetoric against France’s minority of non-vaccinated people –– less than 10% of the eligible population –– in part as a way of setting the political battle lines for the election. Coronavirus rules are becoming a significant issue for the campaign. The vaccine pass would harden Covid-19 restrictions, making proof of vaccination mandatory to enter certain public places including cafes, restaurants, cinemas and long-distance trains. Macron had hoped to introduce it this weekend. But the bill has been forced to a second round of parliamentary debate after lawmakers and senators failed to reach agreement. Macron’s recent, deliberately radical statement that he really wanted to dump non-vaccinated people “in the shit” by making their daily lives as difficult as possible was aimed to appeal to his own centrist electorate, which is overwhelmingly vaccinated and exasperated at the ongoing coronavirus crisis. Although France had a slow start on vaccines, it now has one of the highest rates of vaccination in Europe – at more than 90% of those eligible – and a majority of people support the vaccine pass. The president is seeking to portray himself as the centrist voice of reason and science –– as previously defined by his Europe minister, Clément Beaune, who will play a leading role in his campaign –– against what he deems the dangers of populism among other candidates: Marine Le Pen and the former TV pundit Éric Zemmour on the far right, and the left’s Jean-Luc Mélenchon. None of those candidates oppose vaccination, but they have been critical of the vaccine pass. Macron’s main challenger, Valérie Pécresse of Nicolas Sarkozy’s right-wing party, Les Républicains, supports the vaccine pass but her party’s amendments and challenges in parliament and the senate have stalled it coming into force. Macron’s party blamed Les Républicains on Friday for delaying Covid protections. But Damien Abad, the head of the party in the parliament’s lower house and an advisor to Pécresse, described Macron’s comments about dumping people “in the shit” as “cold and calculating populism” aimed at “dividing the French people” for electoral purposes. There is a mood of mistrust of the political class and institutions in France, which has simmered since the gilets jaunes anti-government protests before the pandemic. Elected politicians, particularly from Macron’s party, have made more than 300 complaints to police of death threats against them since the introduction of Macron’s health pass in July 2021, which required either vaccination, recovery from coronavirus or a negative test for access to public places such as restaurants and libraries. There have been more than 60 complaints of violence against elected officials so far this month, including over the vaccine issue, the interior minister said this week. Yaël Braun-Pivet, a lawmaker from Macron’s party, received a message saying if she didn’t vote against the vaccine pass there would be a “gigantic bloodbath” in parliament. Pascal Bois, another lawmaker from Macron’s party, who had already received a bullet in the post, had his garage and car torched two weeks ago with graffiti on the walls about “voting no”. Within the minority of the roughly 5 million unvaccinated people in France, not all are anti-vaccine by principle, according to research by France’s national institute of health and medical research, Inserm. Some have fears over side-effects and four out of 10 may have difficulties accessing the relevant health services for free vaccines, including elderly people isolated in rural communities. Nevertheless, divisions in society are becoming clear. Jérôme Fourquet of the pollsters Ifop said 51% of French people felt they were in danger when in contact with a non-vaccinated person and 51% felt non-vaccinated people should pay all or part of the cost of their treatment in intensive care. These views are higher among over-65s, who are being courted by both Macron and Pécresse. More than 100,000 people protested against the vaccine pass across France last weekend, saying it curbed their liberties. More demonstrations are expected on Saturday. “Non-vaccinated people are being held responsible for the latest Covid wave in France, but it’s lack of government hospital-funding that created the problems,” said a 27-year-old woman from Paris who works in the public sector for a government ministry and has not been vaccinated because she fears unknown side-effects. She had voted for Mélenchon in the past, but might now vote far right. “Strangely, it’s the right which now seems more likely to defend our liberties as non-vaccinated people.” Polls show Macron is the favourite to top the first round of the presidential election and could beat a far-right candidate in the final contest, but would face a challenge from Pécresse if she makes the second round. Antoine Bristielle, the director of opinion at the Fondation Jean Jaurès thinktank, said the current priority for French voters was purchasing power and making ends meet. “But in second place is Covid, which has made a spectacular return as an election concern in recent months,” he said. He felt that Macron could benefit from the fact that voters often looked for stability and known leaders in a crisis. But he said: “There is currently an extreme mistrust among French people towards politics and institutions … Only six out of 10 French people are certain they will turn out to vote in the presidential election –– 10 points lower than the same period for the last election.” Stewart Chau, a sociologist and consultant at the pollsters Viavoice, said 57% of French people defined their current state of mind as “fatigued”, worsened by the pandemic. He said that although there was broad approval of Macron’s handling of the economy during the pandemic, there is a limit to politicians’ ability to capitalise on Covid “because French people clearly want to move on to something else”. • This article was amended on 20 January 2022 to clarify that the vaccination rate given of “more than 90%” relates to the eligible French population, not the whole population.According to reports, the England team took a charter flight to Hobart. Watching them play on the first day at the Bellerive Oval it looked more like they had travelled by ancient sailing bark, and arrived, like Abel Tasman, soiled, sore, and ship-worn, half-starved after six months picking weevils out of biscuits. Battered, cut, and bruised, suffering from strains, niggles, aches and breakdowns, a loss of form, and a lack of faith. Between the 11 of them it felt like if you cherry-picked the best bits from each they could just about cobble together one fit, functioning, and happy Test cricketer. The record books show this is the shortest Ashes tour the team have ever taken, but from the look of them, it must be starting to feel like it’s dragged on awfully long. The brief elation they, and everyone else felt, after Joe Root had won the toss on a grassy, damp, green, and unexpectedly familiar sort of pitch and Australia fell to 12 for three, gave way pretty quickly once Marnus Labuschagne and Travis Head launched their brilliant counterattack. England started to fall apart almost as soon as Root made his first bowling change. Chris Woakes, hopelessly short of form and good-feeling after being dropped from the team, seemed to have forgotten how to do the one thing that’s always come so naturally to him, and couldn’t settle on a line, or a length. Mark Wood wasn’t doing much better. Then Ollie Robinson went off injured just after lunch, and, when he came back on again, spent the rest of the day hobbling geriatrically around the outfield, sometimes throwing the ball back underarm from the deep. With Ben Stokes unable to bowl because he came into the game carrying a side-strain, the only option Root had left was to bowl himself, which is how England ended up delivering 10 overs of part-time off-spin in conditions which were tailor-made for seam bowling. The score at stumps should have felt encouraging, but spoke, instead, of an opportunity missed, and a chance let slip. So, as the day wore on, thoughts drifted along, away from what will happen in this game to the more pressing question of what will happen when it’s all over. Fortunately, the ECB chief executive Tom Harrison was on hand to fill us in on the details. Harrison gave an interview to the BBC in which he talked through some of his ideas for the future. Have you got the appetite for more of this? Harrison hardly ever gives interviews, and yet, as soon as he does speak up, he has the odd knack of making you feel as though you’ve already heard enough. Harrison explained that we were in fact looking at this latest series defeat all wrong, and it was really “a brilliant opportunity for us to come together as a game” to “reset the importance of red-ball cricket in our domestic schedule” and “recalibrate how we play first class cricket in the UK”. This would be more convincing if Harrison hadn’t spent the last seven years in charge of the very same system he’s now blaming this failure on. It would have helped his case, too, if the single biggest impediment to that recalibration he wants wasn’t the eye-wateringly expensive white-ball tournament he launched that’s now sprawled across the middle of the summer like a doberman on a sofa. Harrison also returned to another of his recent themes, “the volume of cricket”, and again, he’s entirely right. There is too much. The question is whether he’s noticed that a large part of it is down to the fact he just launched a needless fourth format of the sport. There was another odd little irony when he spoke about the one tangible measure he has taken so far. He said that he had written to Cricket Australia asking them to help set up a system where English players could play in the Sheffield Shield (they can hardly get a game of first-class cricket in their own country, after all). More cricket, then, for the men who he says need to play less of it. There’s a grain of a good point here, too. If you looked with the right kind of eyes you could see how Labuschagne and Head have benefited from playing in English county cricket in the way they set about England’s seamers on a green pitch in Hobart. But there are only six Shield sides, and competition for places on them is pretty fierce. Good luck persuading them that they should also be helping to develop young English players. Besides which, this current England squad actually has plenty of experience in Australian conditions, whether it was in Grade cricket, or the Big Bash, or on A tours. It is one of the things the ECB have got right in the last few years. That’s before you even consider the question of where, exactly, they are going to find time for this in the schedule. All that aside, it’s a fine idea, just way down the list of things England need to fix. They should maybe wait until they broach it with the players though. If they tell this lot that they are going to have to spend any more time in Australia, they might just end up with a mutiny on their hands. Although funnily enough, listening to Harrison, you wonder if that might be exactly what English cricket needs.After a week of controversy surrounding Novak Djokovic’s right to stay in Australia and compete in the Australian Open, the tennis star has now had his visa revoked again. The Djokovic case has several legal and medical aspects to it, but it has also fast become a symbolic battle between those who support coronavirus vaccination and restrictions on travel, and those who oppose them. The importance of his case needs to be understood in terms of its effect on public health and behaviour. Djokovic’s actions alone were always unlikely to have a significant impact on Australia’s Covid case rates. Furthermore, an athlete in his thirties (such as Djokovic) is, statistically speaking, unlikely to become seriously ill with the virus, and so is individually unlikely to strain Australia’s healthcare system. But pandemics are about groups, not individuals – and it is the potential impact of this incident on group behaviour that really matters here. The unvaccinated, high-profile Djokovic, who secured an Australian visa via a medical exemption, could easily have become a symbol of the Australian government’s leniency regarding its own restrictions. There is precedent for this in the “Cummings effect”: public faith in the UK government’s handling of the pandemic fell after the revelation that the No 10 senior adviser Dominic Cummings had travelled to Durham during lockdown. The decision by the Australian government to revoke Djokovic’s visa and potentially deport him – despite a court ruling earlier this week that he could stay and compete – was likely to have been prompted by a desire to avoid a similar “Djokovic effect”. Australia has seen a huge increase in coronavirus cases during its Omicron wave, and Victoria, the state hosting the Australian Open, broke its record for Covid hospitalisations this week. A “Djokovic effect” would be disastrous, as it could push even those who would otherwise follow the rules towards non-compliance. Throughout the pandemic, Australia has imposed some of the longest and harshest lockdown measures in the world. These measures greatly rely on evoking a sense of “prosociality” – the idea that our actions should benefit everyone, not just ourselves. But this social contract is sustained only through fairness. Unfairness, therefore, can make us want to punish others and rebel, even if this comes at a cost to ourselves. Fairness is crucial to pandemic compliance, and one would expect people to become non-compliant with existing restrictions, even when those restrictions would benefit themselves, if unfairness is perceived. It is likely the Australian government has now revoked Djokovic’s visa because it realised that the compliant majority of Australians would view the court’s original decision as unfair. Djokovic has not helped himself by being photographed in public shortly after testing positive for Covid-19 and possibly making incorrect declarations on his visa application. From a behavioural perspective, this leads to a simple conclusion: people who play by the rules will stop if the rules are perceived to allow rule-breaking. Equally, there is the non-compliant minority to consider. In refusing vaccines or ignoring lockdown rules, this group must overcome social norms and the fear of shame and being “othered” by the majority. Djokovic is one of the few high-profile individuals anywhere in the world who seems to be publicly supporting their beliefs. The decision earlier this week to allow him to stay in Australia could be perceived by those resistant to vaccines and restrictions as an implicit validation of their own views, as might any decision by the Australian government against taking further action. Djokovic’s lawyers have recognised that this is all playing out in a wider context, and have argued that the authorities are reacting to the risk of sparking wider anti-vaccination sentiment, rather than taking the tennis player’s case on its own merits. The immigration minister meanwhile said in a statement that this latest decision was based on “health and good-order grounds”. In revoking Djokovic’s visa, the Australian government is probably trying to prevent him from becoming an important, positive figurehead for those who oppose vaccination or travel restrictions. By taking such action, in front of what is now an international audience, Scott Morrison, the prime minister, is drawing a clear line in the sand and turning Djokovic’s initial exemption into a reaffirmation of Australia’s Covid measures. Stuart Mills is a fellow in behavioural science at the London School of EconomicsMy theory is that every British person has one pet peeve Americanism. Perhaps it’s the phrase “pet peeve”. Maybe it’s people saying, “Can I get a coffee?” when, “Can I have … ” makes more sense. Or maybe it’s a custom, such as tipping. I asked Professor Stefan Gössling of the School of Business and Economics at Linnaeus University in Sweden, whose study explored the impact of tipping on social welfare, whether it’s a good thing to do. Hi Stefan! Where are you? Southern Germany. Is tipping the norm there? It is in London, and it’s creeping up from 10% to 12.5% and sometimes 15%. The other day I left 20% Germany is a tipping country; Norway and Iceland are moving away from it. I read that the Norwegian labour unions discourage tipping, saying it promotes weak wages and doesn’t count toward pensions And most people tip by card there, which makes it difficult to enforce the regulation to deduct tax from tips before they’re passed on. Norway has a high minimum wage, too. And our research showed that customers prefer tipping with cash, perhaps because they see it as a tax-free gift. I can see why, although I think paying taxes is chic. What about service charges? It’s illegal for UK employers to keep tips left by card, but service charges are often used to cover costs. Well, an average restaurant makes about 5% profit. So in North America, service charges pay staff, and everyone accepts it. It’s the European model to price everything into the menu. Including a liveable salary for staff? Not always. In Spain, the rate is about €1,000 (£850) a month. Few people can live on that. In Switzerland, it’s double. And they don’t tip in Switzerland. It can’t be a coincidence that tipping isn’t customary where staff are well paid. Should ending tips be the goal? Or it can be a good wage and tipping. People like tips, it makes them feel good. But isn’t it discriminatory? Studies show that if you’re a good-looking blond woman, you’ll earn more tips. You could call that a racial bias, or a gender bias. I would call it biology: men like to impress attractive women. But knowing that means it’s easy to find mechanisms to increase tips. Everyone loves a friendly waiter. A smile is a great weapon. Doesn’t sound wholly fair, though. It’s going to be hard to find any job where your personality doesn’t make a difference. And the monetary difference between the best- and worst-performing is small. Punters rarely have the knowledge to judge performance-related pay – it’s not the waiter’s fault if the kitchen is slow. Should customers have this power? It’s only an issue of power when staff depend on tips to survive. Do you tip? Yes, about 10%. Is 10% the magic number? It’s made up, based on the country’s norms and economy. But it can change, so it’s up to us to decide how we want this system to develop. If it goes in the direction of 20% tips … Uh-oh, did I overdo it? … we could be undermining working conditions because employers won’t pay more than the minimum. Then we’re approaching the US model. As consumers, we should be aware that we might be pushing that system to exist.This is a really quick dessert to knock up. Roast hazelnuts marry well with good chocolate and ricotta, and the ricotta in this pudding means that, while it bakes quickly in the skillet, it also remains incredibly moreish and soft. If, for some reason, you can’t eat it all in one sitting, the texture is still brilliant once cool. Serve with a big scoop of milk ice-cream, or clotted or pouring cream. Baked chocolate, hazelnut and ricotta pudding Prep 25 min Cook 25 min Serves 2 35g unsalted butter, softened, plus extra for greasing 55g golden caster sugar 1 tsp cocoa powder, plus extra for dusting 1 egg, whisked 20g plain flour 20g roasted hazelnuts ground A pinch of salt ½ tsp baking powder 60g ricotta 20g dark chocolate chips Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4 and grease a 12cm x 12cm skillet or ovenproof dish with butter. Beat the butter and sugar until pale and fluffy, then beat in the cocoa powder until combined. Beat the whisked egg bit by bit into the butter and sugar mixture. In a separate bowl, combine the flour, hazelnuts, salt and baking powder, then add to the cake batter and mix well. Fold in the ricotta and chocolate chips, then spoon into the greased skillet. Bake for 25 minutes, or until a skewer comes out clean. Dust with cocoa powder and serve warm with a dollop of clotted cream, a jug of cold pouring cream or a scoop of your favourite ice-cream. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoFashion brands that make misleading claims about their environmental credentials face a crackdown by the competition watchdog as it targets greenwashing. Brands could be forced to change the way they advertise or face court action if they are found to have breached consumer protection law with spurious environmental claims. The Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) is understood to have prioritised fashion because of the size of the market and the scale of consumer concerns. Other sectors, including transport, food and drink, and beauty are also expected to be investigated over their environmental claims. Cecilia Parker Aranha, the CMA’s director of consumer protection, said: “People are becoming increasingly aware of the negative impact that fashion can have on our planet. We know many shoppers are actively looking for brands which are doing good things for the environment – and we want to make sure the claims they see are stacking up. “Our work so far indicates that there could be issues with greenwashing in the fashion sector and that is why we’ve prioritised this area for further investigation. “Now is the time for the fashion industry to take a fresh look at what they’re telling customers and make any changes needed to comply with the law. Businesses that can’t back up their claims risk action from the CMA and damage to their reputation in the long-run.” The investigation comes as the fashion industry faces increasing pressure to reduce its environmental impact as some estimates indicate it is responsible for between 2% and 8% of global carbon emissions. Its thought the global industry contributes more to the climate emergency than the aeronautical and shipping industries combined and, if trends continue, it could account for a quarter of the world’s carbon budget by 2050. The growing volume of online shopping returns have also fuelled concern among campaigners. The pressure group Changing Markets Foundation released a report last year into the use of synthetic fibres by 46 leading brands. It said that 60% of claims by UK and European fashion companies, including Asos, H&amp;M and Zara, were unsubstantiated and misleading shoppers. The report particularly criticised the use of polyester made from recycled plastic bottles which it said was a “false solution” and said brands were not doing enough to ensure their clothing was recyclable. Urska Trunk, the campaign manager at Changing Markets, said: “While brands are quick to capitalise on consumer concern by using sustainability as a marketing ploy, the vast majority of such claims are all style and no substance. While they greenwash their clothing collections, they are simultaneously dragging their feet on embracing truly circular solutions, for example by not making the necessary investments to ensure a future in which clothes can be recycled back into clothes.” It picked out H&amp;M’s ethical Conscious Collection for using more synthetics than in its main collection, with one in five items analysed found to be made from 100% fossil fuel-derived synthetic materials. H&amp;M said it based its product sustainability claims on “credible third-party certification schemes for our materials to ensure sustainable sourcing and integrity” such as the Global Recycled Standard. The Swedish fast-fashion retailer said that polyester made up 27% of its material use, however it agreed that “recycled polyester from single-use plastic bottles shouldn’t be the long-term solution for the industry”. It said while it was investing in recycling, textile-to-textile recycling solutions are needed, hence its investment in recycling technologies, such as Worn Again, TreeToTextile and Renewcell. The CMA began looking into green claims in 2020, finding that up to 40% could be misleading to consumers. It gave companies making misleading claims about their environmental credentials until the end of last year to stop the practice, which is known as “greenwashing”. The Advertising Standards Authority has clamped down on several big companies in recent years over greenwashing adverts, including the airline Ryanair, the carmaker BMW and the oil producer Shell.The government has ignored the advice of its scientific advisers to allow sugar beet farmers to deploy a banned bee-killing neonicotinoid pesticide in 2022. British Sugar has successfully applied for an exemption to permit the banned pesticide, known as Cruiser SB, to be used in England this year because of the threat to sugar beet posed by a virus transmitted by aphids. The decision by the environment secretary, George Eustice, to allow the “emergency” use of the neonicotinoid thiamethoxam came despite the Health and Safety Executive and the government’s expert committee on pesticides concluding that the requirements for an emergency authorisation had not been met, and that pollution from the pesticide would damage river life. Announcing the decision, the environment secretary said that farmers would be forbidden from growing flowering plants for 32 months after the sugar beet crop to reduce the risk to bees, but admitted: “It was not possible to rule out completely a degree of risk to bees (and this is the case even with a 32-month exclusion) from flowering plants in or near the field in the years after neonicotinoid use.” Environmental charities condemned the move as “shameful” and “a betrayal”. Sandra Bell, campaigner at Friends of the Earth, said: “Allowing a bee-harming pesticide back into our fields is totally at odds with ministers’ so-called green ambitions, not to mention directly against the recommendation of their own scientists. This decision comes just two months after the government enshrined in law a target to halt species loss by 2030.” Stephanie Morren, senior policy officer for the RSPB, said: “As we tackle the nature and climate emergency on our doorsteps we need decision-makers to support our farmers in delivering sustainable farming. This means upholding the ban on highly toxic pesticides like neonicotinoids, and instead working to support our farmers in reducing their reliance on these harmful chemicals.” Matt Shardlow, chief executive of Buglife, said: “Neonicotinoids approved under the current pesticide approval process devastated populations of wild bees and heavily polluted rivers. It is shameful that no action has been taken to ensure that bee and wildlife destroying pesticides are properly assessed as being pollinator safe before they are approved or derogated for use.” Neonicotinoids were banned for agricultural use across the EU and Britain in 2018 due to their devastating impact on bee populations. Tiny traces of these toxic chemicals in crop pollen or wildflowers damage bees’ ability to forage and navigate. A recent scientific study found that even a single exposure to a neonicotinoid insecticide could significantly damage future generations’ ability to reproduce. The exemption for Cruiser SB was also granted in 2021 but was not needed by sugar beet farmers because modelling indicated that the yellows virus carried by aphids would pose no threat. In 2020, according to the government, the virus destroyed a quarter of the national crop. A Defra spokesperson said: “This decision has not been taken lightly and is based on robust scientific assessment. We evaluate the risks very carefully and only grant temporary emergency authorisations for restricted pesticides in special circumstances when strict requirements are met. “Last year the threshold was not met so the authorisation was never exercised. Strict criteria remain in place meaning this authorisation will only be used if necessary.” Peter Watson, the agriculture director of British Sugar, said the seed treatment would only be used if scientific predictions of the virus reach a certain level in March. “The emergency authorisation also contains controls to protect wildlife, including a reduced application rate of the treatment,” he said. “We continue to progress our plans to tackle virus yellows without the need for neonicotinoids in future years, such as through grower practices and seed breeding programmes.”If Norwich have any hope of staging an unlikely bid for survival it surely has to start with the visit of an Everton side in almost similarly dire straits. After taking five points from his first three matches, Dean Smith has presided over six consecutive Premier League defeats – failing to score a single goal. Everton have won once in their past 11 league games but Rafael Benítez will hope the signings of Nathan Patterson, Vitalii Mykolenko and Anwar El Ghazi will revitalise them along with the hoped-for returns to fitness of Dominic Calvert-Lewin, Yerry Mina and Richarlison. Stephen Hollis Saturday 3pm Venue Carrow Road Last season n/a Referee Andy Madley This season G8 Y14 R2 2 cards/game Odds H 37-13 A 19-17 D 18-7 NORWICH Subs from Gunn, McGovern, Byram, Tzolis, Lees-Melou, Idah, Cantwell, Placheta, Gibson, Williams, Dowell, Gibbs, Rowe Doubtful None Injured Omobamidele (back, Feb), Zimmermann (ankle, Feb), Rupp (hamstring, Feb), Gilmour (ankle, Feb), Normann (groin, Feb) Suspended None Discipline Y35 R1 Form LLLLLL Leading scorer Pukki 5 EVERTON Subs from Begovic, Tyrer, Lonergan, Patterson, Kenny, Mina, Branthwaite, Delph, Gomes, Gbamin, Townsend, El Ghazi, Simms, Dobbin, Tosun, Onyango, Rondón Doubtful Calvert-Lewin (quadriceps), Richarlison (calf), Mina (calf), Branthwaite (hamstring), Delph (illness) Injured Davies (hamstring, Mar) Suspended None Discipline Y36 R1 Form LLWLDL Leading scorer Gray 5Incredible, when you think about it, that the ceremonial funeral of His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh had fewer attendees than “Slacky”’s leaving do the night before. That’s showbiz, I guess. Anyway: another day, another Downing Street party dispatch from the nation with the highest Covid death toll in Europe. If only Boris Johnson’s administration could have organised a piss-up in a brewery, instead of just in No 10. I’m sure Dominic Cummings has some complex 5D game-theory analysis as to why decision-making in Whitehall was systematically loaded toward bad outcomes, but a lot of us will be developing an alternative hypothesis. Namely, do you reckon one of the reasons we did so badly was because you lot were trashed half the time? Forgive me: I forgot to use the approved euphemism. Do you reckon one of the reasons you made impaired decisions and now seem to be suffering repeated memory loss was because of “the drinking culture at No 10”? I mean, honestly. Imagine being such a mess that even JOURNALISTS reckon you drink too much. And so to a recap of the latest. These two most recently exposed parties were both held at Downing Street on the eve of Prince Philip’s funeral, during lockdown last April. Probably the most eye-catching detail reported – beyond the impromptu DJ set, the basement dancing, the suitcase of wine wheeled in, the spills and stains on the carpets – was that one of the revellers apparently broke Wilfred Johnson’s garden swing. (Incidentally, if you take a tour of Graceland, you’re told that Elvis and his chums loved to shoot in the backyard, and are shown the bullet hole in Lisa Marie Presley’s kiddie slide. Fun times.) “What happened to my swing, Daddy?” “Buck up, little chap. Some press officer whose job is issuing denials but who currently thinks he deserves a Victoria Cross for coming into the office sat on it when he was drunk. Is it wet? Probably don’t touch it if it is.” As for the rest of the-day-after-the-night-before … I was recently re-reading a bit in Tom Wolfe’s The Bonfire of the Vanities about a shame-haunted hangover, where the character has drowned his memory of the previous evening like a monstrous beast in an icy lake. And yet, the events begin returning to him. Perhaps it felt a bit like this for the Downing Street staff who attended those parties. “A ripple … The monster was heading up from the bottom of the lake! In a moment … Its filthy snout! Can’t face it –” Well quite. Oh, God, the suitcase of booze. The attempt at body popping in the basement. Breaking the kid’s swing … Can’t face it. Switch on the telly, to take the old mind off it. Oh dear. Live footage of the 94-year-old Queen sitting utterly alone at her husband’s funeral. Christ, the snout on this hangover. The filthy snout … Then again, the one thing the Downing Street staff don’t seem to have been overburdened by after these many, many parties is a sense of shame. I guess you tell yourself that while the Queen is vaguely significant, she is not in any way as significant a personage as you, a Downing Street desk johnny. It all gives new meaning to one of the slogans of Vote Leave, who famously wanted to be rule-makers, not rule-takers. After all this, I don’t think anyone could accuse them of taking their own rules. Speaking of Vote Leave, many of you will be rather bored of Cummings’s ongoing attempts to present himself as Downing Street’s Jiminy Cricket, a tireless conscience who was forever trying to do the good and noble thing while surrounded by liars and idiots. Take his announcement this week that he told the BYOB party organiser, Martin Reynolds, “in writing” that it should not happen. Yeah, not all heroes wear capes. Some send a single, arse-covering email to insulate themselves against any future trouble and then do jack shit else to stop the event, even though as the prime minister’s most senior adviser they could have taken a proper stand. Reynolds has long been expected to be moved after Sue Gray’s investigation, apparently to a Middle Eastern ambassadorship. Amazing. Is this the same Martin Reynolds who was this week reported to have regretted his BYOB email as soon as he sent it, become “panicky”, but thought he couldn’t go back on it or it would somehow be worse? Because he sounds EXACTLY the sort of guy who should be an ambassador in the Middle East. Great to hear that the British establishment will keep protecting and advancing him. Come on, what’s the worst that can happen? Meanwhile, today’s Sue Gray leak indicated that the civil servant investigating the multiple parties would find insufficient evidence of criminality. Maybe there are legal exemptions because all this took place on the Crown estate – which won’t do a whole lot for the whole stink of elitism, but it will certainly allow the Met to carry on doing absolutely nothing about any of it. As for the damage being done not merely to the Johnson administration but to the entire concept of government by consent, are these latest revelations finally going to be an end to it? Or are they not even the half of it? My guess is that there is plenty more to come out. One rumour doing the rounds of the upper echelons in Whitehall centres on a lockdown drinks event allegedly attended by several secretaries of state. Last night, even loyalist MP Andrew Bridgen called for Johnson’s resignation, apparently as disillusioned with the government as fellow Brexiteer Lord Frost. (As with communism, the problem with Brexit will always be that it has yet to be done properly.) Johnson’s staunchest defenders seem to be Priti Patel, now detested by Tory voters and beyond because of her perceived failure to get a grip on migrant boats, and Jacob Rees-Mogg, whose intellect remains very much single-breasted. Perhaps you caught him this week declaring that “HR does not apply to ministers”, and calling the leader of the Scottish Tories a “lightweight figure”. Oh dear. How did Jacob bite through his restraints? If he hadn’t been kept out of circulation for months, he might have heard that hanging on to the union was quite an important policy of his government, and perhaps not best assisted by mugging off the most senior Conservative in Scotland. Not the greatest surprise, then, to see a voter in a TV vox pop judging that “Boris has lost his moral compass”. (I love the idea that he ever had one. What would this contraption have looked like? A custom-built device where the needle pointed magnetically to the words World King Get Big Drunken Shag?) If things carry on at this rate, it won’t be long before the Conservative party decides to Build Back Borisless. For now, the most positive reading of Johnson’s situation is that he’s in the last chance saloon – but hey, at least that means there’s booze. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist Join our journalists for a Guardian Live online event on the No 10 lockdown party and Boris Johnson’s future at 8pm GMT on Wednesday 19 January. Book hereBob Hughes, Lord Hughes of Woodside, who has died aged 90, was a Labour MP for 27 years and a key figure in the Anti-Apartheid Movement (AAM), which he chaired for two decades until the organisation was wound up in 1995 following democratic elections in South Africa. A self-effacing figure on the Tribunite left of the party, Hughes was a minister in Harold Wilson’s 1974 government but was the first to resign in protest against cuts in public expenditure. However, that step opened up a hugely productive phase in Hughes’s life. He was soon asked to become chairman of the AAM and spent the next 20 years as a valued friend and ally of liberation leaderships in southern Africa. His principled yet emollient style made him an ideal figure to lead an organisation that accommodated a vast range of political perspectives and its fair share of strong personalities. London was the worldwide focal point for opposition to apartheid, and Hughes had no doubt in later life about the role that the AAM had played, particularly by promoting economic boycotts of the Pretoria regime. After his release from prison in 1990, Nelson Mandela visited supporters and politicians around the world and members of the AAM leadership gathered at his hotel in London. “Mike Terry, Trevor Huddleston and myself went to meet him,” recalled Hughes. “While we were waiting, Mrs Thatcher twittered in. We’d have strangled her, never mind granting her an audience. But he [Mandela] has always shown such magnanimity.” Bob’s long tenure as AAM chairman confirmed the widespread esteem in which he was held. Once the organisation was wound up, having fulfilled its purpose, he became chairman of the archives committee that undertook the massive task of collating the movement’s documentary records over a 50-year period as a contribution towards an historical understanding of the period. They were then transferred to Rhodes House Library in Oxford. Hughes was born in the Fife fishing village of Pittenweem, the home territory of his father, Mitchell Hughes. His mother, Jessie (nee Anderson), was also from a fishing community, Whitehills in Banffshire. The family moved first to Aberdeen, where his father was a marine engineer. It was their decision to emigrate to South Africa in 1946 that was to galvanise Bob’s later political career. At first, the teenage boy regarded the warmth and brightness of life at Benoni in the eastern Transvaal as a considerable improvement on the postwar gloom he had left behind. After leaving Pietermaritzburg Technical College, Natal, he completed an apprenticeship as an engineer at the South African Rubber Company in a place called Howick, which was heavily populated by Scots. Bob became involved in trade union activity and, though apartheid was not formalised until 1948, separate development was already an entrenched reality and the contrast between the conditions of whites and blacks horrified him. He left South Africa in 1954, but said later that it was “the cataclysmic experience of seeing there how people lived that started me on the process of becoming a socialist”. Back in Aberdeen to further his engineering studies at Robert Gordon’s College (now Robert Gordon University), he joined the Labour League of Youth and fought his first parliamentary election in 1959, standing in North Angus and Mearns against Sir Colin Thornton-Kemsley, on the grounds that he was the only one who turned up for the selection conference. He was then recruited to the AUEW engineering union’s list of sponsored candidates and became deeply immersed in Aberdeen local government. Elected to Aberdeen corporation in 1962, he retained a lifelong pride in the city’s progressive record in housing, health and education. It was, for example, the first local authority in Britain to sponsor family planning clinics, though an attempt in the early 1960s to establish an occupational workshop for people with learning difficulties was turned down by the Tory secretary of state for Scotland on the quite open grounds that it would be detrimental to house values around it. When Hector Hughes, MP in the rock-solid Labour seat of Aberdeen North, was nearing retirement, Bob was an obvious successor. He was elected in 1970 and became first a frontbench spokesman and then a Scottish Office minister in 1974. It was a brief tenure, however, as Hughes found Wilson’s style of government “very difficult to live with”. He was not prepared to argue publicly in favour of an incomes policy supposed to prevent public expenditure cuts but also “sit in my own office and at the same time work out the next five years of public expenditure cuts”. As the Bennite left came to the fore after the 1979 Labour defeat, Hughes deeply resented litmus tests of socialist purity and denunciations of treachery for failure to support some fashionable cause, when they came from people who had “sat tight” during the Wilson years. It was, he recalled, Tribunite MPs such as Norman Buchan, Joan Lestor and himself who had made the sacrifice of resignation. Much against his instincts, Hughes went to the House of Lords in 1997 and remained an active, working peer. He was a vice-president of the British Humanist Association and a devoted follower of Aberdeen football club. In 2004 Hughes was honoured by South Africa as a Companion of the Order of Oliver Tambo. His wife, Margaret (nee Miller), whom he married in 1957, died in 2021. Hughes is survived by their two sons and three daughters. • Robert Hughes, Lord Hughes of Woodside, politician and campaigner, born 3 January 1932; died 7 January 2022Novak Djokovic’s Australian Open hopes are reliant on him winning a last-ditch appeal after another extraordinary day in which the government cancelled his visa for the second time. Shortly before 6pm in Melbourne on Friday, Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, exercised a personal power to revoke Djokovic’s visa “on health and good order grounds … and on the basis that it was in the public interest to do so”. It later emerged that one reason why the government wants the men’s world No 1 deported is because they believe his presence could “excite anti-vaccination sentiment”. However the Serb’s legal team said that this was “patently irrational” and immediately applied for an urgent court directions hearing which began less than three hours after Hawke’s decision. Shortly after 11pm, after yet more legal arguments in front of Judge Anthony Kelly, it was finally confirmed that Djokovic would be granted a temporary permission to stay – at least until his expedited case is heard in federal court on Sunday. Before then, Djokovic will also meet immigration lawyers on Saturday at 8am. There is a small chance he could leave Australia after that, however on Friday it appeared far more likely that he would stay and fight. According to Prof Jack Anderson, the director of sports law at the University of Melbourne, the chances of Djokovic succeeding are small. “All the Australian government has to do is show that it acted reasonably and rationally, while Djokovic’s team have a very narrow judicial review application to make,” he told the Guardian. “They will try to find a way to argue that elements of the minister’s decision are not reasonable – and, in fact, are so irrational that it should be quashed and Djokovic’s visa reinstated.” “Looking at judicial reviews of migration cases in Australia generally, you would expect the government will survive this one,” he added. “Although we’ve never quite had an application like this.” Certainly the stakes are high. The fresh decision to cancel the visa threatens to leave the Australian Open without one of its biggest stars and Djokovic – who was seeking a record-breaking 21st grand slam triumph in the men’s game – unable to defend the title he has won nine times. It also means the 34-year-old could be effectively barred from re-entering the country for three years unless he can show in future bids that compelling circumstances exist, such as compassionate or Australian national interest grounds. Earlier, the Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, said that Australians had “made many sacrifices during this pandemic, and they rightly expect the result of those sacrifices to be protected”. “This is what the minister is doing in taking this action today,” Morrison said, explaining he would not comment further “due to the expected ongoing legal proceedings”. However, at an urgent court directions hearing on Friday evening, Djokovic’s counsel, Nicholas Wood, revealed that Djokovic’s visa had been partly revoked because the government believed he would excite anti-vax sentiment. Wood noted that this was “radically different” from the reason for the first cancellation and argued there was “no rational basis” for the conclusion. Although Djokovic is not vaccinated, he has not actively promoted anti-vax disinformation. However, Australian anti-vaxxers have been using the hashtag #IStandWithDjokovic on social media. Wood also expressed concern at Djokovic’s safety and a potential “media circus” when his client is due to be taken into detention after an interview with immigration officials. Meanwhile speaking after his semi-final victory in the Sydney Tennis Classic, Andy Murray described Djokovic’s visa saga as “not great for tennis, not great for the Australian Open, not great for Novak”. “I’m not going to sit here and start kicking Novak whilst he’s down,” Murray said. “I just want it to get resolved. It would be good for everyone if that was the case.” The Djokovic saga began when he was detained after arriving in the country on the evening of 5 January. The world No 1 had believed that a visa granted on 18 November and an exemption approved by Tennis Australia’s chief medical officer and a Victorian government independent expert panel would be sufficient to enter Australia. However, he was then told that a recent Covid infection by itself was not sufficient for an exemption from Australia’s strict vaccination requirements and that he posed a risk to public health. After four days in an immigration hotel, a federal circuit court judge restored Djokovic’s visa on Monday, concluding it was unreasonable for the Australian Border Force to renege on a deal to give him more time at the airport to address the exemption issue. Since then it has also emerged that Djokovic made several public appearances after his positive Covid diagnosis of 16 December and that he travelled from Serbia to Spain over Christmas before flying to Melbourne – despite declaring on his visa he had not travelled in the two weeks before his flight to Australia. Der Spiegel also claimed anomalies suggested the positive result could have been negative or dated 26 December. On Wednesday, Djokovic conceded his agent made an “administrative mistake” when declaring he had not travelled in the two weeks before his flight to Australia and acknowledged an “error of judgment” by not isolating after he tested positive for Covid. However, opinion in Australia has since turned sharply against him. A survey of 60,000 people carried out by NewsCorp before Hawke’s decision showed that 83% wanted Djokovic to be deported.The proportion of infants in hospital with Covid-19 in the UK has risen with the spread of Omicron, figures suggest, although researchers have urged calm, noting most cases are very mild. The number of Covid-positive admissions, whatever the cause, is expected to rise when there is more infection around, but the latest figures suggest there has been a shift in the proportion of children in hospital with coronavirus who are infants. The data from the Isaric/Co-CIN study, published on Friday by the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) and based on a broadly representative subset of NHS hospitals, reveals that in previous Covid waves about 30% of children in hospital with the virus were under the age of one. Between mid-December and mid-January, however, when Omicron spread rapidly around the country, the proportion was just over 42%, with children from the most deprived areas most affected. The data does not break down whether infants were in hospital because of Covid or the infection was detected during care for another reason. However, in the second wave the majority of Covid-related infant admissions were because of Covid, experts said. Calum Semple, a professor in child health and outbreak medicine at the University of Liverpool, said infants were generally experiencing very mild symptoms. “I really want to emphasise here the fact that these are not particularly sick infants. In fact, they’re coming in for short periods of time for investigations,” he said. “If we look at those who went on to a high dependency unit, our intensive care unit, again, the proportions have fallen over time.” A similar trend has been recorded for the proportion requiring oxygen, and the time infants spend in hospital has fallen from almost seven days in the first Covid-19 wave to just under two days. Dr Camilla Kingdon, the president of the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health, said the infants’ symptoms fit with what would be expected in a busy winter in the UK. “So we’re not, on the shop floor as it were, picking up any signals that are overly concerning about this,” she said. Most infants in hospital with coronavirus experience a fever and a cough. One potential factor behind the shift in proportions could be that older children have been vaccinated, but experts say it is unlikely to fully explain the situation. Even among children under 12, the proportion of infants in hospital with Covid-19 has risen. “It may just be that because of vaccination and infection having been through the elderly and the younger adults, we may just be seeing a much harder hit in the younger age groups at this point,” said Semple. Among other tentative explanations, Russell Viner, a professor of child and adolescent health at UCL, said Omicron appeared to affect the upper airways more than previous variants, and younger children have smaller upper airways. He also suggested Omicron might be more likely to cause fever and cold-like symptoms in younger children than previous variants, and that protective care pathways meant such symptoms might indicate a hospital visit.A vice-president of the European parliament is facing questions after it was revealed he had spent nearly €690,000 (£576,000) on lavish office renovations. Rainer Wieland, a Christian Democrat MEP from Germany, spent €486,011 on a state-of-the-art office and €134,774 “showroom” next door, both built from scratch on the 15th floor of the European parliament in Brussels, according to a leaked report seen by the Guardian. The “showroom” – that Wieland said was a meeting room that can be used by anyone in the parliament – is equipped with top-range IT equipment, including €42,722 transcription tools and a €26,482 videoconferencing system. The final bill could be even higher if the MEP goes ahead with plans for a €49,864 mobile studio. Wieland oversees the internal management of the European parliament’s buildings and was testing a new office set-up he called an “idea laboratory” to see what features could be extended to all 705 members. “The institution will be able to act in a financially responsible manner, as features that could originally seem useful, but during testing would be ruled out, would not be acquired by the institution,” states an internal report drafted by senior administrators seen by the Guardian. But the staggering costs have rung alarm bells. In order to build the new office, Wieland spent nearly €35,000 demolishing the existing space, dismantling two existing bathrooms, pipes and ventilation systems, as well as windowsills, partitions and false ceilings. His new office was equipped with bespoke doors costing €25,000, a separate sliding door at €14,810 and €57,948-worth of built-in furniture, including a kitchenette with appliances. Inside the office, partitions costing €33,619 change from translucent to opaque at the flick of a switch. Doors are sealed with electronic locks costing €10,968. The “showroom” is equipped with a wall of monitors, a €3,500 table and a €25,000 ceiling light that looks like a window. “It’s nice, this kind of light is very pleasant, it’s also very, very expensive,” said Daniel Freund, a German Green MEP, who is responsible for overseeing the parliament’s 2020 spending. He said he feared the revelations would damage the image of the European parliament. “Looking at this from the perspective of a budget controller, I find it very difficult to justify that kind of expense to the EU taxpayer. I am conscious as well these are bad stereotypes, that there is a perception that the European parliament is expensive … We need to be very conscious of how we spend taxpayer money and this project is not a great example of that.” Freund is also concerned that the plans appeared to have been waved through by senior MEPs, with no fixed budget or tracking of costs. “There has never been a dedicated budget and no budget oversight,” he said. “I want to make sure that the money is spent according to the rules, so that needs to be clarified now with the administration … or the rules need to be changed to make sure projects of this size have proper accountability.” The spending is likely to raise eyebrows among EU member governments, who regularly complain that the parliament demands too much money for unjustified projects. MEPs have offices in Brussels and Strasbourg, which were renovated at a cost of €17.6m in 2019 to update IT and replace furniture. They can also claim expenses for a work space in their constituency. Speaking to the Guardian, Wieland said the project would save taxpayers money. “This is an idea lab where we test ideas, whether they are useful, usable – and we want to think out of the box … I am deeply convinced that testing costs money, but not testing costs also money and sometimes even more.” He added: “Most of the costs which are at stake are behind the walls and it’s not a luxury.” Each MEP’s Brussels office is equipped with a toilet and shower, which Wieland said was “an anachronism” that required staff to run water for 10 minutes every fortnight to prevent legionella. He rejected the term “showroom” from the internal report as misleading, describing the space as “a multifunctional meeting room” that can be used by all MEPs and staffers. He said the parliament had a shortage of medium-sized meeting rooms, adding that such a room may not be on every floor in the future, “because if we test it we also test how strong is the need”. Sources close to the MEP disputed suggestions that the IT equipment should be included in the total costs, claiming that the licences for the videoconferencing system and transcription technology covered the whole parliament. Wieland, who is bidding to be re-elected as a vice-president next week, also defended other elements of the project, saying: “We believe that normal keys are not appropriate any more, [in case] keys are lost.” The €25,000 light fixture was necessary, he said: “If you have high-quality cameras for high-quality communication, then you need high-quality lights.” A spokesperson for the European parliament said a test for an “innovative architectural concept for MEPs offices” had taken place in 2020, adding the size of the project had not allowed for any economies of scale. “After finalisation, evaluations will be carried out whether it would make sense to envisage some of the new features for other offices. Any decision would need the approval by the political and budgetary authorities of the EP.”Andy Murray described the re-escalation of Novak Djokovic’s visa saga as “not great for tennis, not great for the Australian Open and not great for Novak,” after the Serb’s hopes of playing in the first grand slam of the year were left hanging by a thread on Friday. Murray was one of a number of current and former players to express their frustration at the continuing situation after Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, exercised his powers to revoke Djokovic’s visa for a second time. While Djokovic will spend the 48 hours before he is due to play his first match on Monday at the Australian Open being detained at a secret location and watching a final hearing to determine his status, Murray will play in his first ATP Tour final in just over two years. Speaking after defeating Reilly Opelka in the last four of the Sydney Classic, a visibly frustrated Murray said of the topic that has dominated the buildup to Melbourne: “It’s unfortunate that it’s ended up in this sort of situation … [I] just want it to get resolved. I think it would be good for everyone if that was the case. It just seems like it’s dragged on for quite a long time now, and yeah, not great for the tennis, not great for the Australian Open, not great for Novak.” Boris Becker, who coached Djokovic from 2013 to 2016, acknowledged that “no tennis player is bigger than a tournament” but also told BBC Sport: “It is a political game he got involved in and that’s unfortunate.” The announcement at close to 6pm on a Friday evening local time that Djokovic’s visa was being cancelled again had drawn mixed reaction on social media, with many Australians believing it was the right decision to stick to the initial decision by the Australian Border Force the unvaccinated player did not meet federal law and should be deported. Others, however, bemoaned the long drawn-out process that they said allowed Scott Morrison’s government to distract attention from pandemic-related supply chain and testing issues. The seven-times grand slam champion, Justine Henin, argued that given most public sentiment seemed to favour the government’s decision, that Djokovic would be better off heading home. “I think it’s the best thing he doesn’t play at the moment,” she said. “When something is so complicated, I don’t say that Djokovic doesn’t have to fight, because he thought it was the right thing to do, but I think now it’s been proved that so many Australian people don’t want him to play. So maybe it’s better for everyone, for tennis, for the tournament, and maybe for him, that he doesn’t play the tournament.” The well-respected coach Darren Cahill, who has worked with Andre Agassi and Simona Halep among others, said that there were no winners amid the fallout and that the sacrifices of the Australian people in enduring long lockdowns and strict vaccine mandates should have been prioritised. “Fault lies everywhere here,” Cahill tweeted. “It’s been a mess. Novak, TA [Tennis Australia], Vic Gov, Federal Gov. It should’ve been a hard rule entering this country considering what the folks have been thru. Get vaccinated and come play the AO, or if not maybe see you in 23. No wiggle room.”OFI FRIDAY It’s a big weekend in the Premier League, which is The Fiver’s stock opening gambit for very quiet Fridays. But to be fair, it is a big weekend in the Premier League, which is what The Fiver always says to justify trotting out its stock opening gambit for very quiet Fridays. Come the evening, towards the end of this, a very quiet Friday, Brighton host Crystal Palace in the latest edition of the A23 derby, one of only four synthetic confections from the 1970s to still retain cultural cachet in the 21st century, alongside Spangles, Monster Munch, and Son of my Father by Chicory Tip. Hey, does anybody remember, etc. Palace have had the better of the coffee-infused rivalry in recent times, winning on their previous two visits to Falmer. Brighton are in good form, though, having won two of their last three, so this stramash is nicely unpredictable, not least because the last three meetings have all ended with perception-bending, 90th-minute goals, Brighton scoring a couple of equalisers and Palace securing an absurd smash-and-grab win last February after being thoroughly played off the park. Hey, does anybody remember Mr Roy? A big match all right, yet it’s just a mere curtain raiser for some proper humdingers to follow over the next couple of days. Aston Villa look to play Manchester United off the park for the second time in five days, with a view to maybe getting something out of it this time. In theory, Spurs and Arsenal contest the north London derby, a cauldron at the best of times, never mind with both teams dreaming of a seventh- or even sixth-place finish this year. There are two big relegation six-pointers between Newcastle and Watford, and Norwich and Rafa’s Everton. And perhaps best of all, Chelsea travel to Manchester City, who will wrap up England’s latest anti-climactic title race at approximately 12.47pm on Saturday, when John Stones rolls in their fourth. Yep, big weekend, coming right up (which, for the record, is our stock closing gambit for when we don’t have a pay-off). LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Scott Murray from 8pm for hot Premier League MBM coverage of Brighton 0-0 Crystal Palace. QUOTE OF THE DAY “Thanks to God and the work of these heroes I was saved” – former Mali international Ousmane Coulibaly, who suffered a heart attack on the pitch during a Qatar Stars League match last week, thanks Al Rayyan’s James Rodríguez and Al Wakrah teammate Saoud Al Khater for helping to save his life. FIVER LETTERS “Re: yesterday’s Fiver letters. Reading the first English team to score seven more than once away from home since 1895-96? I must have dreamt Hereford United beating Forest Green Rovers 7-1 and Dagenham and Redbridge 9-0 in 2003-04. Just the 91 points and 103 goals that season, and they still didn’t get promoted” – Neil Turner. “Anwar El Ghazi, completing his move to Everton, says that he wants to put a smile on the faces of the club’s fans. Shortly before Macbeth murders him, King Duncan, reflecting on the treacherous Thane of Cawdor, says: ‘There is no art to find the mind’s construction in the face.’ When would a smile on an Evertonian’s face have anything to do with what is going on on the pitch? Are FSG planning to move Liverpool FC to Boston?” – Hanford Woods. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Neil Turner. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Burnley v Leicester has been postponed after a Covid outbreak, collective-knack and Chris Wood hotfooting it to Newcastle left the Clarets short of players. It’s not going well for Tunisia at Afcon: having been left in a red-hot funk by bizarre timekeeping in their defeat by Mali, six of their players have now tested positive for Covid. Pre-tournament favourites Senegal and Guinea are closing in on the Afcon knockout stages after their 0-0 stalemate. Bayern Munich’s Alphonso Davies has stopped training due to a mild inflammation of the heart. Mikel Arteta has been paying tribute to Arsenal’s “spirit, fight and brotherhood” [subs, please check – Fiver Ed] after his Granit Xhaka-impacted 10 men drew 0-0 at Anfield in the Worthington Cup semi-final first leg. Meanwhile, Jürgen Klopp says that “scoring” is the only way to stop his ears being burned by questions about Mo Salah’s Afcon absence. English clubs splashed more ca$h on international transfers than those of any country and completed seven of the 10 biggest deals in 2021, according to Fifa number-crunchers. Ralph Hassenhütl is enjoying a test-drive of Chelsea’s Armando Broja so much that he wants him to stay in the go-faster stripes of Southampton. “As long as he is our player, we will have as much fun with him [as possible] and make him better,” he vroomed. And Crystal Palace have offered to subsidise the coach travel costs for Hartlepool fans coming to Selhurst Park for their FA Cup fourth-round tie. “This kind of gesture restores your faith in the football family,” trilled Hartlepool suit Stephen Hobin. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Get your listening gear around the latest Football Weekly Extra podcast. STILL WANT MORE? Ten things to look out for in the Premier League this weekend, right here. Arsenal’s 10 men seized their chance to be heroes … just for one day, croons Jonathan Liew. Steven Pye’s DeLorean takes us back to 1989 and a time when Manchester United were in even more of a state than they are now as they prepare to face Aston Villa. Is Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang Turin-bound? Is Youri Tielemans off to Arsenal? Probably not, but they make a good headline for the Mill. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! ‘YOU WANNA RUMBLE IN MY JUNGLE? I’LL TAKE YOU ON’Last month, with storm clouds gathering over Windsor as the Duke of York pinned his hopes on a US judge dismissing the sexual assault civil lawsuit against him, his ex-wife, Sarah, Duchess of York, was appearing on Italian TV. Promoting her Mills &amp; Boon novel Her Heart for a Compass, Fergie – as she is known after her birth name, Sarah Ferguson – was effusive in her praise for Prince Andrew. “I completely stand by Andrew 100%,” she told the talk show Porta a Porta. The happiest day of her life, she continued, was her wedding day back in 1986, “when I married the best man in the world”. As character witnesses go, this was gleaming testimony, especially coming from a woman who has been divorced from her husband for 25 years. Today, permanently stripped of his military affiliations and royal patronages, banished from the official royal court, and facing an unforgiving legal battle to clear his name – which he has pledged to continue – there appear to be few Andrew can turn to for unconditional support. But one who has remained steadfast throughout is his ex-wife. Once described, by the duchess herself, as “the happiest divorced couple in the world”, the relationship between the duke and duchess is undoubtedly unconventional. “Who knows what the relationship really is. It seems utterly bizarre,” said the royal author Penny Junor. They still live together – when she is in the UK – at Royal Lodge, the grace-and-favour former home of the Queen Mother in Windsor, on which Andrew has a 75-year lease. After all, with its reported 30 rooms and 21 secluded acres, there is plenty of space. Though to call it her home, Ferguson told the Sunday Times last year, “would be presumptuous”. They happily holidayed together with their daughters, Beatrice and Eugenie, leading to constant speculation of reconciliation and remarriage – rumours that grew after the death of the Duke of Edinburgh, said to be no fan of the duchess. Asked directly in August on the ITV show Loose Women if a rekindling of romance was on the cards, she brushed it aside. “Oh, goodness me,” she responded, “you’re all fairytale, you’ve all got your wands out. Andrew and I remain steadfast, in the past we’ve been co-parenting and now we’re co-grandparenting.” Junor said: “She has not just stood silently by his side. She actually speaks out in favour of him.” The duke now seemed an isolated figure, added Junor. “He used to be a great partygoer. Those days do seem to be gone. He cuts a sad and lonely figure these days, I think. We see him out riding but always on his own. It’s the daughters I feel most sorry for, being caught up in all this. It must be really difficult for them.” It is not the first storm the couple have ridden out together. They separated in 1992, months before photographs of the duchess having her toes sucked by her financial adviser John Bryan appeared on the front pages while she was at Balmoral with the Queen – an “excruciatingly embarrassing” moment, she has since said. Then in 2010, the financially challenged duchess was caught in a sting by the now defunct News of the World, allegedly trying to sell an undercover journalist access to Andrew for £500,000, for which she was forced to issue an apology for her “serious lapse of judgment”. In 2012, another grovelling apology for a “gigantic error of judgment on my behalf” followed revelations she had allowed the convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein to provide £15,000 to help pay off her debts. To the Evening Standard, she spoke of her contrition and how her actions had “inadvertently impacted on the man I admire most in the world, the duke”. She would “throw myself under a bus for him”, she continued, and she was “not going to stand back and let him take any more abuse from any suggestion or implications of impropriety”. Now Andrew is fighting for what is left of his reputation, already tarnished by his friendships with Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell, who was recently convicted of charges relating to the recruitment and grooming of teenage girls for Epstein. As he decides his next move to defend himself over claims – which he denies – by Virginia Giuffre that she was forced into having sex with him when she was 17 and had been trafficked by Epstein, one person he can count on, it seems, is his ex-wife. Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999 in England and Wales, 0808 801 0302 in Scotland, or 0800 0246 991 in Northern Ireland. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlThis was the week in which the Tory party – from cabinet ministers down to grassroots associations – started to believe that the end was nigh for Boris Johnson’s premiership. “The problem is that he has in no way accepted that himself,” says one senior Tory adviser with knowledge of the prime minister’s inner circle. And so began a period of what one Conservative minister described as prime ministerial “purgatory” – the gap between a leader being politically done for and the moment of their stepping down. Downing Street had hoped to draw a line under the partygate scandal in the new year, after a grim run of headlines and mutinous mood in the Tories before Christmas. But after only a brief respite, the bad news for Johnson resurfaced on Monday night when ITV revealed that Johnson had attended a “bring your own booze” social event in the garden of No 10 to which 100 people were invited. On Wednesday, he had to say sorry in the House of Commons, while several prominent Tories called for his resignation. By Friday morning, Downing Street even found itself apologising to the Queen after it emerged that two other parties were held in No 10 on the eve of Prince Philip’s funeral, while the prime minister was away at Chequers. However, some of those who have spoken to Johnson this week say he is not in a mood to give in to what many Tory MPs now see as inevitable. One person present at cabinet on Tuesday said the mood in No 10 was “total denial” about the seriousness of the situation that Johnson faces. Describing a “bizarre” and “farcical” virtual meeting, they said not a single cabinet minister mentioned the political peril that Johnson is facing, as Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, gave a presentation on the economy, and Sajid Javid, the health secretary, an update on Omicron. The fact that no one was willing to confront the prime minister about how he will dig his way out of the current hole may indicate that cabinet colleagues have already turned their minds to whatever is next – and which of them is best placed to succeed him. However, while most Tory MPs now believe Johnson will be gone before the next election, there is heated disagreement about the best timing for his departure. The clearest way of challenging the prime minister would be for 50 or so MPs to hand in letters of no confidence in him to the 1922 Committee of backbenchers. But some of Johnson’s opponents are worried there is a risk that he could still, despite everything that has happened, secure enough votes among his colleagues, which would mean he would be safe for another year. MPs said another part of the reason for delaying a challenge would be that the leadership teams of possible opponents – such as Sunak, Liz Truss, Jeremy Hunt and Javid – do not yet feel completely ready for a contest. They may look at the economic pain on the cost of living about to be inflicted on the country this spring and believe that it would be better to keep Johnson in place for a while longer to “suck up that unpopularity”, said one MP. A no confidence vote would only be likely to succeed with the tacit support of cabinet leadership candidates and the MPs on their list of supporters. Then there are the veteran MPs who have seen prime ministers weather some terrible times and believe the party should hold fire until they have seen whether public anger subsides and the polls settle again, potentially using the local elections as a barometer. Others disagree and believe that it would be harmful to have a lame duck prime minister in place for much longer, and wrongheaded to risk the loss of council seats, arguing that the moment of reckoning should come sooner. This caucus – comprising many more centrist Tories as well as some 2017 and 2019ers worried about their seats – are pushing for a challenge after the publication of Sue Gray’s report into the parties at No 10 during lockdown, which could be published at the end of next week. MPs said there will be “phone calls and Zooms” in the next few days where they work out their strategy and whether that is the right moment to seek a confidence vote in Johnson’s leadership. Many MPs are also using the weekend to sound out their constituents and associations. One 2019 Tory MP, Lee Anderson, sent out a message asking people for their views, with a survey of options for people to complete, asking: “a) He has done wrong and apologised. It is time to move on. b) He has done wrong and should go. c) He has done wrong and should have a six-month departure plan.” Setting out his own position, Anderson said: “Personally, I would not back anyone who has knowingly done wrong but I also realise that our country is at a critical point in beating the virus.” Other Tory MPs have written to constituents saying they believe Johnson’s position would be untenable if the Gray report finds serious wrongdoing. But in private, some MPs believe the bar is lower and that he could be pushed out if any new revelations emerge in the Gray report that implicate him in the partying culture. There is also a fear that photos, videos or new disclosures could appear at any time in the media. While backbenchers may be the ones to implement a challenge, the mood of the cabinet will be key. The least supportive has been Sunak, who issued a statement backing his apology but was marked by its absence of any other supportive comments. But several cabinet ministers still believe Johnson may still be able to find way of turning things around. His greatest defenders among senior colleagues have been Priti Patel, the home secretary, and Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary. Others are reserving judgment until they see how he reacts over the next week or so – and particularly in relation to whether he will show he is willing to overhaul his operation. Colleagues accept that he is a “campaigner, not a manager”, and that he needs better support in No 10, says one cabinet minister. “Boris is staring disaster in the face in a way that he hasn’t done before in his premiership,” he says. “But if anyone on the planet can come back from this, it’s Boris. He does have the characteristics that defy normal expectation.”The 66-1 success of Boreham Bill in last season’s Lanzarote Hurdle at Kempton Park was a skinner for the bookies but this has generally been a good race for punters since the trip was extended in 2007, with lightly raced, improving hurdlers holding a clear edge over more experienced handicappers. Marie’s Rock, Gelino Bello and Green Book all arrive with the right profile for Saturday’s renewal, and represent big-name stables that have sent out a Lanzarote winner within the last six years. Jamie Snowden’s Up For Parol (2.40), though, has as strong a chance as any and seems to have crept in slightly under the radar at around 8-1. Like several recent winners of this race, Up For Parol had an underwhelming stab at chasing earlier in the campaign, but put up a career-best on his return to hurdles at Haydock in December and is just 6lb higher now. He has yet to race over this trip but is bred to improve for the step up and won a three-mile point-to-point in Ireland as a four-year-old. Warwick 1.18 Two comfortable wins have seen Brave Seasca take a 16lb hike in the ratings but he had plenty in hand at Ascot last time out and a swift hat-trick is likely. Kempton 1.32 Foxboro might well have won but for a last-fence mistake at Wincanton in December and he should go close off a 1lb higher mark here. Warwick 1.50 A 5lb penalty is unlikely to be enough to stop Threeunderthrufive notching up a fourth win from five starts over fences. Kempton 2.05 All four runners go to post with a serious chance but Eldorado Allen has consistency on his side and showed up well behind First Flow at Huntingdon last time. Warwick 2.25 A top-class renewal of this Grade Two novice hurdle with Stag Horn, rated 103 on the Flat, marginally preferred at around 9-2 to back up a successful hurdling debut at Hereford in December. He won with something to spare there and has been gelded since. Warwick 3.00 After 452 days off Padleyourowncanoe made a solid return to action over hurdles last month. Dan Skelton’s runner had promising course form over fences for Colin Tizzard in 2020 and should go well at around 7-1. Kempton 3.15 More negatives than positives for several of these, so perhaps the veteran Double Shuffle, who has an excellent record over track and trip, may be up to repeating his win in this race – off a 1lb lower mark – last year. Warwick 3.35 Sporting John was only fourth when sent off at 5-4 at Cheltenham last time but the first two home there have franked the form since and he remains on a fair mark based on his win in November.The UK economy surpassed its pre-pandemic level for the first time in November ahead of the rapid spread of the Omicron variant and the government’s warnings about workplace and social gatherings. Official figures showed GDP grew by 0.9% in the penultimate month of 2021, making the UK economy 0.7% larger than it was before March 2020 and the first lockdown. The US, France, Denmark and Sweden are among the other rich countries to have recovered all the lost ground during the pandemic while Germany, Italy and Spain have yet to pass the pandemic milestone. City economists had expected an expansion of only 0.4% and said November was likely to prove a high point in 2021, with the figures collected by the Office for National Statistics coming shortly before the Omicron variant took hold, exacerbating worker shortages as thousands were off sick. It followed growth of 0.2% in October. A surge in early Christmas shopping provided one of the biggest boosts to activity in November, though all sectors, including manufacturing and services, reported expanding output. With the HS2 high-speed rail line starting to make some headway and housebuilding able to benefit from a mild November, the construction industry increased by 3.5%, reversing a trend of contraction dating back to May. The continuing increase in health services as a proportion of economic activity was another factor supporting the rise in GDP, the ONS said. Against a backdrop of rising inflation and the expectation of further interest rate rises by the Bank of England, business groups warned the economy remained weak. Suren Thiru, the head of economics at the British Chambers of Commerce, said: “Stronger growth in November is likely to be followed by a modest fall in output in December and January, as consumer caution to socialise and spend, and mounting staff absences sparked by Omicron and plan B limit activity. “While the UK economy should rebound once plan B measures are lifted, surging inflation and persistent supply chain disruption may mean that the UK’s economic growth prospects remain under pressure for much of 2022.” Analysts said that while the economy had struggled to grow since the summer, there was the prospect of a return to stronger growth in 2022, albeit with consumer spending constrained by the rising cost of living. ONS officials said there was little evidence from early indicators that many shops and restaurants were forced close in December, though business lobby groups suffered a collapse in bookings that prompted the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, to offer £1bn in extra support. Ana Boata, the head of economic research at the credit insurer Euler Hermes, said the consumer had come to the rescue of an economy still suffering the effects of Covid-19 “We expect GDP growth to hit 4.4% this year, followed by a further 2.6% increase in 2023. It’s not all plain sailing, though. Wages will go up about 3.5% above the pre-crisis average in 2022, in reaction to price rises across the full economy. “Despite the Bank of England expected to raise rates at least twice this year to keep inflation in check, households’ real purchasing power will suffer, leaving excess savings to prop up consumer spending levels.” Sunak welcomed the news that Britain’s economy was larger than before the pandemic. “It’s amazing to see the size of the economy back to pre-pandemic levels in November – a testament to the grit and determination of the British people,” he said.The extent of the problems Ralf Rangnick has inherited at Manchester United need to be put in perspective. The fortunate 1-0 win over Aston Villa in the FA Cup on Monday was the latest example of how disjointed the team are but also meant United have lost once in 10 games under their interim manager. Scoring goals remains a problem but the return of Cristiano Ronaldo and Jadon Sancho from injury should give them more of a cutting edge. Villa will be keen to avenge their Cup defeat and Steven Gerrard is expected to give Philippe Coutinho and Lucas Digne debuts. Stephen Hollis Saturday 5.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Villa Park Last season Aston Villa 1 Manchester United 3 Referee David Coote This season G11 Y53 R2 5 cards/game Odds H 2-1 A 19-13 D 13-5 ASTON VILLA Subs from Steer, Sinisalo, Tuanzebe, Philogene-Bidace, Carney Chukwuemeka, Archer, Young, Hause, Targett Doubtful Young (ankle) Injured Nakamba (knee, Apr), Bailey (thigh, unknown) Suspended McGinn (one match) Unavailable Traoré, Trezeguet (both at Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y40 R1 Form LWLWLL Leading scorer Watkins 5 MANCHESTER UNITED Subs from Heaton, Henderson, Shoretire, Mata, Hannibal, Mengi, Lingard, Elanga, Martial, Jones, Wan-Bissaka, Lindelöf, Rashford, Van de Beek, Bailly Doubtful None Injured Pogba (thigh, Feb) Suspended McTominay (one match), Shaw (one match) Discipline Y42 R2 Form WWWDWL Leading scorer Ronaldo 8A comprehensive review is to be held into how a suspected Chinese agent was able to get so close to senior British politicians, the security minister, Damian Hinds, has said. MI5, the domestic intelligence agency, on Thursday took the unusual step of circulating a warning to MPs accusing Christine Lee – a prominent London-based solicitor – of being engaged in “political interference activities” on behalf of China’s ruling communist regime. The Chinese embassy rejected the claims, accusing the authorities of “smearing and intimidation” against the Chinese community in the UK, while a Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson said the British were “too obsessed with James Bond 007 movies”. However, Hinds said the security services had been aware of Lee’s activities – including channelling funds to British politicians in an attempt to secure influence – for “some time”. The Times had reported on her activities in 2017, including her extensive payments to the office of Barry Gardiner then the shadow energy minister. It is not clear what prompted M15 to make its surprise statement on Thursday, but, asked about the scale of Chinese influence in the UK, Hinds said on Friday: “We’re learning all the time, all the implications, of course, have to be able to be taken into account.” Much of Hinds’s broadcast round was diverted to questions about further revelations of Downing Street parties, dashing any hopes in government circles that MI5’s warning might draw the media to a new subject. Nevertheless Conservative MPs tried to make political capital out of the revelations, suggesting both Labour and the Liberal Democrats’ approach to Chinese investment in the Hinkley Point C nuclear plant, sealed in 2015, may have been influenced by the Chinese. In reality, Gardiner is on the record saying Hinkley was not essential to UK energy needs. The Conservative MP Marcus Fysh claimed: “Chinese government spy agencies have been massively funding frontline Labour and Liberal Democrat political operations in the UK. Energy policy directed by Ed Davey the Liberal Democrat leader and supported by Barry Gardiner has greatly favoured China and this needs to be addressed.” The trade minister Greg Hands said: “This is extremely concerning. I was trade minister. Barry Gardiner was our Labour shadow, and we used to brief him confidentially on complex and sensitive international trade negotiations which certainly would have been of interest to the Chinese government.” Davey’s Kingston constituency party received £5,000 from the Chinese in February 2013 when he was energy secretary. Sir Michael Rake, a member of the board of Huawei UK, also donated £5,000 to Davey in 2020. Gardiner received more than £500,000 from Christine Lee over six years to cover staffing costs in his office as well as employing her son as his diary manager. The son quit his job on Thursday in the wake of the revelations. Lee also received an award from Theresa May when she was prime minister, for her work on a project promoting good relations between the Chinese and British communities in the UK, and was a VIP guest when David Cameron hosted President Xi Jinping in London. Her connections with the Chinese embassy were widely known. Gardiner said he had liaised with the security services for many years regarding his contacts with Lee but had only learned on Thursday that she had been engaged in “illegal activity”. Gardiner had been a supporter of the Chinese investment in UK nuclear power plants, but the current Labour frontbench opposes the potential investment even more than the government. Tim Loughton, one of the four MPs subject to Chinese sanctions said it was “deeply worrying that agents of the Chinese Communist party have been given access to the mother of parliaments and funding the offices of selected politicians. We urgently need an exhaustive audit of where they have bought influence or inveigled their way into virtually every aspect of the U.K. and can then take appropriate measures to roll back that influence.” It is unlikely that Lee will face charges, since the home secretary, Priti Patel, has said her activities fell below the criminal threshold. In the security service interference alert (SSIA) sent to MPs and peers, MI5 said Lee “acted covertly” in co-ordination with the United Front Work Department (UFWD) of the Chinese Communist party (CCP). It said she had been “engaged in the facilitation of financial donations to political parties, parliamentarians, aspiring parliamentarians, and individuals seeking political office in the UK, including facilitating donations to political entities on behalf of foreign nationals”. The Electoral Commission will be asked to investigate whether these donations breached electoral law since they had in reality come from a foreign power, and not a British citizen. In Beijing, the foreign ministry spokesperson Wang Wenbin dismissed the claims, accusing the UK government of making “groundless allegations and hyping the China threat” to serve its own purposes. “It is highly irresponsible to make sensational remarks based on hearsay evidence and certain individual’s conjecture,” he said. The Chinese ambassador was asked for an explanation when he met UK diplomats at the Foreign Office in what is being described as a routine meeting. News of the alert became known when the Conservative MP Iain Duncan Smith, a frequent critic of China, revealed the Commons Speaker had written to MPs about the MI5 warning.The government is to push ahead with changes to languages teaching in schools that will result in pupils in England memorising lists of 1,700 words to pass GCSEs in Spanish, French or German. The decision by the Department for Education (DfE) comes despite opposition from language associations, teaching unions and headteachers at state and independent schools, as well as concerns it could cause an exodus of languages teachers from the profession. Simon Hyde, the general secretary of the Headmasters’ and Headmistresses’ Conference of independent schools, said his members feared the narrow focus on grammar and vocabulary would put pupils off studying modern foreign languages (MFL). “This model will not give students the confidence in their language, both at examination level and as a life skill, to take forward into further studies, careers and personal endeavours,” Hyde said. The initial proposals, published in a consultation last year, were criticised for stripping out cultural topics from the proposed course content and replaced with lists of words to be memorised. While the DfE has made some concessions in its final proposals, one academic dismissed the revisions as “a nod” to the earlier criticisms. The Association for Language Learning said it was “very disappointed” the DfE had not taken up an invitation to work collaboratively with subject associations, exam boards and headteachers on a further review of GCSE content and development. School leaders said they were grateful for the DfE’s decision to delay the introduction of the reformed curriculum until September 2024, meaning that the first GCSEs with the new content would be sat in spring 2026, to be taken by pupils currently in year 7. The DfE said its consultation received 1,644 responses, with the majority “from language teachers agreeing with the proposals”. Robin Walker, the schools minister for England, said studying languages was “hugely important” for the global economy. “That’s why we want more young people to take up modern language GCSEs, and these evidence-based changes aim to do just that – making these qualifications more well-rounded and accessible, and helping more young people to enjoy learning languages.” The DfE said students will be assessed on 1,200 words or “word families” – for example, counting grand and grande in French as the same word – at foundation-tier GCSE and 1,700 words or “word families” in higher tier, mainly taken from the 2,000 most common words used in a language’s conversations and writing, as well as grammar and pronunciation. But Katrin Kohl, a professor of German at the University of Oxford, said: “There’s no pedagogic precedent for using vocabulary frequency as the key driver for subject content, and as has been widely emphasised, the approach isn’t tested at GCSE level. “Vocabulary frequency is a statistical measure that is context-dependent, not absolute. It’s hard to see how the subject aims can be met with a narrow range of vocabulary that has been selected on a one-size-fits-all statistical basis, that varies across languages and that is focused on formal language used by adults.” Jim Milton, an emeritus professor of applied linguistics at Swansea University, said the focus on most common words ignored the fact that less frequently used words supply most of the content when people communicate. “I once arrived in Outer Mongolia at a hotel where everything was written in Chinese and no one spoke English. I wanted a cold beer but I did not know the words for this. After inventive use of my Chinese, much circumlocution, and some acting out, I was served an omelette,” Milton said.What happened on Friday? Another extraordinary day in the Novak Djokovic saga began at 5.52pm local time when Australia’s minister for immigration, Alex Hawke, exerted his personal powers to cancel the men’s world No 1’s visa for the second time. In a statement Hawke said he had done so “on health and good order grounds, on the basis that it was in the public interest to do so”. Hawke’s decision also superseded a federal court’s decision on Monday that had allowed Djokovic to stay in Australia after he had his visa initially revoked on 6 January. However three hours later the parties were back in the federal circuit court, again in front of Judge Kelly for an urgent court directions hearing, which finished shortly after 11pm. What emerged from that court hearing? Three things. First it was confirmed that Djokovic will meet immigration officials at 8am local time on Saturday, after which he could decide to leave Australia – although such a scenario appears unlikely. If the 34-year-old stays, his legal team and the Australian government will then face each other in court on Sunday morning for a third time in a full hearing. Finally, Djokovic’s lawyer also revealed that the Australian government wants the Serb deported as they believe his presence could “excite anti-vaccination sentiment” – a claim he described as “patently irrational”. Is that really the crux of the Australian government’s case? Probably not. As Prof Jack Anderson, the director of sports law at the University of Melbourne, explains: “We only got a glimpse of the lawyers’ arguments on Friday. There is no doubt that Djokovic’s lawyers are cherry picking, or reinterpreting, the minister’s reasoning. Of course that’s their job, but we haven’t seen the minister’s reasoning in full yet.” What will Sunday’s hearing come down to? “In some ways it is pretty straightforward,” says Anderson. “The minister has said that he’s cancelling Djokovic’s visa in the public interest and on health and safety grounds, and under the law he has very broad discretion. “That leaves Djokovic’s team with a very narrow judicial review application to make. They will try to find a way to argue that elements of the minister’s decision are not reasonable – and, in fact, are so irrational that it should be quashed and Djokovic’s visa reinstated.” Is there any danger that the case will spill over into next week? Highly unlikely. As Anderson points out, Djokovic’s legal team asked for the case to be heard on Sunday, the government accepted this, and both sides have agreed on an expedited hearing where they will have an hour to present their arguments before a judge decides whether Djokovic can stay or go. And that will be it. What is the most likely outcome? Good question. “It’s more likely than not that Djokovic has to leave Australia,” says Anderson. “In some ways all the Australian government has to do is show that they acted reasonably and rationally. The case is not about whether a court should have done something differently. It’s whether Hawke has properly instructed himself on the facts and the evidence. “That makes it easier for the government side. But Djokovic’s legal team is very sharp. And if you look back at the original decision, it was not something that people imagined would happen. You would expect, looking at judicial reviews of migration cases in Australia generally, that the government will survive this one. Although we’ve never quite had an application like this.” Where does the public stand? A recent poll found that 83% want Djokovic deported. “The slow drip-drip of information about Djokovic’s behaviour in Serbia after his positive test on 16 December and the breaches of federal regulations by entering Spain has had an impact,” explains Anderson. “That is balanced by an embarrassment over the way the Australian government has done this. But definitely public sentiment is not in favour of Djokovic.”Jimmy Kimmel On Thursday evening, Jimmy Kimmel celebrated the arrest of a far-right militia leader and 10 others for their role in the 6 January attack on the Capitol for charges of seditious conspiracy. “Sedition is a very serious charge,” Kimmel explained. “It’s similar to treason. “The definition of seditious conspiracy is essentially two or more people conspiring to overthrow the government by force,” he added. “You know how your mother used to say, ‘if your friend jumped off a bridge, would you jump off one too?’ These are the people who answered yes.” The most high-profile arrest was of Stewart Rhodes, the 56-year-old, eye patch-wearing leader of the far-right Oath Keepers and a “cross between Captain Hook and Captain Crunch”, Kimmel joked. “The charges were a bit of a surprise because apparently it’s very difficult to prove sedition,” he noted, “although he did say that anyone opposing Donald Trump should expect a ‘bloody, bloody civil war’, so how hard could it be, really?” In its statement, the justice department described the Oath Keepers as “a large but loosely organised collection of individuals, some of whom are associated with militias”. In other news, a new study found that the average American spends one-third of their waking hours on a mobile device. “Am I the only one who thinks that sounds low?” Kimmel wondered. “Pretty sure I was playing Wordle in my sleep last night.” Stephen Colbert On the Late Show, Stephen Colbert also cheered the arrest of 11 people associated with the 6 January insurrection for seditious conspiracy, which is “no slap on the wrist”, he said. The group faces a maximum of 20 years in prison. “That’s pretty bad, I gotta say, but somehow it feels like it should be more?” Colbert said. “Like if you tried to take the government down, you should go away for longer than one Billie Eilish.” Seditious conspiracy can be a difficult charge to prove, but the justice department offered evidence that in the run-up to 6 January, Rhodes called on members to “stock up on ammo” and prepare for a “full-on war in the streets”. “And a war was there, and it’s a war that they lost,” Colbert said. “Finally, they’re charging people with the sedition we saw with our own eyes on live TV. And hopefully one day the feds will learn the identity of that shadowy figure who was the president who told them to do it.” While the charges started to restore Colbert’s faith in the justice department, he was still losing it with the supreme court, which voted along ideological lines, 6-3, on Thursday to block Biden’s vaccine mandate for large employers. “What the hell, Supremes? What do you know about large employers?” he said. “You’re a small business with nine workers whose dress code is ankle-length Hefty bag!” In an unsigned opinion, the conservative majority argued: “Although Congress has indisputably given Osha [Occupational Safety and Health Administration] the power to regulate occupational dangers it has not given that agency the power to regulate public health more broadly.” “But Covid is an occupational danger!” Colbert responded. “Why do you think everyone who can is working from home? You think it’s because they want to see their spouse yell at the Roomba again?” Seth Meyers And on Late Night, Seth Meyers checked in on the House select committee’s investigation into the 6 January attack, which has called upon the House minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, to cooperate. McCarthy, who once condemned the rioters but has since re-allied with Trump, has stonewalled the committee. “No offense, but why are they asking Kevin McCarthy for information now?” Meyers wondered. “This committee moves slower than the courtship in a Jane Austen novel. Did you invite him via scented letter? With that said, I do hope they subpoena him, mainly because it would be so funny to see him try to hide from the process server.” It would be easy for McCarthy to hide, Meyers admitted, showing a photo of an all-white, all-male group of Republican lawmakers. “How could you pick him out of a crowd? Even Trump doesn’t know his name,” he said, pointing to a 2019 clip in which Trump called McCarthy “Steve” instead of Kevin. “Can’t blame Trump for that one. He looks like a Steve to me, too. If he were a character in Guess Who? that shit would be impossible.” It would be especially interesting to hear from McCarthy, Meyers continued, because just days after the riot, he told Congress that Trump “bears responsibility for Wednesday’s attack on Congress by mob rioters”. “Oh boy, I’m guessing McCarthy doesn’t want anyone to remember that video,” Meyers joked. “No, no, no, that wasn’t me! That was that asshole Steve. Hate that guy!”Manchester City would surely finish off Chelsea’s title challenge if they beat them, as each would have 16 games remaining but the champions a 13-point advantage. Pep Guardiola has further Covid cases to contend with, though the manager has not revealed who they are. Thomas Tuchel is rated highly by Guardiola and, after Chelsea’s 1-0 defeat in the reverse fixture, Tuchel’s plan to turn the champions over on their own turf should fascinate. Jamie Jackson Saturday 12.30pm BT Sport 1 Venue Etihad Stadium Last season Manchester City 1 Chelsea 2 Referee Craig Pawson This season G12 Y46 R1 3.92 cards/game Odds H 8-11 A 22-5 D 3-1 MANCHESTER CITY Subs from Steffen, Carson, Palmer, Fernandinho, Aké, Mbete, Delap, Sterling, Egan-Riley, Wilson-Ebrand, Lavia, McAtee, Gündogan, Stones, Zinchenko Doubtful Delap (match fitness) Injured None Suspended None Unavailable Mahrez (Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y30 R1 Form WWWWWW Leading scorers Silva, Sterling 7 CHELSEA Subs from Bettinelli, Bergstrom, Pulisic, Jorginho, Simons, Hall, Ziyech, Hudson-Odoi, Vale, Loftus-Cheek, Barkley, Saúl, Havertz Doubtful None Injured Chilwell (knee, unknown), James (hamstring, unknown), Christensen (Covid, unknown), Chalobah (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Unavailable Mendy (Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y33 R3 Form WDDWDD Leading scorer Mount 7And finally, European stock markets have closed on the red. The pan-European Stoxx 600 finished the day down around 1%, as worries about inflation and looming US interest rate rises weighed on stocks. For the week, it fell 1.1%, its biggest fall since the last full week of November (the Omicron selloff). In London, the FTSE 100 fared relatively well as traders welcomed the better-than-expected growth figures this morning. The blue-chip index closed 21 points lower at 7543, down 0.3% today, having its highest level in two years this week. Banks, utilities and oil companies were among today’s risers, including Standard Chartered (+2.3%), Lloyds (+1.85%), BP (+1.25%) and National Grid (+1.35%). Retailer B&amp;M were among the fallers, down 5.3%, after the family office of CEO Simon Arora, sold 40 million shares overnight at a 1.8% discount. Online grocer Ocado lost 4.9%, extending its losses as investors lost interest in low-profitability growth stocks That’s all for this week. Have a lovely weekend, we’ll be back on Monday. GW Simon French, chief economist at Panmure Gordon, has sent over a neat chart showing how the UK recovery from Covid was much faster than after the financial crisis. With the economy back at pre-pandemic levels within two years, he predicts the economic scarring will be low, at just 1% of GDP. Here’s a reminder of all today’s main stories, including the latest on the UK economy: The energy crisis: Crypto: And also Back in the UK, the NIESR thinktank has lifted its forecast for growth at the end of last year, thanks to the stronger-than-expected expansion in November. NIESR now expects GDP to rise by 1.2% in the October-December quarter, due to the “rapid and broad-based growth in November”. However, only expect growth of 0.6% in the first quarter of 2022. Rory Macqueen, principal economist at NIESR, says: “November 2021’s growth in GDP was broad-based, with output increasing almost across the board and transport and education among those returning to their pre-Covid output levels. Omicron is likely to have caused a significant slowing in growth in December, but the November data show little sign of headwinds from supply shortages: manufacturing and construction both enjoyed their strongest month-on-month growth since March 2021.” Another gloomy sign from the US economy - consumer confidence has weakened this month: In New York, the Dow Jones Industrial Average has opened lower as the slump in US retail sales in December worries investors. The Dow has dropped by 211 points to 35,902, down 0.6%. JP Morgan is the top faller, down 5% after beating profit expectations today (see earlier post), followed by American Express (-3.5%), Walt Disney (-2.7%) and Goldman Sachs (-2.5%). Tech stocks are holding up better, though, with the Nasdaq Composite up 0.3% in early trading, as a weaker economy may mean US interest rates don’t rise as fast. Back in the US, industrial production has slipped in another sign that the economy could be losing steam. Industrial production declined 0.1%, including a 0.3% drop in manufacturing output. Britain’s cost of living crisis is no laughing matter, something the energy suppliers are struggling to grasp. E.ON Next has apologised to thousands of British households after sending them a pair of socks alongside unwelcome advice on how to keep warm during the national energy crisis. My colleague Jillian Ambrose explains: E.ON Next said it was “incredibly sorry” after sending pairs of polyester socks branded with advice to turn heating down to help reduce carbon emissions to about 30,000 households which had taken part in an energy saving campaign last year. Many of the new E.ON Next sock-owners took to social media to criticise the “pitiful package” which was delivered to homes in the same week that Ovo Energy was forced to apologise for a customer letter urging households to cuddle a pet or perform star jumps to keep warm. British households face some of the highest energy bills on record this winter, due to record high market prices which could drive fuel poverty levels to the highest since records began. Age UK warned this week that millions of older people in the UK face an energy emergency, with some forced to switch off their heating, limit hot showers and live off soup and sandwiches to pay their increased energy bills. Back on Monday, energy supplier Ovo apologised and said it was “embarrassed” after it advised customers to keep their heatings bills low by “having a cuddle with your pets”, eating “hearty bowls of porridge” and “doing a few star jumps”. The slide in December US retail spending could discourage the US Federal Reserve from tightening policy quickly, suggests Craig Erlam, senior market analyst at OANDA: The US retail sales report was rather disappointing in December, perhaps a sign of consumers being more restrained as a result of omicron, not to mention early Christmas prep in anticipation of supply issues. Markets seem a little directionless after the release, which could be a sign that investors don’t know how to take the data. A strong report would have been positive for the economy but also feed into the argument for faster tightening, which is not being particularly well received at the moment. A few weak reports may, on the other hand, encourage caution from policymakers. Cryptocurrency firms bombarded Londoners with a record number of adverts on public transport during 2021, fuelling calls for a ban to prevent people being lured into risky investments. The surge in adverts for crypto assets, which are unregulated in the UK, has prompted concerns about the risk of addiction and financial harm, particularly given the wild volatility in the price of digital currencies such as bitcoin, which reached record highs last year before crashing again. It also emerged that Transport for London (TfL) has not implemented a ban on gambling adverts promised by the mayor, Sadiq Khan, allowing the industry to step up its marketing activity in the meantime. Records obtained by the Guardian under the Freedom of Information Act show that TfL services displayed 39,560 crypto adverts from 13 firms in the six months between April and September 2021. Major advertisers include the trading platform eToro, floki – “a “meme coin” named after Elon Musk’s dog – Crypto.com and Luno Money, whose campaign telling people it was “time to buy” bitcoin was banned by the advertising regulator for being “irresponsible”. More here. Meanwhile, Dogecoin, the cryptocurrency with a shiba inu dog meme, soared in value by 15% on Friday after the billionaire Elon Musk said it could be used to buy Tesla merchandise. The French government will force EDF, the state energy giant, to take an €8.4bn (£7bn) financial hit to protect households from rocketing energy costs by limiting bill hikes to 4% this year. The company lost a fifth of its market value on Friday after the French government set out plans to cap rising energy bills which include forcing EDF to sell electricity generated by its fleet of nuclear reactors to rival home suppliers at well below the current record high market prices. The move underlines pressure on governments across Europe to help households squeezed by the cost-of-living crisis. The UK chancellor, Rishi Sunak, has been accused of being “missing in action” over soaring energy bills. He has been in talks with MPs and companies to agree a package of measures to soften the blow of the national energy crisis, but no decisions have been made. Here’s the full story: Ouch! US retail sales fell by 1.9% in December, as worries over the Omicron variant, product shortages and rising inflation hit spending. That’s much weaker than expected and shows America’s consumers are under growing pressure. Inflation hit its highest level since 1982 in December, the pandemic escalated, and supply problems created shortages. Stripping out cars and gasoline, retail sales were down 2.5% in December - showing little festive cheer for retailers. Back in the UK, wage growth is lagging behind inflation despite the pick-up in growth. Data from jobs site Indeed shows a rise in advertised pay, but a slow start to new vacancies in the new year: BlackRock has become the first public asset manager to hit $10 trillion in assets, propelled by a surge in fourth-quarter flows into its exchange-traded funds. New York-based BlackRock has reported that assets grew by 15% during 2021 to reach over $10.01trn. BlackRock saw $540bn of total net inflows during the year, including $104bn into ETFs in the last three months of 2021, it says, a record for the world’s largest money manager. It benefitted from the boom in trading, and rising asset prices, last year, as people invested in actively managed funds and also passive vehicles that track the markets. Larry Fink, chair and chief executive, says: “BlackRock delivered the strongest organic growth in our history, even as our assets under management reached new highs. We generated $540 billion of net inflows in 2021, including an industry leading $267 billion of active net inflows. Fink adds that the firm is more diversified than ever before: Active strategies, including alternatives, contributed over 60% of 2021 organic base fee growth. Our industry-leading iShares ETF platform remained a significant growth driver with record flows of $306bn. Higher pay also ate into JP Morgan’s profits. “Noninterest expense” rose 11% to $17.9bn, largely due to higher compensation. Just in: Profits at JPMorgan Chase have dropped, but the Wall Street bank has still beaten forecasts. JP Morgan’s fourth quarter earnings came in at $3.33 per share, topping expectations for $3.01 per share, but down from $3.79 a year ago. Revenue came in at $30.35bn, also ahead of forecasts for $29.9bn. JP Morgan also took a $1.3bn benefit from releasing reserves set aside for loan losses that didn’t materialize. CEO Jamie Dimon explains: JPMorgan Chase reported solid results across our businesses benefiting from elevated capital markets activity and a pick up in lending activity as firmwide average loans were up 6%. The economy continues to do quite well despite headwinds related to the Omicron variant, inflation and supply chain bottlenecks. Credit continues to be healthy with exceptionally low net charge-offs, and we remain optimistic on U.S. economic growth as business sentiment is upbeat and consumers are benefiting from job and wage growth.” Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, says merger and activity deals helped boost JPM: Unprecedented M&amp;A activity helped boost global investment banking fees this quarter after a stellar year for deals and IPOs. Quarterly net interest income also grew by 3%, thanks to balance sheet growth with the bank pointing to further growth in NII for the year ahead on the back of higher rates and a pick-up in loan growth. However capital markets suffered with trading revenues falling 2% in equities and 16% in fixed income. However, JP Morgan’s shares are down 3% in pre-market trading, she adds: Pre-market price action points to a weaker print out of the gates, marking the sixth consecutive decline in its shares on earnings day. There has been a big run up for the sector to kick off the year with high expectations for these results with a lot of today’s positivity already baked into the cake. Many traders may have bought the rumour and sold the fact to avoid today’s event risk. The Hollywood blockbuster Spider-Man: No Way Home pulled in the cinema crowds in December, driving Cineworld’s box office revenues to almost 90% of pre-pandemic levels despite the rapid spread of Omicron over the festive season. The world’s second-largest cinema operator, the owner of the Cineworld and Regal Picturehouse chains in the UK and Regal Cinemas in the US, said that across its global business, box office and concession revenue hit 88% of 2019 levels in December. In the UK and Ireland revenues hit 89% of pre-pandemic levels, and 91% in the US. Cineworld credited the phenomenal success of the latest Spider-Man film, which has taken £80m in the UK despite the reintroduction of face masks in cinemas to curb the spread of Omicron days before its release and has become the only film to make more than $1.5bn (£1.1bn) globally since the pandemic began. Mooky Greidinger, the chief executive of Cineworld, said: “Spider-Man: No Way Home has shown the importance for studios of cinematic releases. “We are pleased to see continued strong demand among audiences for cinema experiences, supported by a slate of high-quality and high-performing movies.” The UK’s trade gap with the rest of the world widened in the three months to November, by £2.8bn to £9.3bn. The UK continued to import more from non-European countries than from the EU. In November alone, total imports of goods, excluding precious metals, increased by £2.0bn, due to an £800m increase in EU imports and a £1.1 billion rise in imports from non-EU countries. Exports lagged, falling by £300m due to drop in sales to non-EU countries. Thomas Sampson, associate professor at the LSE, says the Brexit free trade deal (the EU–UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement) has hit imports from the EU: The pound has hit its highest level against a basket of currencies since the EU referendum in 2016. The British pound’s trade-weighted index has risen to its highest level since June 24 2016, the day after the Brexit referendum vote. Reuters has the details: The Bank of England’s sterling exchange rate index measures the overall change in the trade-weighted exchange value of sterling, calculated by weighting together exchange rates adjusted for their trade relationships and is closely tracked by market participants. It rose to 83.288 on Thursday, jumping nearly 4% in over a month to vault over the highs seen last October. The BoE releases the data with a day’s lag. Sterling has been lifted by optimism over the economic recovery, as worries over Omicron’s long-term impact ease, and by expectations that UK interest rates will rise in 2022 to combat rising inflation. Dean Turner, economist at UBS Global Wealth Management, explains: Sterling has been the best performer amongst the G10 countries thus far in 2022, largely due to expectations of further interest rate hikes. With the other central banks, most notably the Fed, becoming more hawkish the pound may struggle to make further progress against the US dollar. Sterling strength is likely to be confined to currencies where central banks are more cautious, including the euro and the Swiss franc.” It has taken a year and a half but the UK economy has now regained the ground lost during the early stages of the Covid-19 pandemic. But as our economics editor Larry Elliott writes, Omicron has muddied the waters: A better than anticipated performance last November means national output is now 0.7% higher than it was in February 2020. Other countries reached this milestone sooner, with the US for example already operating well above its previous peak. Even so, Britain has experienced what economists call a V-shaped recession, with a precipitous drop in activity in March and April 2020 followed by a brisk – if occasionally interrupted – recovery. That pattern is explained by the nature of the Covid shock. Governments imposed lockdowns in an attempt to prevent the virus spreading, and once the restrictions were eased businesses that had been closed reopened and economies bounced back. The UK economy contracted by less during the financial crisis of 2008-09 than it did in 2020 but took much longer to regain the lost ground... Larry’s full analysis is here: Currys has trimmed its annual profit forecast after a shortage of goods ranging from PlayStation 5 consoles and Apple products to hairdryers resulted in a 5% fall in sales over the peak Christmas period. The UK’s biggest electrical retailer said that sales were hit by problems including the global chip shortage, which is affecting the supply of goods from TVs to appliances, the shipping of products and a drop in demand as households budgets become increasingly squeezed. “The technology market was challenging this Christmas, with uneven customer demand and supply disruption,” said Alex Baldock, the chief executive of Currys, which formerly traded as PC World, Carphone Warehouse and Dixons. “We have certainly had our hands full this Christmas with supply, not just of products but also of people, containers, chip sets, the full range.” Baldock has also warned that price rises are coming, telling reporters: “The direction is definitely inflationary. That’s one of the contributors ... also to the uncertainty in the outlook because consumers are keeping a close eye on the cost of living at the moment,”. Germany’s economy has yet to recover from the pandemic, new data shows. The Federal Statistical Office has reported that Germany’s economy grew by 2.7% last year, with growth hit by Covid-19 infections and restrictions imposed to fight the pandemic. That leaves Germany’s GDP still 2.0% lower in 2021 than in 2019, the year before the Covid-19 crisis began, after the economy plunged 4.6% in 2020. Dr. Georg Thiel, president of the Federal Statistical Office, says: “Despite the continuing pandemic situation, more delivery bottlenecks and material shortages, the German economy managed to recover from the sharp fall last year although the economic performance has not yet reached its pre-crisis level again.” Germany’s factory sector has been hit by supply chain issues, with semiconductor shortages hurting the car industry. Manufacturing, for instance, was 6.0% below the level of 2019 in 2021. UK construction sector output was the highest since September 2019 in November. The 3.5% jump in output was the best since March, with easing supply chain bottlenecks and mild and dry weather helping builders to press on with new work. The global surge in demand for energy could spark another three years of market volatility and record power plant pollution unless countries make major changes to how they generate electricity, the world’s energy watchdog has warned. The International Energy Agency recorded the steepest ever increase in electricity demand last year, which triggered blackouts in major economies and led to historic energy price highs and record emissions. The IEA’s annual electricity report said this could continue for another three years, with serious consequences for consumers and economies unless there is a faster structural change to the way electricity is produced. The IEA’s executive director, Fatih Birol, said: “Sharp spikes in electricity prices in recent times have been causing hardship for many households and businesses around the world and risk becoming a driver of social and political tensions,” The UK’s manufacturing sector had a decent November too. Manufacturing was the largest contributor to production growth, increasing by 1.1%, with positive growth in 9 out of the 13 manufacturing sub-sectors. Production of cars jumped by 7.8%, which suggests some of the supply chain problems hitting auto factories eased. But the mining sector shrank, due to a 2.3% fall in extraction of crude petroleum and natural gas -- which won’t have helped ease the energy crunch. This chart handily breaks down the growth in the UK’s service sector: The 2.5% jump in professional, scientific, and technical activities was driven by architectural and engineering work, with some companies saying they brought work forward. Postal and couriers were busy in November, helping the transport and storage sector to grow, due to early Christmas shopping and Black Friday demand. There was also growth of 14.6% in air transport, the sixth consecutive month of positive growth - but leaving the sector over 23% smaller than before Covid. It’s encouraging that all major sectors of the UK economy grew in November, as Thomas Pugh, UK Economist at RSM explains: The services sector grew by 0.7% m/m, boosted by stronger retail sales as consumers brought forward some Christmas shopping. But output in consumer-facing services are still 5.0% below their pre-coronavirus levels. The 1.1% jump in manufacturing output suggests that the easing of supply shortages, especially in the automotive manufacturing sector, which has been evident in some of the survey data recently is filtering through into higher output. Finally, construction output soared, growing by 3.5% m/m as an unusually dry November and easier access to materials allowed firms to ramp up production. The UK economy surpassed its pre-pandemic level for the first time in November after growing by 0.9% over the month, partly driven by an unexpected surge in early Christmas shopping. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) said a jump in restaurant bookings and a rapid turnaround in construction output were also behind the growth that took the size of the economy 0.7% above its level before March 2020. City economists had expected an expansion of only 0.4% and warned that November was likely to prove a high point in 2021, with the figures collected by the ONS coming shortly before the Omicron variant took hold, exacerbating worker shortages as thousands were off sick, and forcing the government to introduce plan B restrictions. It followed growth of 0.2% in October. The continuing increase in health services as a proportion of economic activity was another factor supporting the rise in GDP, the ONS said. Against a backdrop of rising inflation and the threat of further interest rates by the Bank of England, business groups warned the economy remained weak. Suren Thiru, the head of economics at the British Chambers of Commerce, said: “Stronger growth in November is likely to be followed by a modest fall in output in December and January, as consumer caution to socialise and spend, and mounting staff absences sparked by Omicron and plan B limit activity. “While the UK economy should rebound once plan B measures are lifted, surging inflation and persistent supply chain disruption may mean that the UK’s economic growth prospects remain under pressure for much of 2022.” The squeeze on household budgets from rising inflation will weigh on the economy this year, agrees James Smith, research director at the Resolution Foundation: “Today’s GDP data show an economy growing robustly on the eve of omicron, with a welcome return to pre-pandemic levels of monthly output as sectors such as retail grew rapidly. “But more timely data show that consumer-facing services like hospitality hit a brick wall in December and January, as families become more cautious in the face of rising cases. This, combined with rising inflation and soaring energy bills, means we may need to work back towards this November peak of output in early 2022.” Growth is likely to slow this year, predicts Yael Selfin, chief economist at KPMG UK, after the UK hit a ‘milestone’ in November. Rising taxes and borrowing costs, as well as elevated inflation, will squeeze households’ purchasing power, while the lingering effects of supply chain bottlenecks together with a persistent shortage of labour could constrain production this year. “Despite the growing threat of Covid, the UK economy was back on track in November led by professional scientific and technical activities as well as transport and storage services. GDP grew by 0.9% to reach a level last seen before the pandemic. “Strong retail sales show the growing importance of November pre-Christmas sales to the holiday season, especially as December was marred by rising infections due to the Omicron variant. Elsewhere, manufacturing activity showed signs of easing supply tensions, while services built on October’s strong momentum.” The hit from Omicron may mean the UK economy temporarily falls back below its pre-pandemic levels in January. Paul Dales, chief UK economist at Capital Economics, says November’s 0.9% growth was impressive, as the economy gained momentum.... but has taken a knock since. The increase was mostly due to a 1.1% m/m rise in manufacturing output, a 3.5% m/m leap in construction output and a 2.5% m/m gain in professional/scientific activities. It seems that an easing in shortages contributed to the first two, with car output rising by 7.8% m/m and construction materials reportedly easier to source (although the unusually dry weather probably helped too). And the rise in the third was apparently due to architectural/engineering activities being brought forward from December. Accommodation (+0.5% m/m), arts/entertainment (+1.2% m/m) and education (+1.4% m/m) all performed well too. But output in those three areas probably fell back in December and perhaps January too due to the effects of the government’s Plan B restrictions, staff absences due to Omicron isolation/illness and some consumer caution. Dales has pencilled in a 0.5% m/m decline in GDP for both December and January. Overall, GDP grew by 1.1% in the three months to November 2021, reflecting the strong performance of the services sector, the ONS says: Administrative and support service activities, human health and social work activities and transport and storage were the three largest contributors to the services sector growth. The UK’s surge in growth in November has unfortunately been overtaken by the Omicron variant, cautions Alpesh Paleja, CBI lead economist. Supply chain problems, and the cost of living crisis, are also weighing on growth, Paleja explains: “While it’s good that economic growth picked up in November, the data has been overtaken by events. Activity is very likely to have taken a hit in December, as the spread of the Omicron variant and subsequent restrictions disrupted operations in certain sectors. “As we kick off the new year, the near-term outlook is also clouded by additional challenges: shortages of labour – exacerbated by sickness absence, supply chain disruption and a cost of living crunch for households. “Implementing Plan B in December was the right thing to do, but with Covid clearly here to stay, the Government must now act to prevent the need for further restrictions on activity. This includes providing clearer forward guidance to support business adaptation, prioritising mass-testing over mass self-isolation, and ensuring that travel controls are proportionate so that the UK remains open to the rest of the world.” Chancellor of the Exchequer, Rishi Sunak, has welcomed the news that Britain’s economy is larger than before the pandemic: “It’s amazing to see the size of the economy back to pre-pandemic levels in November – a testament to the grit and determination of the British people. “The government is continuing to support the economy, including through grants, loans and tax reliefs for businesses, and our Plan for Jobs is ensuring people up and down the country have fantastic opportunities. “We all have a vital part to play to protect lives and jobs, and I urge everyone to do theirs by getting boosted as soon as you can.” Architects, retailers, couriers and accountants had a ‘bumper’ November, says the ONS’s chief economist, Grant Fitzner. Builders benefited from an easing of the supply chain crisis too. Good morning. The UK economy has recovered to its pre-pandemic level, after a surge of growth in November. UK GDP grew by 0.9% in November, data from the Office for National Statistics shows, as the economy picked up after slowing to just 0.2% in October. It means UK GDP is 0.7% above its level in February 2020, just before the first wave of Covid-19 pandemic hit - a milestone in the recovery from the pandemic. However, this recovery came just before the Omicron variant hit the UK, causing disruption in December. The ONS reports that the services, production, and building sectors all expanded in November, while the retail sector saw strong growth. Services (0.7%), production (1.0%) and construction (3.5%) output all increased between October and November 2021; this means that services and construction output are both 1.3% above their pre-coronavirus levels while production remains 2.6% below. In the latest month, output in consumer-facing services grew by 0.8%, mainly because of a 1.4% increase in retail trade, while all other services rose by 0.6%; consumer-facing services are still 5.0% below their pre-coronavirus levels, while all other services are 2.9% above. We’ll pull together more details and reaction now. Also coming up today China has posted a record trade surplus in December and in 2021, with exports growing 20.9% year-on-year last month and imports up 19.5%. Trade data from the UK and the eurozone today will show how Covid, and Brexit, weighed on trading in November. New US retail sales and consumer confidence data will highlight if Omicron has hurt the American economy. European stock markets are set for a lower start, after another day of choppy trading on Wall Street. The tech-focused Nasdaq index tumbled 2.5%, to its lowest level since October. On the corporate side, Blackrock, Citi, JP Morgan and Wells Fargo are releasing Q4 financial results. The agenda 9am GMT: Germany’s full year GDP report 10am GMT: Eurozone trade balance for November 1.30pm GMT: US retail sales for December 2.15pm GMT: US industrial production for December 3pm GMT: Michigan survey of US consumer sentiment in JanuaryThe seditious conspiracy charges against the leader of the Oath Keepers militia and 10 others related to the January 6 Capitol attack have revealed an armed plot against American democracy that involved tactical planning and a formidable arsenal of weapons. Court documents unsealed on Thursday provide the most detailed account to date of the level of planning by the far-right militia in the assault on the Capitol that was aimed at scuppering the certification of Joe Biden’s election win. The documents describe the creation of rapid-response teams of armed militia members, the deployment of tactical gear and the stockpiling of weapons in a deliberate attempt to overturn the election of Democrat Joe Biden, who beat Donald Trump. On January 6 thousands of pro-Trump rioters stormed the building injuring police officers and sending lawmakers fleeing. Five people died around the events, including a Capitol police officer and a Trump supporter shot by law enforcement. The attempt to stop Biden from becoming president failed. The federal indictment alleges Stewart Rhodes, founder of the Oath Keepers, a far-right extremist group, conspired with 10 other members to oppose by force the lawful transfer of presidential power. The group stationed armed members on the outskirts of Washington to serve as so-called “quick reaction force” teams. Rhodes has pleaded not guilty to seditious conspiracy charges. The Oath Keepers even discussed a naval operation to ferry in guns to the militia. One Oath Keeper, Thomas Caldwell, asked fellow members if anyone had a boat that could handle crossing the Potomac River. “If we had someone standing by at a dock ramp (one near the Pentagon for sure) we could have our Quick Response Team with the heavy weapons standing by, quickly load them and ferry them across the river to our waiting arms,” the documents quoted him as saying. Rhodes went on a buying spree in the days leading up to the attack, spending more than $20,000 on guns and equipment for the attack. In December Rhodes bought two pairs of night-vision goggles and a weapons sight for about $7,000 and shipped them to Virginia. In January he spent another $5,000 on a shotgun, scope, magazine, sights, optics, a bipod, a mount, a case of ammunition and gun cleaning supplies. Two days later he spent $6,000 more, and then about $4,500 the next day. In group chats the Oath Keepers discussed how their quick reaction force (QRF) teams would set up at the Comfort Inn in Ballston Arlington, Virginia, to “use as its base of operations for January 6, 2021”. They reserved three rooms; one was occupied by the so-called North Carolina “QRF” team while Arizona and Florida “QRF teams” stayed in the two others. They used the hotel rooms to store firearms and ammunition. “It’s easy to dismiss a lot of what is in the indictment as fantasy, as projection of what the Oath Keepers would like to see, but the events of January 6 remind us that these things can become reality very quickly,” said Devin Burghart, executive director of Institute for Research &amp; Education on Human Rights, a group that monitors far-right extremist groups. “The dangers are there irrespective of their ability to bring all of their fantasies to fruition,” said Burghart. The planning for some kind of operation appeared to begin right after the election last November, as Trump baselessly disputed the results of the election. Two days after the election Rhodes invited some members of the Oath Keepers to a group chat on Signal, an encrypted messaging app, that was titled “Leadership intel sharing secured”. Rhodes texted the group: “We aren’t getting through this without a civil war. Too late for that. Prepare your mind, body and spirit.” On 7 November 2020, when Trump was finally projected to have lost the election, Rhodes began plotting, texting the group chat: “We must now do what the people of Serbia did when Milosevic stole their election. Refuse to accept it and march en-mass on the nations Capitol.” Rhodes then shared a video on Bitchute, an alt-tech video platform, of a step-by-step procedure of how to overthrow a government based on the Serbian example. Two days later Rhodes held an online conference with Oath Keepers members outlining a plan to overturn the election. Two days later after that a member of the group, Caldwell, reached out to Rhodes to share the results of a “recce” – a military colloquialism for reconnaissance operation – to Washington and begin planning for an upcoming “op” to the Capitol. From there members began working together. In late November, the Florida chapter of the Oath Keepers held a training on “unconventional warfare”. “It will be a bloody and desperate fight. We are going to have a fight. That can’t be avoided,” Rhodes wrote in a group chat with members in December. On 21 December 2020, Oath Keepers mentioned January 6 for the first time. James Wakins, one of the 11 Oath Keepers charged in the case, texted the signal chat about a “National call to action for DC Jan 6th” and said Oath Keepers from three states were mobilizing “Everyone in this channel should understand the magnitude of what I just said,” Wakins wrote. Rhodes told a regional Oath Keeper leader that if Biden assumed the presidency, “We will have to do a bloody, massively bloody revolution against them. That’s whats going to have to happen.” At 6.27am on the morning of January 6 Rhodes texted the group chat: “We will have several well equipped QRF’s outside D.C.” At about 8.30am Rhodes and other Oath Keepers left from their hotel and drove to the Capitol in Washington DC. The teams that stayed behind in a hotel in Virginia discussed the possibility of “armed conflict” and “guerrilla war”. At the Capitol, Oath Keepers marched in formation wearing tactical gear including protective vests, helmets and eye goggles as they carried radios, chemical sprays and hard-knuckle gloves. In the group chat one member shared the rumor that it was leftwing groups that had breached the Capitol. “Nope I’m right here, these are Patriots,” replied Rhodes. Rhodes never entered the Capitol, but other members of the Oath Keepers did. Jessica Watkins texted in one of the Oath Keepers group chats: “We are in the main dome right now. We are rocking it. They are throwing grenades, they are freaking shooting people with paint balls. But we are in here.” Another member replied with enthusiastic expletives that this what they “trained for”. The indictment reads that Watkins and other Oath Keepers in one formation joined a mob pushing against a line of law enforcement officers in a hallway containing the Rotunda to the Senate chamber, Watkins commanded those around her to “Push, push, push … get in there, get in there.”Novak Djokovic’s supporters in Serbia have reacted furiously to Australia’s decision to cancel the world tennis No 1’s visa for a second time, but the government has yet to respond officially and previously vociferous politicians have stayed quiet. The unvaccinated tennis star on Friday asked a court to block his deportation before the Australian Open after Australia’s immigration minister revoked his visa, citing strict Covid-19 entry regulations and stating it was in the public interest. The player, bidding for a record 21st grand slam trophy, and his team are seeking to have the decision overturned in court, but public law experts in Australia have said that unless there have been procedural errors, any appeal is likely to fail. The Belgrade-born player is national hero with near-iconic status at home, and his detention this week drew fierce reactions from media and politicians alike. Serbia’s president, Aleksandar Vučić, went on social media to denounce “harassment” and a “political witch-hunt” targeting “the best tennis player in the world”, while the foreign ministry said he had been “lured to Australia to be humiliated”. A health ministry official insisted on Friday that a document showing Djokovic had tested positive for Covid-19 was “absolutely valid” after media including Der Spiegel and the New York Times reported possible anomalies. Zoran Gojkovic added: “I defend his free will not to get vaccinated.” There are signs, however, that the government – in a delicate position diplomatically and unwilling to be seen as promoting vaccine hesitancy in one of Europe’s least-jabbed countries – may be starting to distance itself from the player. Some Belgrade residents suggested on Friday that Djokovic had only himself to blame. “Their country, their rules,” said one resident, Jovo Tadic. “If Australia tells you to get vaccinated to enter, do it, or face problems.” Another resident, Marko Stanic, said: “I think he’ll have a problem in other tournaments, because it seems vaccination is going to be mandatory for all of them. He’ll have to do it if he wants to stay at the top.” Others, though, remained passionately behind their national idol. “I am revolted. I am angry because I did not expect that they would treat the world’s best tennis player like this,” said Mila Aleksic. “He did not deserve this; he is representing our country.” Some suggested Djokovic had become a political pawn in the run-up to Australian election in May. “Australians are dragging him around like an old rag. They are ready to burn the world’s No 1 because of politics,” said Aleksandar Petrovic. Djokovic’s former coach, Niki Pilic, called the situation “shameful” and said the star was being treated like a criminal. “People do not understand what it means to be a world champion, what kind of strength, will and morale is needed,” he said. Nebojsa Covic, a former politician who owns the Red Star Belgrade basketball club, said the controversy had made Djokovic “a symbol of the free world” and “the moral winner of the tournament”. The player was “a global star, a beacon of free men”, he said. “Basic human rights are being violated.” Senior government figures in Serbia, which has vaccinated less than 47% of its population, far below the European average, have appeared more circumspect since questions have emerged over the player’s conduct after testing positive for Covid. The prime minister, Ana Brnabić, said this week Djokovic seemed to be “in clear violation of the rules” after the player acknowledged making an “error of judgment” by attending an interview and photoshoot on 18 December 2021 knowing he had Covid. He also made at least two public appearances in Belgrade the previous day, one of them with children, despite court documents saying had been “tested and diagnosed” with the virus on 16 December. Djokovic has since said he was not informed of the result until later the next day. Although Brnabić said it was not completely clear when the player had got his test result, she added: “If you know you are positive, you should be in isolation.” She said she strongly disapproved of his stance on vaccination. Lawyers have said Djokovic could face a fine or, more likely, community service if he is found to have breached Serbia’s strict self-isolation rules, which in theory carry a maximum jail term of three years. However, pro-government Serbian media remained staunchly supportive of the star. The tabloid Informer criticised “scandalous, shameful and discraceful” behaviour by the Australian authorities, who it said were “deporting a healthy Novak supposedly to save lives”. The daily Blic said the there was “no end to the Calvary being endured by Novak Djokovic in Melbourne”, while TV Pink said the Australian decision was “only to satisfy the people of Australia, since Djokovic has been labelled an anti-vaxxer”. Milivoje Pantovic is a producer with N1 Television in BelgradeA matter of weeks ago Gareth Taylor’s sanity would have been questioned had Manchester City’s manager suggested his side could still secure the Women’s Super League title. Late last year there remained a sense that the former coach of City’s men’s under-18s was on borrowed time but, suddenly, no one is underestimating Taylor when he talks about stealing Chelsea’s crown. “We want to win the league,” said Taylor before Saturday’s trip to Aston Villa. “We just need to stay in the hunt.” City finished second to Chelsea last season but their start to the new campaign was disrupted by injuries to key players, several of whom travelled to the Tokyo Olympics. When Taylor’s team lost four of their first 10 fixtures he seemed on the way out but the recent return to fitness of his England defenders Lucy Bronze and Steph Houghton after long-term knee and ankle problems respectively has transformed City’s landscape. Last Sunday they won 6-0 at previously high-flying Brighton, their third straight league victory, and they sit fifth, nine points behind the leaders, Arsenal, but only four in arrears of Tottenham, occupants of the third and final Champions League position. “I think we’re in a good place,” said Taylor. “Confidence is high and I wouldn’t want to put limits on what we want to try to achieve. We just need to stay in the hunt. If we can do that, who knows what can happen?” The return of Bronze and Houghton also represents good news for England as they limber up for hosting this summer’s Euro 2022 with a four-team tournament also involving Canada, Spain and Germany next month. Neither player has featured for the Lionesses since Sarina Wiegman became manager but Houghton is not thinking about reclaiming the England captaincy just yet. “My first focus over the next few weeks is to get my form and confidence back for Manchester City,” said the 33-year-old, who has signed an extended contract. “It’s just about playing well for City and then everything else will take care of itself.”The allegations about No 10’s parties have shown the policing of lockdown in a whole new light – and some people who faced prosecution or fines for what they feel were relatively minor breaches are outraged over their treatment. We would like to speak to people who faced police action over lockdown parties. Were you caught holding a garden party or a work social? You can share your experiences confidentially below. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below, anonymously if you wish, or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The royal family is engaged in frantic damage limitation ahead of the Queen’s platinum jubilee this summer. The Duke of York’s court case, which could turn out to be a high-octane festival of royal humiliation, risks contaminating the celebrations. This should have nothing to do with Britain’s monarchy, except that it has everything to do with it. The essence of monarchy is its image; right now, the royal family’s public appearance looks messy. The lifestyles of the Queen’s son and grandson, the dukes of York and Sussex, have acquired the aura of a Shakespearean tragedy appropriate to their titles. The Duke of Sussex has done nothing wrong; as yet, neither has the Duke of York. Prince Harry was merely seeking to profit from his only marketable asset – royalty. Prince Andrew used the same asset to win unsavoury friendships, one of which laid him open to what he regards as outrageous blackmail, as yet untested in a court of law. His desperate hope was that a New York judge would disallow Virginia Giuffre’s suit. But American lawyers do not volunteer to starve. The Queen may not have power, but she can wield tools of emphasis. Just as the Duke of Sussex was shorn of even the slightest royal status, so his uncle has been stripped of titles, badges, regiments, charities and patronages. Like a disgraced medieval saint, he is cast out of heaven into the jaws of hell. His fault is not a matter of right or wrong – he may yet prove a victim of a gross unfairness – but of embarrassment, shame and misery, caused to his mother and family and the institution they represent. Monarchy depends for public support not on votes but on a fragile, intangible underpinning of public opinion. It needs to be loved for its dignities, its ceremonies and its anniversaries. It must be beyond criticism, pure as the driven snow. It can be tedious and boring. The one thing it cannot be is scandalous – least of all sexually scandalous. Sex was always a royal taboo; for royalty was about heredity, as James II and Edward VIII learned to their cost. As for Prince Charles, he has spent a quarter of a century purifying his image after his own purgatory years. He has carefully fashioned himself as a genial and blameless middle-aged monarch in waiting. As his moment approaches, the last thing he needs is his brother’s alleged antics flashed in headlines round the world. As he found with his second son, he must preserve royalty on its eerie, untainted pedestal. How a nation embodies its statehood is bequeathed to it by history. A virtue of inherited monarchy – perhaps its sole virtue – is that it takes succession beyond argument. It also puts beyond argument any suggestion that the monarch should exercise political power. If monarchy strays into politics or controversy – or shame – it ceases to embody its nation. That was the fundamental risk taken by the Queen – reportedly against her better judgment – when she decided in the 1960s to depart from the custom of other postwar European monarchs and present Britain’s monarchy as a “royal family”. While monarchs in Sweden, Norway, Belgium and the Netherlands were retreating into bourgeois semi-obscurity – where they have wisely stayed – the Queen turned monarchy into a family firm under a blaze of televised publicity. Royal offspring – who were then still children – became instant celebrities. A cast list of entitled princes, princesses, dukes and duchesses prowled the gossip columns and monarchy magazines. Inevitably they became accidents waiting to happen. It was hard to see these junior royals as anything but victims as they stumbled through life’s perils, but the chief risk was to monarchy itself. So it has proved. The single best decision Prince Charles could make on assuming the throne is, quite simply, to abolish the royal family. He should go Scandinavian. Monarchs do not die young. The throne needs only an heir and a spare. The rest of the family should become commoners and lead normal lives. Perhaps inadvertently, that process started this week. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistScientists advising the government have predicted there will be a fresh wave of Omicron cases in the early summer as people resume social activities and immunity wanes. But experts on the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) said they were increasingly confident that the worst case scenarios for the current wave are very unlikely to occur, with the latest modelling suggesting a peak of fewer than 4,000 hospitalisations each day. The advice comes as ministers face pressure from some Tory MPs to scrap all so-called plan B restrictions in England when they are next reviewed, on 26 January, with officials stressing more data is needed before any decisions are made. Things have turned out better than some anticipated due to the lower intrinsic severity of Omicron compared with Delta and because vaccines have held up well against severe illness. The size and timing of the next peak “cannot be predicted with any certainty”, according to the team at the University of Warwick. Modelling gave projections ranging from fewer than 1,000 admissions each day in the next wave to about 2,000 each day, for the scenario where plan B restrictions remain in place until the end of January and are followed by a gradual return to socialising. However, uncertainty about factors including severity of Omicron, how long people typically take to become infectious, cross-immunity with other variants and how behaviour will change, makes it difficult to predict hospital admissions, the scientists said. Scientists may have also overestimated the growth advantage of Omicron over Delta, the latest documents suggest, due to Omicron apparently having a shorter generation time (the average time between someone being infected, and that person infecting others). This suggests that the staggering rate at which Omicron cases took off could have been partly due to shorter generation time as well as because the strain is more infectious. Once this is factored in, a lower peak is predicted that is more consistent with current rates of hospitalisation, with 2,423 people admitted on Thursday. However, at the 7 January meeting, scientists suggested that hospitals could remain under pressure for some time because prevalence in older people is high and growing rapidly, with hospital admissions expected to peak this month. “It remains likely based on the scenarios that hospital admissions in England will remain high for some time as a result of the very high number of infections and the continued risk of hospitalisation for the elderly and unvaccinated adults in particular,” Sage scientists advised. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) estimated on Friday that 3,735,000 people – or about 1 in 15 – in England had coronavirus during the week, while the figure for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland was about one in 20. Infection levels appear to have peaked in London, falling from one in 10 at the end of 2021 to one in 15 in the week ending 6 January, but they have risen in all other regions of England except the east. The north-west recorded the highest levels, at one in 10. However, the ONS indicated there could be a significant under-reporting of cases. The body uses tests taken by a representative sample of 150,000 people to extrapolate likely infection rates and found rates in December up to three times as high as official figures. The ONS figures add to the difficult decision facing Sajid Javid, the health secretary, who told MPs on Thursday that he wants all restrictions removed as soon as possible. A number of Tory backbenchers want all plan B restrictions – the limited use of vaccine certificates, mandatory masks in shops and on public transport, and advice to work from home – ended at the 26 January review. One government source said that while statistics in areas like hospitalisation due to Covid and numbers in intensive care were better than feared, it was still possible some or all of the restrictions could be extended. “At this point in time it’s too early to say. I think next week will be pretty important in terms of future direction,” they said. “There are points of optimism in the data. The NHS is still under a lot of pressure and the next couple of weeks are going to be difficult. We’re not out of the woods by any stretch of the imagination, but things have not been as severe as the worst end of some of the possible outcomes.” Wales has already announced an easing of its tighter restrictions, with the end of limits on outdoor activities from 21 January, meaning mass sport crowds can return.After 70 years on the throne, every aspect of the relationship between the monarch and her prime ministers must surely have become deeply, even sometimes wearyingly, familiar to Elizabeth II. Fourteen very different men and women have held the country’s highest political office since 1952 – 10 Conservatives and four Labour. Ideologically, they cover a wide spectrum of views. Yet they have all been united by one thing: the intense care they have taken never to embarrass the Queen in the slightest way. Until Boris Johnson. The thought of having to make a public apology to the monarch like the one that Johnson made on Friday would likely have sent shivers of shame down the spines of every one of his Downing Street predecessors. From Winston Churchill to Theresa May, it would be hard to think of a more humbling and cringeworthy moment than having to apologise for their staff partying on the eve of the monarch’s husband’s funeral in the midst of a plague. But Johnson is a precedent buster as well as a rule breaker. He is said to have also apologised to the Queen in 2019 when the unlawful prorogation of parliament was overturned by the supreme court. But there has never been a more humiliating prime ministerial grovel than the one he made this week. That is not to say that all previous prime ministers have behaved with equal tact and deference in every aspect of the relationship with the palace. During the short reign of the Queen’s uncle, Edward VIII, in 1936 there was a full-on political battle between the government and the king over whether he would marry Wallis Simpson, an American divorcee. The then prime minister Stanley Baldwin told the king to his face that the government would resign if he did not abdicate. When the king asked for time to consult his friends, Baldwin replied tartly: “Who are they?” Edward gave in. During her own reign, the Queen has sometimes had periods of brittle relations with certain prime ministers. Edward Heath’s and Margaret Thatcher’s hostility to the prospect of Commonwealth sanctions against South Africa caused tensions with a monarch whose devotion to the grouping is second to none. Yet according to Thatcher’s biographer Charles Moore, both she and the Queen remained very sensitive to the other’s role and views, in spite of the lurking disagreement. Tony Blair offended some traditionalist courtiers when he pressed the Queen to respond with more public sensitivity to the displays of distress after the death of Diana, Princess of Wales in 1997. Palace traditionalists attempted to get their own back on Blair by claiming he was getting above himself during the Queen Mother’s lying in state in 2002. But there has never been any suggestion that the Queen herself took this view. Blair’s memoirs, like those of other prime ministers, are respectful and deferential towards her. Long ago, the Victorian constitutional expert Walter Bagehot said the British monarch had three rights when meeting a prime minister: to be consulted, to encourage and to warn. Johnson has added another one to the list: the right to an apology.Moussa Sissoko returns to Newcastle in Watford’s midfield as Claudio Ranieri’s side aim to arrest a run of seven straight defeats in all competitions against a Newcastle side with only one win to their name. Both Eddie Howe and Ranieri accept a draw will not be good enough in a relegation skirmish being dubbed a 12-pointer. Much could hinge on the performance of two forwards, Newcastle’s £25m signing, Chris Wood, and Ranieri’s £3.6m leading scorer, Emmanuel Dennis. After this, 17th-placed Watford face two more of the bottom three in the next week, travelling to Burnley on Tuesday and entertaining Norwich on Friday. Louise Taylor Saturday 3pm Venue St James’ Park Last season n/a Referee Paul Tierney This season G15 Y61 R1 4.13 cards/game Odds H 19-17 A 27-10 D 27-10 NEWCASTLE Subs from Darlow, Gillespie, Dummett, Clark, Krafth, Willock, Almirón, Hendrick, Gayle, White, Anderson Doubtful Darlow (illness), Gayle (illness), Clark (illness), Lascelles (illness) Injured Lewis (thigh, 22 Jan), Fernández (thigh, Feb), Hayden (knee, Mar), Wilson (calf, Apr) Suspended Manquillo (one match) Discipline Y47 R2 Form DWLLLD Leading scorer Wilson 6 WATFORD Subs from Elliot, Foster, Fletcher, Gosling, Hernández, Angelini, Conteh, Morris, Cleverley, Pedro, Kabasele, Rose, Samir, Kayembe Doubtful Kabasele (calf), Foster (groin) Injured Sarr (knee, Feb), Etebo (quadriceps, Mar), Nkoulou (hamstring, Apr), Baah (ankle, unknown) Suspended None Unavailable Louza, Masina, Troost-Ekong (all at Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y34 R1 Form LLLLLL Leading scorer Dennis 8Gary Neville, the footballer turned TV pundit, hotelier, property developer and university founder, has joined the Labour party and has not definitively ruled out a future career in politics. Neville, regularly a fierce critic of Boris Johnson on Twitter, revealed to Nick Robinson’s BBC Political Thinking podcast that he had joined the party in the last few days. “That is purely for myself,” he said. “I want to support Labour. I do believe that we need a progressive Labour party but one that not just looks after the left side … it has to come towards the centre.” Robinson asked Neville whether he would consider a career in politics, to which he replied: “I say to myself sometimes ‘I’m able to communicate. I know what I want. I have got a business mind, I can manage people.’ But I just think I’d get eaten alive. I don’t know what Whitehall’s like, what Westminster’s like, I can only imagine what you have to do there to survive and I don’t play the game. So how can I get in? “When I ask myself the question, do you want to dip your toes in? I can’t dip my toes in because I’m all or nothing. If I’m going in, I’m going in.” Robinson asked what he would do if the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, were to call him and ask. “I don’t know,” replied Neville. “At the moment, no, I’ll just continue to do this I think. People would say ‘why are you using your influence to try to turn people?’” Neville has 5 million followers on Twitter and is scathing of Johnson and his “rancid” government. On Friday he joked: “No 10 Downing St should be renamed Hacienda.” He has also criticised Labour, including for abstaining during a vote on further lockdown restrictions in December 2020. He told Sky News’ Ridge on Sunday at the time: “When you’re elected and you’re in that seat in Westminster, you take a position, you don’t abstain, you take part in the match, you’re the opposition. Don’t sit in the stand.” Some have speculated that Bury-born Neville, 46, who spent his entire playing career at Manchester United, may be tempted to run to succeed Andy Burnham as mayor of Greater Manchester. The Manchester Central MP, Lucy Powell, who is the shadow secretary for digital culture media and sport, said she was very pleased Neville had finally joined Labour. “It’s something he and I have been discussing for a while. Personally think he’s more than capable of navigating [well, steaming] his way through the world of politics! Look forward to helping,” she tweeted. The Labour party chair, Anneliese Dodds, also welcomed Neville. She tweeted: “A very warm welcome to Labour @GNev2. Great to have you on the red team.”The libel action brought by the multimillionaire Brexit backer Arron Banks against the Observer and Guardian journalist Carole Cadwalladr should concern “anyone who cares about freedom of speech in this country,” a court has been told. Banks, who funded the pro-Brexit Leave.EU campaign group has brought a defamation action against Cadwalladr over two instances – one in a Ted Talk and one in a tweet – in which she said the businessman was lying about his relationship with the Russian state. On Friday, the first day of the trial at the high court, in central London, Gavin Millar QC, representing Cadwalladr, said: “What my client said, she was legally entitled to say as part of a discussion about matters of the highest public interest.” Those matters were listed as campaign finance, foreign money and the use of social media messaging and personal data in the context of the EU referendum. Millar said Cadwalladr’s claims in the April 2019 Ted Talk were not new and had been covered by both her and other media organisations in the two preceding years without prompting legal action. He said the claim against her personally was an “attempt to stymie her investigative journalism about him and make other investigative journalists wary about pursuing theirs”. At a preliminary hearing in 2019, on the meaning of the remark about Banks made by Cadwalladr at the Ted technology conference and a related tweet, Mr Justice Saini concluded an average listener would have understood that: “On more than one occasion Mr Banks told untruths about a secret relationship he had with the Russian government in relation to acceptance of foreign funding of electoral campaigns in breach of the law on such funding.” Millar said Cadwalladr did not intend to allege that Banks had received funding from the Russian government. In written submissions, he also claimed that, at the time of her comments, Banks had “no meaningful reputation” to be seriously harmed because: The digital, culture, media and sport committee had found that he had misled parliament in respect of his relationship with Russian officials and had sought to hide the same. There had been widespread publicity about Banks’s relationship with the Russian state and “his dishonesty and prevarication in respect of that relationship”. Leave.EU and Banks had been the subject of enforcement action by both the Electoral Commission (EC) and the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) in relation to their activities during the referendum campaign. He said Cadwalladr’s reporting represented “public interest journalism raising issues going to the heart of the integrity of British democracy” which materially contributed to the investigations by the EC and the ICO and for which she also won an Orwell prize and was shortlisted for a Pulitzer prize. On Friday, Banks was questioned about his connections to Russia. Asked about why he had previously suggested the Russians had invited him to a meeting with its ambassador when it was actually initiated by Andy Wigmore, Banks denied it was because the former explanation was more palatable, saying he had simply misremembered. He used a similar explanation for not previously remembering he had met the Russian ambassador more than once. In his written witness statement, Banks said Cadwalladr’s remarks had led to comments to his sons by fellow students and a teacher about their father and that someone had thrown a glass of water over him accusing him of bullying the journalist and selling his country down the river. He said she had given an impression that he was “a traitor to this country and to the democratic process. That crosses the line.” His barrister, William McCormick QC, claimed Cadwalladr’s defence was “extreme” and “wholly unrealistic” in that it would enable her to continue to publish false statements complained of. “To suggest this is issued in bad faith simply to stop her reporting is a complete misconception,” he said. The hearing is expected to last four days.A Republican bill to ban the teaching of “divisive concepts” in schools in Virginia ran into ridicule when among historical events deemed suitable for study, it described a nonexistent debate between Abraham Lincoln and Frederick Douglass. Lincoln did engage in a series of historic debates hinged on the issue of slavery, in the Illinois Senate campaign of 1858. But he did so against Stephen Douglas, a senator who had ties to slavery – not against Frederick Douglass, the great campaigner for the abolition of slavery who was once enslaved himself. The Virginia bill was sponsored by Wren Williams, a freshman Republican sent to the state capital, Richmond, in a tumultuous November election. Identifying “divisive concepts” including racism and sexism, the bill demanded the teaching of “the fundamental moral, political and intellectual foundations of the American experiment in self-government”. In part, this was to be achieved with a focus on “founding documents” including “the Declaration of Independence, the United States Constitution, the Federalist Papers, including Essays 10 and 51, excerpts from Alexis de Tocqueville’s Democracy in America, the first debate between Abraham Lincoln and Frederick Douglass, and the writings of the Founding Fathers of the United States”. The teaching of history has become a divisive concept across the US, as rightwing activists have spread alarm about the teaching of race issues. In November, the winning candidate for governor in Virginia, the Republican Glenn Youngkin, made it a wedge issue in his win over the Democrat, Terry McAuliffe. Youngkin successfully seized upon critical race theory, an academic discipline that examines the ways in which racism operates in US laws and society – but which is not taught in Virginia schools. The elementary error in Williams’s bill attracted national attention, including from the Washington Post. However, reports that the bill had been withdrawn were in error, a spokesperson for the politician said on Friday. The spokesperson also provided to the Guardian a statement from the Virginia division of legislative services, which said the error “was inserted at the drafting level, following receipt of a historically accurate request from the office of Delegate Wren Williams”. Williams told Townhall.com he was “frustrated” but realized “mistakes happen”. Nonetheless, many were happy to point out the error. “New rule,” wrote Steve Vladeck, a University of Texas law professor. “If you don’t know the difference between Frederick Douglass and Stephen Douglas, you don’t get to tell anyone else what to teach.” Many were also happy to point out that Douglass has caused embarrassment for Republicans before. In 2017, Donald Trump at least gave the impression he thought the great campaigner was alive. “Frederick Douglass is an example of somebody who’s done an amazing job and is getting recognised more and more, I notice,” the former president said. Sidney Blumenthal, a Guardian contributor and Lincoln biographer, said: “Lincoln did not debate Frederick Douglass. Historians may search for the video, but they will not find it.” Blumenthal also pointed out that Lincoln and Douglass did meet three times when Lincoln was president, from 1861 to 1865 and through a civil war that ended with slavery abolished. Their conversations included a discussion about inequality in pay between Black and white soldiers, upon which Lincoln ultimately acted, and Confederate abuse of Black prisoners. There was also a famous meeting after Lincoln’s second inauguration, in 1865, when Lincoln greeted Douglass at the White House as a friend. Blumenthal also offered a way in which students in Virginia and elsewhere might use Douglass’s life and work to examine divisions today. Speaking a day after two centrist Democratic senators sank Joe Biden’s push for voting rights reform, Blumenthal said: “Frederick Douglass’s great cause became that of voting rights. “If there is any debate that is going on now, it is not between Lincoln and Frederick Douglass. It is between Frederick Douglass and all the Republican senators who refuse to support voting rights – and Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema too.”An 18-year-old woman was raped by two masked men who approached her near a London overground station. The Metropolitan police have appealed for witnesses after the attack near Peckham Rye station. The woman, who is being supported by specialist officers, was walking down an alleyway off Elm Grove when approached from behind by two men about 10.20pm, the Met police said. The two men were described by police as wearing dark clothing, both wearing gloves and face coverings. The men took the teenage victim a few yards away to Holly Grove where she was raped, the police said. A cordon remains in place. No arrests have yet been made. “Last night’s violent attack by two men on a woman near Peckham Rye station has appalled and upset our whole community,” the Labour leader of Southwark council, Kieron Williams, said on Twitter. “No woman should live in fear of male violence.” The crime comes just 106 days after Wayne Couzens was sentenced to life imprisonment for the kidnap, rape and murder of Sarah Everard, a 33-year-old marketing executive who was abducted by the serving Met police officer while walking home, which provoked a national reckoning on male violence against women. Mandeer Kataria, a 30-year-old woman living nearby in Nunhead, said: “Male violence is endemic. This is a horrific incident and it’s honestly petrifying walking home alone in the dark right now – almost all women navigating cities know the feeling. “Since Sarah Everard and Sabina Nessa, what safety measures have been considered around that exact area? The council and local police will need to answer this.” “The investigation into this incident is fast paced and ongoing and involves an extensive crime scene,” Det Supt Clair Kelland said in a statement. “We would like to speak to anyone who was in the area of Peckham Rye station between 10pm and 11pm last night who saw anything that might assist our investigation.” The report comes on the same weekend thousands are expected to gather across cities in Ireland and the UK after the murder of 23-year-old Ashling Murphy, who was killed in broad daylight while out for a run in Ireland on Wednesday. The killing has sparked an outpouring of grief and anger throughout Irish society. The incident happened near Rye Lane, a busy street of restaurants, shops and bars, but Southwark Police said multiple people had raised concerns that the area by the alleyway was not very safe, lacking CCTV and lighting. Southern Rail said Peckham Rye railway station would be closed until at least 10pm on Friday. Police told witnesses or anyone with any information to call 101 or tweet @MetCC quoting 240/14JAN. They said witnesses wishing to remain anonymous can call Crimestoppers on 0800 555 111 or visit crimestoppers-uk.org.It’s come to something when there’s more accountability in a hereditary monarchy than in our elected government. Even in Buckingham Palace there are consequences for one’s actions, as Prince Andrew learned on Thursday, when he was stripped of his sort-of jobs. In the Palace of Westminster, not so much. The contrast could hardly be sharper. On one side, a Queen so determined to show that she was not above the rules that she grieved alone as she buried the man she had loved for 73 years. On the other, a prime minister running Downing Street like a frat house, where bottles were reportedly brought in by the suitcase and they danced in the basement even on the eve of that austere royal funeral, even in the midst of a lockdown. And yet, Johnson remains in his post, his titles still his to use. There’s confident chatter, briefed to the papers, that he’ll get away with it. His team is already spinning in advance the report of the civil service inquisitor, Sue Gray, suggesting that she will find no criminal wrongdoing – deliberately misunderstanding the role of her inquiry – thereby setting the bar sufficiently low for Johnson to say he has cleared it and we should all move on. Meanwhile his supporters, and even some of his opponents, are working out what serves them best: to push him out or let him stay. There are Tories looking at the calendar, asking if the local elections in May might be the moment. There are Labour folk wondering if it might help to have a weakened Johnson to punch at from now until the next general election. I understand all those calculations. But what does it mean for our system if he is allowed to hold on? What does it say about us? What, for example, would it say about our perennial brag that we are a society subject to the rule of law that the man who sets the rules is allowed to break them and break them so egregiously? I know it’s hard to keep track, but the party we were all focused on before the revelation of the basement disco was the one on 20 May 2020, when lockdown was still a relative novelty and most Britons were policing themselves with extraordinary self-discipline and self-sacrifice. Johnson says he went to that garden party, attended by his wife and some of her friends, where the gin and rosé flowed, and thought he was at a “work event”. No one in their right mind believes that is true. But if he stays in his job, we are saying that we accept it. What will it say about the supposedly unbreakable convention that a minister who lies to or misleads the House of Commons has to resign? Johnson was guilty of that on Wednesday with that “work event” nonsense, but it was hardly the first time. On 1 December last year, when grilled about whichever of the seemingly daily Downing Street parties had just been revealed, Johnson told MPs “all guidance was followed completely in No 10”. That was obviously untrue, and he must have known it was untrue because he had attended just such a rule-breaking party himself, back on 20 May 2020. Whatever elaborate get-out he tries to construct, we can all see the truth. If Johnson’s lie goes unpunished, a convention that evolved in order to allow the public to feel a basic level of trust in their government will have been shattered. That will damage our democratic health, but what will it mean for our literal health if Johnson is allowed to stay? Should there be a grave new variant of this disease, one that demands a return to full lockdown, it’s clear that he could not impose it. The country would simply refuse to take instruction from a man who so flagrantly laughed in their face last time. Indeed, it’s not clear any government could ever again impose such restrictions: the electorate might well conclude from this episode that all politicians and their officials are as hypocritical as the current gang inside No 10 and refuse to comply. That is a grim possibility. But with Johnson himself, it is certain. The country cannot navigate a public health crisis with this man at the helm. If that was true of Matt Hancock snogging his lover – a point Johnson conceded when he accepted Hancock’s resignation – then it is a hundred times truer of him. Of course, there were multiple reasons for Johnson to be removed, even before we knew he had turned Downing Street into the Studio 54 of Whitehall. On Wednesday, the high court found that the government’s use of a “VIP lane” for the allocation of lucrative PPE contracts during the first wave of the pandemic was unlawful, exposing to the light once more a pattern of behaviour that, were it spotted in any other country but ours, we would call corruption. What does it say about us that no one thinks for a minute that Johnson will be pushed out over any of that? There will be many now hoping that Sue Gray will ride to the rescue, that in calm, mandarin prose she will pronounce the prime minister unambiguously guilty. But it’s a fantasy, just as it was a fantasy to expect Robert Mueller to topple Donald Trump over collusion with Russia, or Robin Butler to remove Tony Blair over Iraq. I spoke to Lord Butler on Friday, and he reminded me that inquiries of this kind are not about declaring guilt or innocence, but solely about establishing the facts. He believes Gray will set out “what happened. It’s then for other people to reach judgments.” Those others will include the police, who will determine whether there is evidence of criminal activity. That’s their job, not Gray’s. Which is why it’s so dishonest of Downing Street to be briefing that the civil servant will rule on a question she has not been asked. Johnson’s fate will be decided not by her, but by politics: initially by MPs and, if necessary, by the people. Johnson’s former editor at the Telegraph, Max Hastings, once wrote that if Johnson, a man he believed “would not recognise truth if confronted by it in an identity parade” became prime minister, it would demonstrate that Britain was no longer “a serious country”. If we allow Johnson to stay as prime minister, given all that he’s done and all that we’ve seen, it would say something far, far worse. Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnistRory Kinnear has written eloquently about his sister before but this article was heart-wrenching (On the day of No 10’s lockdown party, I buried my sister, 12 January). Boris Johnson and every Tory MP should be made to read it. If they do not feel guilty afterwards, they are inhumane and do not possess a conscience. Val Malone Edinburgh • If Boris Johnson’s intellect is so suboptimal that he cannot recognise a party when he encounters one, do we really want him in charge of the country? Or maybe he just needs glasses? Could he pop up to Barnard Castle for an optician’s appointment? Virginia Withers Chertsey, Surrey • Norman Baker comments that Prince Andrew had been “well and truly chucked under the bus” (Prince Andrew loses military roles and use of HRH title, 13 January). Would it not be truer to say that Prince Andrew had thrown the royal family under the bus? Dr Brigid Purcell Norwich • As the Tory party and the monarchy, two pillars of the establishment, disintegrate in front of our eyes, I can only assume that Justin Welby is walking round with his fingers crossed, hoping these things don’t come in threes. George Steel Liverpool • I’ll wager that I’m not the only Guardian reader who has just posted a letter addressed to “The Liar, London” (Letters, 13 January). Stephen Rafferty Buckland Brewer, Devon • Further to Philip Clarke’s letter (7 January), in the hymn Onward Christian Soldiers, it is not the Christian soldiers who are “going on before” but “the cross of Jesus”. The soldiers are “marching as to war”. Frederick Robinson Bexhill-on-Sea, East Sussex • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I enjoyed your piece on the use of the word Albion in football club names (Pass notes, 10 January), but was dismayed to see Stirling Albion omitted from your list of footie Albions. The ancient Albion name was favoured by the club’s founder, Tam Fergusson, though many fans prefer the apocryphal tale of it being taken from the Albion coal trucks used as stands in the club’s early days. Stirling Albion were, in 1966, the first professional British team to play in Japan. I would have thought that alone would merit a place in your list. And we are, for the moment, above Albion Rovers in the league, making us Scotland’s leading Albion – just! Colin Sinclair Stirling • Ewan Murray describes Cambridge United’s run of 31 games without a win as their previous “claim to fame” before they knocked Newcastle United out of the FA Cup last Saturday (Report, 10 January). I witnessed many of those bleak, winless games in 1983-84. I also watched a club only elected to the Football League in 1970 win promotion from the Fourth Division to the Second Division in consecutive seasons in 1977-78, and then spend six seasons among such exalted company as West Ham, Chelsea, Newcastle and Crystal Palace, as well as knocking Aston Villa out of the League Cup in the season they won the First Division championship. I could go on. The wonderful memories are plentiful, and the mighty Us march on. Bill Hawkes Canterbury • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.In England, following a Christmas break full of uncertainty about further restrictions, a rise in the number of Omicron Covid cases and disrupted Christmas plans due to self-isolating family members, pupils returned to school at the start of January for a new term. Only a few days before teachers returned to school, new advice emerged from the Department for Education (DfE) saying all secondary school pupils should wear masks in classrooms in an attempt to stem a rise in cases of the Omicron variant. Three teachers in England speak about their first week of term and their concerns for the coming weeks. ‘I don’t think I’ve known it this bad since I started teaching nearly 20 years ago’ “It’s been awful,” said Julia*, who teaches at a secondary school in London. “We had less than half of our students show up for a lateral flow test before the start of term and quite a few of our parents didn’t grant permission for their children to be tested.” Julia said she feels concerned as students are hesitant to wear masks and a significant portion of their staff are off sick. “We are already talking about having to send students home as we don’t have enough cover,” said the 50-year-old, who has been in the profession for nearly 20 years. “I’m fully jabbed and have had Covid twice – catching it again is an inevitability at this point.” She said her school has a high number of disadvantaged children and the situation with Covid has become more difficult following years of little to no funding. “We don’t have enough toilets so we use portaloos and sometimes when it rains too much in my classroom it floods. At the end of the day it’s the children who lose out. “I think this government is the absolute pits and schools are being hung out to dry. Announcements are left to the last minute when bigger-picture thinking would be a great help. At the end of the day, good teaching happens when you can plan effectively. I don’t think I’ve known it this bad in schools since I started teaching.” ‘We feel hamstrung’ Tom, 40, a deputy headteacher in Essex who leads his secondary school’s Covid response, said staff and student absences have been at their highest this term since the start of the pandemic. “We’ve been letting a different year group back into the school each day and doing on-site testing. But as we wait for year groups to come in, we’re finding that pupils are testing positive,” he said. “So I’ve been spending much of my time informing staff of students who are positive, making sure online learning is set up, and letting families know when their child will return. We’ve got so many that we’ve had to put them on a centralised spreadsheet.” The school is well prepared for remote teaching, said Tom, but staff shortages concern him. “In mid-December, we started to get hit quite badly. At the beginning of the holiday, myself and 20% of my colleagues tested positive. It was my second positive result during the pandemic. It was obviously disarming for those of us who couldn’t see our families over the Christmas period.” This term, the school has introduced the compulsory wearing of masks in communal spaces, according to government guidance. However, Tom is frustrated that the rule is unenforceable. “The DfE said no child should be denied an education if they refuse to wear a mask. The vast majority of our students are really good about it, but we feel a bit hamstrung. The DfE doesn’t seem to be able to make a decision.” ‘I’m not sure how much longer I can continue’ For Amanda* in Birmingham, the Covid situation at her school is better than they expected it to be. “We haven’t had many absences compared to other times during the pandemic,” said the secondary school teacher. “Staff absence is very low and our children have been incredibly compliant about masks.” Her main concern is the lack of ventilation and the threat of an inspection from Ofsted. “I have a CO2 monitor in my classroom but no real guidance on how to use it. The readings appear to be normal but if it gets high, what am I supposed to do? I already have the windows open. “Workload is a huge problem at the moment. We are trying to help students catch up, and prepare them for exams and teacher-assessed grades, all the while with the threat of Ofsted hanging over us. It’s a fear for many of us and feels like the DfE have forgotten teachers are not immune to the pressures of Covid, let alone preparing for an inspection.” With the added pay freeze from 2021, Amanda and her colleagues are feeling the pinch of the continuing pressure. “Teaching used to be a well-paid job with a good pension but with inflation at an all-time high, and energy bills going up now I’m not sure how much longer I can continue.” *Some names have been changed.In Sali Hughes’ article on beauty myths (Shaving your legs won’t make your hair thicker: 10 beauty myths busted, 8 January), dermatologist Sam Bunting suggested that those who cover their skin fully should be advised to take a vitamin D supplement. This is true, but it should be noted that this advice extends to the whole population, including children. The latest advice is that everyone in the UK should consider taking a 10 microgram vitamin D supplement daily, particularly during October to March. This has been even more important during the pandemic, with many people in the UK leaving home less often, if at all. Dr Fiona Comrie Aberdeen • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.A former senior civil servant who led the government’s Covid taskforce has apologised for having leaving drinks during lockdown before Christmas 2020. Kate Josephs, who is now chief executive of Sheffield city council, said she was “truly sorry” for the event on 17 December – one day before No 10 held its Christmas party. The gathering, first revealed by the Telegraph, saw “dozens” of officials from the Cabinet Office’s Covid-19 taskforce attending the event, while the country was in lockdown. On that same day, the government’s official Twitter feed replied to a query asking if employers could hold Christmas parties at the end of the working day. It said: “Hi Mick, although there are exemptions for work purposes, you must not have a work Christmas lunch or party, where that is a primarily social activity and is not otherwise permitted by the rules in your tier.” Josephs tweeted a statement apologising for what happened, saying: “As people know I previously worked in the Cabinet Office Covid taskforce where I was director general from July 2020 to 18 December 2020. “I have been cooperating fully with the Cabinet Office investigations and I do not want to pre-empt the findings of the investigation. However as chief executive of Sheffield city council I am responsible for leading the organisation and working with partners across the city and region to support our Covid response and recovery. That is why I have decided to make a statement. “On the evening of 17 December, I gathered with colleagues that were at work that day, with drinks, in our office in the Cabinet Office, to mark my leaving the civil service. “I am truly sorry that I did this and for the anger that people will feel as a result. Sheffield has suffered greatly during this pandemic, and I apologise unreservedly. “The specific facts of this event will be considered in the context of the Cabinet Office investigation. I did not attend any events at 10 Downing St. I am grateful for the ongoing support of colleagues and partners and need now to ask that people allow the Cabinet Office to complete its investigation.” Terry Fox, leader of Sheffield city council, said: “To be honest I need to express my deep disappointment – people will rightly feel angry and let down. I get that completely. “After everything that Sheffield has been through during the pandemic, this is news that we did not want to receive. “Over the last year, Kate’s been an asset to our city and she is working tirelessly for Sheffield and its people. Our residents will understandably have questions and concerns, and we await the findings of the investigation.” It is the second report of a leaving drinks in Downing Street to have emerged in the last 24 hours. James Slack, the former director of communications, was revealed to have had a leaving do during lockdown on the eve of Prince Philip’s funeral, leading Downing Street to apologise to the Queen.