On a night of wildly unexpected suddenly inflating late drama in Bridgetown England snatched a scarring, fraught, very narrow victory from the jaws of a morale-boosting, straightforward and emphatic victory to nevertheless level the five-match Twenty20 series against West Indies at 1-1 with three to play. After its dizzying conclusion, when Akeal Hosein had sent the last five legal deliveries of the night – there was a wide in there somewhere – for four, four, six, six and once again six, the home side, having inflicted upon England a morale-sapping thrashing in Saturday night’s opener, had somehow found a way of inflicting upon them a morale-sapping success, secured by a one-run margin. It had all seemed so straightforward. Just after the halfway point of their innings England, poised at a reasonable if not outstanding 64 for two, thrashed 24 runs off an over bowled by the spinner Fabian Allen in what at the time seemed a decisive acceleration. An hour and a half later West Indies stood at a similar point in their reply, already nine runs and two wickets worse off, as England tossed the ball to spinners of their own. Adil Rashid bowled a wicket maiden, Moeen Ali promptly took two wickets, and West Indies were 65 for seven. All available evidence dictated there could be no coming back. And so it proved, but only just. Though what was to happen in the final overs was outlandishly improbable – in 14 previous T20 internationals Hosein had never hit a boundary and his highest score was six, here there were seven boundaries in his 16-ball 44 – it will reopen some not very old scars for an England side whose death bowling had been so exposed in their World Cup semi-final defeat to New Zealand last November. That they eventually emerged from this period with a victory of sorts still to savour was down to Reece Topley, making his first T20 international appearance for nearly six years, whose 19th over went for just eight, and the umpire Joel Wilson, who after Saqib Mahmood started the final set with a very wide wide gave the bowler the benefit of considerable doubt when he followed it with a less emphatically wide wide. “I thought we scored over par, but with the power they have you’ve never won the game until it’s over,” said Moeen Ali. “Even though they were seven down for not many runs, they were never out of the game. The fact they bat all the way down to 10 makes them extremely dangerous. We felt we were going to cruise that game but to win by only one run is actually quite scary. Their batting lineup is quite scary.” For all that England again lost the toss and were told to bat, the game that followed could hardly have been more different to the first match of the series. Among the most significant changes was the pitch, a difference of just a few metres but not only flatter and more reliable but also less central. Both teams were guilty at times of being unnecessarily preoccupied with attacking or defending the shorter boundary, as the number of wides suggested. Though England did not exactly explode out of the blocks, with Saturday’s scars still fresh a little circumspection seemed appropriate. It took until the final over of the power play for West Indies to make a breakthrough, Fabian Allen dismissing both Tom Banton and James Vince. At the other end Jason Roy watched and learned, and it was he who was single-handedly responsible for massacring Allen’s final over shortly after drinks. Ten overs into England’s innings Roy had 17 off 23; six deliveries later he was on the verge of a half-century, a mark he failed to meet after slapping Romario Shepherd’s second delivery of the night straight to long-on. Given the joyful ludicrousness of their run chase it would seem churlish for West Indies to emerge from the match nursing regrets, but they will also be aware that some of their fielding was poor. Most notably Moeen was twice the beneficiary of ghastly drops, and Liam Dawson would have been caught by Nicholas Pooran at deep backward square leg had the fielder not for some reason decided to run in from the rope and watch the ball sail over his head. England’s 171 for eight appeared a more than decent total, all the more so when the first three overs of West Indies’ reply went for three, two and one while Topley trapped Brandon King, whose half-century made him the outstanding batter of the opening encounter, with the second ball of the innings before brilliantly running out Shai Hope in his next over. When Darren Bravo, Kieron Pollard and then Odean Smith fell shortly after the halfway stage of the West Indies innings another comprehensive defeat appeared likely. But that was before Shepherd and Hosein came together and suddenly it was raining sixes, England were getting completely soaked, and West Indies ended the evening brilliantly, thrillingly, and quite encouragingly beaten.Part of Southwark Playhouse’s Shakespeare for Schools project, this drastically pared-down version of Romeo &amp; Juliet will be shown to 2,000 local young people for free. They certainly won’t be bored: the production is peppered with cheeky ad-libs (“Call a fucking ambulance!”) and whizzes along at just 100 minutes. It has been created in the spirit of good fun, which is lovely in theory but ultimately undercuts the tragedy. When Shakespeare’s star-crossed lovers finally take their own lives, it’s a shock – and not for quite the right reasons. There are lots of good intentions here, but not nearly enough rigour. The framing device is just that – a framework, and little else. Nicky Allpress has relocated Shakespeare’s timeless tragedy to Brixton in the 1980s, and it turns out it isn’t all that timeless after all. There are some projections of riots at the beginning and end and 80s costumes and music are used throughout. Other than that, the loose framing device creates more questions than it answers. Why are two teenagers getting married after knowing each other for just one day? How on earth are they this innocent and why doesn’t someone just pick up a phone? The frequent ad-libs work pretty well when they’re thrown in separately from the text – but when phrases like “South Laandon” are jammed into the original verse, things get messy. There’s no rhythm and very little sense and some fairly frantic doubling work only makes things more confusing. Joey Ellis has a strong physical presence but he’s landed with playing the Prince, Mercutio and Paris – often in quick succession. Recent graduate Samuel Tracy plays Romeo as a dazzled innocent, jumping into the air with glee when Juliet (Laura Lake Adebisi) suggests marriage. There’s a lovely fizzing hopefulness about their scenes together but it’s the scenes between Juliet and her nurse (Amy Loughton) that have intensity and clarity. Loughton is a talented comic and bustles about the stage, handing out piles of washing to the audience – but she never once loses control of Shakespeare’s verse. When the nurse discovers Juliet’s cold body, it’s a strangely welcome moment of pathos in this lively but patchy production. Romeo &amp; Juliet is at Southwark Playhouse, London, until 5 February.NHS trusts in England lost nearly 2m days in staff absences due to long Covid in the first 18 months of the pandemic, according to figures that reveal the hidden burden of ongoing illness in the health service. MPs on the all-party parliamentary group (APPG) on coronavirus estimate that more than 1.82m days were lost to healthcare workers with long Covid from March 2020 to September 2021 across England’s 219 NHS trusts. The estimate is based on data obtained under the Freedom of Information Act from 70 NHS trusts and does not include the impact of the highly transmissible Omicron variant that has fulled record-breaking waves of infection in the UK and globally since it was first detected in November. Layla Moran, the Liberal Democrat MP who chairs the APPG, said the government had paid “almost no attention to long Covid and the severe impact it was having on vital public services” and called for immediate support for those affected. “Thousands of frontline workers are now living with an often debilitating condition after being exposed to the virus while protecting this country,” she said. “They cannot now be abandoned.” The Office for National Statistics estimates that 1.3 million people, or 2% of the population, are living with long Covid, based on people self-reporting symptoms that last more than a month after a Covid infection. More than half a million have had symptoms for at least a year, with ailments ranging from breathlessness, fatigue and a cough to muscle aches and pains, “brain fog”, headaches and palpitations. While the figures are only a rough estimate of the impact long Covid is having on health service staff, the MPs have called on the government to recognise the condition as an occupational disease. The move would help standardise support and care for those affected, and improve data collection on the problem across the country. In a further step, the MPs urged ministers to set up a compensation scheme for key workers who have suffered financially through loss of work. The APPG estimates that long Covid caused thousands of staff to be off work for four weeks or more in any given period of the epidemic up until September 2021. The average trust had more than 100 staff off with long Covid and lost more than 8,000 days in absences over the period examined. Only four NHS trusts provided details on the duration of staff absences due to long Covid. These suggest that on average staff were off for more than 80 days with long-term symptoms. Moran said the government must create a compensation scheme for “any of these key workers who have been unable to return to work” and “as a first step in protecting our public services from the impact of long Covid, they must recognise it as an occupational disease and provide formal guidance to employers.” Saffron Cordery, the deputy chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents hospital trusts in England, said while additional funding had been set aside for long Covid services, demand was likely to grow given the large number of people infected in the Omicron wave. “We will need to see more long-term, structural support for treatment of long Covid, as the shorter term horizon of fixed pots of funding make it difficult to develop and train a sustainable workforce,” she said. “This is particularly important for community trusts and primary care services which have been on the frontline of managing long Covid support. “As we start to grapple with the long term effects of Covid, the government will need to look at the wider socio-economic impacts of the disease, including who needs specific support. While this is a decision for government, we know that worklessness and economic deprivation increase demand for mental health services, which are already under incredible strain.”The sharing of some of the most insidious images of child abuse will not be prevented by a new government bill that aims to the make the internet a safer place, MPs have said. The draft online safety bill is not clear or robust enough to tackle some forms of illegal and harmful content, according to a report by the digital, culture, media and sport (DCMS) committee. The landmark bill places a duty of care on tech firms to protect users from harmful content or face substantial fines imposed by the communications regulator Ofcom. “In its current form what should be world-leading, landmark legislation instead represents a missed opportunity,” said Julian Knight, the chair of the DCMS committee. “The online safety bill neither protects freedom of expression, nor is it clear nor robust enough to tackle illegal and harmful online content. Urgency is required to ensure that some of the most pernicious forms of child sexual abuse do not evade detection because of a failure in the online safety law.” The report urges the government to tackle types of content that are technically legal such as “breadcrumbing”, where child abusers leave digital signposts for fellow abusers to find abuse content, and deepfake pornography, which it says are not covered by the bill currently, although creators of deepfake images can be prosecuted for harassment. On child sexual abuse, the committee said the bill should tackle behaviour by predators designed to evade content moderation. “One starting point should be to reframe the definition of illegal content to explicitly add the need to consider context as a factor, and include explicitly definitions of activity like breadcrumbing on the face of the bill,” says the report. As currently drafted, the bill’s duty of care is split into three parts: preventing the proliferation of illegal content and activity such as child pornography, terrorist material and hate crimes; ensuring children are not exposed to harmful or inappropriate content; and, for large tech platforms such as Facebook, Twitter and YouTube, ensuring that adults are protected from legal but harmful content, a catch-all term covering issues such as cyberbullying. The report recommends that the bill gives a definition of legal but harmful content that includes undermining someone’s reputation, national security or public health. The category should also account for attempts to interfere in elections or deter the public from voting, it says. Legal but harmful content is not strictly defined in the draft bill but it gives the culture secretary a key role in defining it. Reflecting concerns that the legal but harmful category will affect freedom of speech, the report recommends a “must balance” test that weighs whether freedom of speech has been protected sufficiently in decisions on content. The report warns that the bill is “vague” about the definition of illegal content and should be redrafted to state that it applies to existing criminal offences, rather than regulatory or civil offences. It also calls for Ofcom to have the power to conduct audits of tech companies’ systems. The former information commissioner Elizabeth Denham told MPs and peers last year that Ofcom should have the power to “look under the bonnet” of tech firms and scrutinise algorithms that could steer users down dangerous content rabbit holes. It is the second committee report to demand changes to the bill, after a joint committee of MPs and peers urged a wide range of amendments, including criminal sanctions for tech executives who fail to deal with “repeated and systemic” safety failings. However, the DCMS committee report pushes back on calls for a permanent committee to oversee the act, stating that such a move would be a “significant departure from convention” and oversight of the act should be carried out by existing cross-party select committees. The government has already suggested “significant improvements” could be made to the draft bill, with the culture minister Chris Philp telling MPs during a debate in the Commons this month that there were a number of areas where the online safety bill could be “improved substantially”. A DCMS spokesperson rejected the committee’s criticism of the bill, saying it set a “gold standard” for safety. They said: “We do not agree with the criticism of the committee. The bill has been recognised as setting a global gold standard for internet safety. It has strict measures including a duty of care to stamp out child sexual abuse, grooming and illegal and harmful content.” The spokesperson added: “The bill will make the UK the safest place to go online while protecting freedom of speech.”Britain’s biggest cities have lost almost a year’s worth of sales during the coronavirus pandemic as lockdowns and a lack of office workers and tourists caused a collapse in consumer spending. As offices have started to reopen following the relaxation of plan B restrictions, the Centre for Cities said Covid-19 had “levelled down” historically more prosperous high street destinations. London recorded the biggest drop for in-person spending for retail and hospitality, losing as much as 47 weeks’ worth of sales between March 2020 and November 2021 compared with the average value for weekly transactions in 2019 before the crisis hit. According to spending data compiled from anonymous card transactions, Birmingham, Edinburgh and Cardiff also lost nearly a year’s worth of sales as people stayed away from big city centres during the health emergency. In comparison, towns and smaller cities have recorded a smaller drop in retail and hospitality, according to the thinktank’s annual Cities Outlook report for 2022. Burnley had the smallest drop in spending with the loss of just eight weeks of sales. Warrington, Huddersfield and Blackpool also lost relatively few sales compared with 2019. The study of 52 city and town centres showed a sharp increase in the number of commercial units falling vacant during the crisis, rising to 2,426 compared with an increase of 1,374 between 2018 and 2020. However, it showed that high streets in economically weaker places have been less affected by the pandemic, with a smaller increase in vacancy rates than in bigger city centre locations. Andrew Carter, chief executive of the Centre for Cities, said the pandemic had had the effect of pausing the long-term decline of poorer parts of the country in the north and Midlands, helped by emergency economic support from the government. However, he warned that while stronger cities had borne the economic brunt of the pandemic, their higher levels of affluence meant the end of restrictions should mean the return of office workers and a swift recovery. “To help them avoid a wave of high street closures this year, the government must set out how it plans to increase people’s skills and pay to give them the income needed to sustain a thriving high street,” he said. Retail consultancy Springboard said home working had led to the growth of “localism”, with consumers visiting nearby high streets when previously they would have shopped in city centres. The most extreme example was in London: in 2021 footfall in outer London was 27% lower than in 2019, while in central London the drop was 52%. The organisation said in 2022 it expected hybrid working to lead to more and longer visits to retail destinations in the evenings and at weekends, as well as an increase in people combining shopping and dining.Farewell tours often have one eye on the past and the other on the cash register – but if Midnight Oil’s show in Launceston on Sunday was any indication, they’re not coasting to the finish line. The first of four performances for Tasmania’s Mona Foma festival – the band will play in Launceston once more, then on to Hobart – marks the start of a tour billed as the Oils’ last ever live shows. But it’s not the end: Midnight Oil are about to drop a new album, due 18 February, and may continue writing and recording. “We’ve played intensely physical gigs since our humble beginnings back in 1977, and we never want to take even the slightest risk of compromising that,” guitarist Jim Moginie wrote in a statement. With the death of longtime bassist Bones Hillman in November 2020, he explained, they felt at the “end of a cycle”. The grassy waterside flat where the Esk and Tamar rivers meet makes for a nice, low-key way to start the band’s lap of stadiums and arenas, gently evoking the Sydney Harbour setting of their seminal 1985 concert film Oils on the Water. The band might move a bit more gingerly than in 1985, but tracks like 1982’s Only The Strong still hit like a slap in the face. Moginie’s and Martin Rotsey’s guitars bring a pub rock fury that hasn’t been dulled by time or a pandemic, as the pair stand stoically on each side of the stage bookending the eternally flailing frontman Peter Garrett. Up the back, Rob Hirst pounds the drums with unyielding joy – no one, it seems, has more fun at a Midnight Oil show than him. When Hirst, bassist Adam Ventoura and guest backing singers Leah Flanagan and Liz Stringer add a stack of harmonies to Read About It, Short Memory and US Forces, it’s hard not to be swept up. Midnight Oil have been coming to Tasmania for a long time and have the songs to show for it, from 1981’s chugging environmental anthem Burnie (“It’s a little cleaner now than it was when we were there, when this song was written,” Garret says of the city north-west of Launceston) to 1993’s Truganini. Garrett says Burnie and Truganini are meant to “commemorate and inspire”, but on newer tracks from the forthcoming album, Resist, his tone is more urgent. A winding acoustic riff opens Tarkine, a tribute to the embattled forest in Tasmania’s north-west and the album’s second single. Its chorus is up there with some of the band’s best belters, but it’s also an opportunity for Garrett to vent – and all the time stuck at home over the past 18 months not mellowed him. “I am so pissed off and angry, I can’t tell you,” he says, pouring disappointed scorn on “parasites, layabouts and magic tongue merchants” who dominate the airwaves and the “highest office in the land”. He then offers a word of caution to his fellow baby boomers, despairing at how, with cruel irony, Australia feels like a less egalitarian nation than when the band started. “This stuff can sneak up on you,” he laments. “Next thing you know, the best parts of it are gone – and the best parts are not nostalgia.” The reunion and farewell tour industry is usually geared towards indulging older, well-off fans, so to hear Garrett remonstrating such generational failure is arresting. It adds a new edge to an anthem like Forgotten Years, but also drives home what they’re hanging up: sung live, there’s a mournful rage to the album’s climate change-inspired single Rising Seas that’s unmatched on the record. Garrett sings with the grief and frustration of a former Gillard government minister who has had to watch a legacy of climate action gleefully unpicked by their successors: Every child, put down your toys And come inside to sleep We have to look you in the eye And say, “We sold you cheap” After two hours, the band have mined most corners of their back catalogue, from the skittish 90s beats of Redneck Wonderland to tracks from last year’s The Makarrata Project. But while Beds Are Burning squeaks in during the encore, a few other key tracks are left unplayed when the hard curfew sets in. There is one big casualty: like Chekhov’s gun, the well-beaten corrugated iron water tank that sits behind Hirst’s kit suggests we’ll be treated to Power and the Passion (and its extended drum solo). But not tonight, and there’s something admirable in the band declining to cut any of the weighty new material, deep cuts or mid-set sermons to cram in more fan favourites. All the same, it’s an awful lot of metal to lug around for naught. Instead, they close with a defiant refrain from 1987’s Diesel and Dust: “Sometimes you’re shaken to the core / Sometimes the face is gonna fall / But you don’t give in”. The band members leave the stage – and don’t look back. • Midnight Oil play Launceston on 25 January and Hobart on 28 and 31 January, as part of Mona Foma festival. Their final tour runs until May, taking in city centres and regions around Australia and New Zealand. Walter Marsh travelled to Tasmania as a guest of Mona This article was amended on 25 January. An earlier version incorrectly placed Tarkine in Tasmania’s north-eastThat’s it from me, Helen Livingstone, and the Guardian’s live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic for now. Before I go, here’s a roundup of the latest developments: The Omicron variant has moved the Covid-19 pandemic into a new phase and could bring it to an end in Europe, the WHO Europe director has said. “It’s plausible that the region is moving towards a kind of pandemic endgame,” Hans Kluge told AFP, adding that Omicron could infect 60% of Europeans by March. A fourth dose of Covid-19 vaccine given to people over 60 in Israel made them three times more resistant to serious illness than thrice-vaccinated people in the same age group, Israel’s health ministry has said. About 50,000 people protesting against Covid-19 restrictions in Belgium have been dispersed by police. The country is facing a fifth wave of Covid-19 infections, with the peak not expected for at least a couple of weeks. US authorities are confident most states will soon reach and pass a peak in coronavirus Omicron variant cases, even as hospitals struggle to cope with the current surge, Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser has said. Nearly half of those who became ill with Covid in the first wave of infections may have long-term and even permanent changes to their sense of smell, according to preliminary research from Sweden. New measures are being introduced in New Zealand as coronavirus cases could rise to more than 1,000 a day driven by the more transmissible Omicron variant. Prime minister Jacinda Ardern has postponed her planned wedding in response. Britain reported 74,799 new Covid-19 cases and 75 deaths within 28 days of a positive test on Sunday, government data showed. The number of positive tests has fallen by 15.4% to 641,687 in the last seven days, according to the data. Beijing Olympics organisers say they have confirmed 72 cases of Covid-19 among 2,586 Games-related personnel entering China from 4 January to 22 January, with no cases among 171 athletes and team officials arriving in that period. The United States, the World Health Organization’s top donor, is resisting proposals to make the agency more independent, four officials involved in the talks said, raising doubts about the Biden administration’s long-term support for the UN agency. Hong Kong authorities said on Sunday one hamster surrendered to authorities by pet owners had tested positive for Covid-19 and that more than 2,200 hamsters had been culled as the city struggled to contain an outbreak. The Omicron-fuelled wave of Covid-19 infections has led wealthy countries to intensify their recruitment of nurses from poorer parts of the world, worsening dire staffing shortages in overstretched workforces there, the International Council of Nurses has said according to Reuters. Sickness, burnout and staff departures amid surging Omicron cases have driven absentee rates to levels not yet seen during the two-year pandemic, said Howard Catton, CEO of the Geneva-based group that represents 27 million nurses and 130 national organisations. To plug the gap, Western countries have responded by hiring army personnel as well as volunteers and retirees but many have also stepped up international recruitment as part of a trend that is worsening health inequity, he continued. “We have absolutely seen an increase in international recruitment to places like the UK, Germany, Canada and the United States,” Catton said in a Reuters interview based on a report he co-authored on Covid-19 and the global nursing force. “I really fear this ‘quick fix solution’ – it’s a bit similar to what we’ve been seeing with PPE (personal protective equipment) and vaccines where rich countries have used their economic might to buy and to hoard – if they do that with the nursing workforce it will just make the inequity even worse.” Even before the pandemic there was a global shortage of 6 million nurses, with nearly 90% of those shortages in low and lower-middle-income countries, according to ICN data. Some of the recent recruits to rich countries have come from sub-Saharan Africa, including Nigeria, and parts of the Caribbean, Catton said, saying that nurses were often motivated by higher salaries and better terms than at home. The ICN report said this process was also being facilitated by giving nurses preferred immigration status. “The bottom line is that some people would look at this and say this is rich countries offloading the costs of educating new nurses and health workers,” he said. Even wealthy countries will struggle to cope with the “mountains of backlog of unmet care” when the pandemic winds down, Catton warned, calling for more investment and a ten-year plan to strengthen the workforce. “We need a coordinated, collaborative, concerted global effort which is underpinned by serious investment, not just warm words and platitudes and applause,” he said. Australians may not be able to travel without quarantine to Europe even if they are fully vaccinated, with both the European Council and the United States issuing warnings about the severity of the Omicron wave down under. On 17 January, the European Council removed Australia, Canada and Argentina from the “white list”, the list of countries for which restrictions on non-essential travel should be listed. One day later, on 18 January, the United States updated its travel advice for Australia to “do not travel” after the Centre for Disease Control issued a level four travel health notice for Australia due to “a very high level of COVID-19 in the country”. That was about a week after reported case numbers peaked at more than 100,000 on 8 January. The European Council list is reviewed every two weeks, so if Australia’s case numbers continue to fall it could be reinstated as early as next week. The recommendation is not legally binding, and countries can set their own border restrictions. Italy, Greece and Cyprus have already ignored the ruling. Many European countries are also experiencing a large number of Covid cases, including France, Italy, Spain, Germany and Denmark. The European Council recommended that states gradually lift their travel restrictions for people coming from New Zealand, Indonesia, South Korea, Bahrain, Chile, Colombia, Kuwait, Peru, Qatar, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, UAE, Uruguay, and China, subject to confirmation of reciprocity Good morning, this is Helen Livingstone taking over from Charlie Moloney to bring you the day’s Covid news. First of all, an update from Australia, where the two biggest states, New South Wales and Victoria, have reported a combined 41 deaths and almost 27,000 new cases. Millions of patients are currently on tenterhooks, often in agony, hoping the NHS will find time to treat them. In my local hospital trust alone, there are 100,000 people stuck in this limbo, with 8,000 of them waiting for more than a year to date. The backlog for operations has reached an all-time high, with Covid making an already difficult situation impossible. Those patients expecting surgery may be shocked by how the current system could encourage those who treat them to see pound signs rather than patients. During the pandemic, the government has poured funding into private healthcare firms, nominally to relieve pressure on overstretched NHS hospitals. The kind of spending that was once deployed for cataracts and hip operations is now being used routinely to deliver cancer and cardiology care. Nobody objects to every effort being made to cut waiting lists: but that has not happened, and costs have also rocketed. During the Covid crisis, private companies have pocketed millions in furlough payments while billing the NHS for services that we now know weren’t fully used... Here’s a round-up of some key Covid news so far: Britain reported 74,799 new Covid-19 cases and 75 deaths within 28 days of a positive test on Sunday, government data showed. The number of positive tests has fallen by 15.4% to 641,687 in the last seven days, according to the data. Beijing Olympics organisers said on Sunday they had confirmed 72 cases of Covid-19 among 2,586 Games-related personnel entering China from 4 January to 22 January, with no cases among 171 athletes and team officials arriving in that period. The United States, the World Health Organization’s top donor, is resisting proposals to make the agency more independent, four officials involved in the talks said, raising doubts about the Biden administration’s long-term support for the UN agency. Hong Kong authorities said on Sunday one hamster surrendered to authorities by pet owners had tested positive for Covid-19 and that more than 2,200 hamsters had been culled as the city struggled to contain an outbreak. About 50,000 people protesting against Covid-19 restrictions in Belgium have been dispersed by police, Reuters reports. European Commission foreign policy chief Josep Borrell thanked police and condemned “the senseless destruction and violence” in a tweet that showed him standing in front of a broken pane of glass. Some protesters let off fireworks as police advanced into a park. Riot officers ringed the water cannon. “I’m not an anti-vaxxer, I’m anti-dictator,” read another placard. Belgium is facing a fifth wave of Covid-19 infections, with the peak not expected for at least a couple of weeks. Some 89% of Belgian adults are fully vaccinated and 67% have now also received a booster shot. US authorities are confident most states will soon reach and pass a peak in coronavirus Omicron variant cases, even as hospitals struggle to cope with the current surge, Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser said on Sunday. “I think [we’re] as confident as you can be,” Anthony Fauci told ABC’s This Week. “You never want to be overconfident when you’re dealing with this virus, because it has certainly surprised us in the past. “But, if you look at the patterns that we have seen in South Africa, in the UK and in Israel, and in the [US] north-east and New England and upper midwest states, they have peaked and started to come down rather sharply. “There are still some southern states and western states that continue to go up but if the pattern follows the trend that we’re seeing in other places … I believe that you will start to see a turnaround throughout the entire country.” The Omicron variant has moved the Covid-19 pandemic into a new phase and could bring it to an end in Europe, the WHO Europe director has said. “It’s plausible that the region is moving towards a kind of pandemic endgame,” Hans Kluge told AFP in an interview on Sunday, adding that Omicron could infect 60% of Europeans by March. Once the surge of Omicron currently sweeping across Europe subsides, “there will be for quite some weeks and months a global immunity, either thanks to the vaccine or because people have immunity due to the infection, and also lowering seasonality”. “We anticipate that there will be a period of quiet before Covid-19 may come back towards the end of the year, but not necessarily the pandemic coming back,” Kluge said. A fourth dose of Covid-19 vaccine given to people over 60 in Israel made them three times more resistant to serious illness than thrice-vaccinated people in the same age group, Israel’s health ministry said on Sunday. The ministry also said the fourth dose, or second booster, doubled resistance against infection compared with those in the age group who received only three shots of the vaccine. Israel began offering a fourth dose of the Pfizer/BioNtech vaccine to people over 60 earlier this month, Reuters reports. Nearly half of those who became ill with Covid in the first wave of infections may have long-term and even permanent changes to their sense of smell, according to preliminary research from Sweden. A sudden loss of smell, or an impaired or distorted perception of odours, emerged as an unusual symptom of Covid early on in the pandemic. While many people swiftly recovered, others found that their sense of smell never quite returned to normal. To find out how common the impairments might be, scientists at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm ran comprehensive tests on 100 individuals who caught Covid in the first wave of infections that swept through Sweden in spring 2020. Their early findings show that 18 months after recovering from Covid, very few people – only 4% – had lost their sense of smell entirely, but a third had a reduced ability to detect odours, and nearly half complained of parosmia, where the sense of smell is distorted. Most of those with a reduced sense of smell were unaware of it before they joined the study. The Queen flew by helicopter to her Sandringham estate in East England on Sunday after delaying her traditional Christmas trip for a month due to COVID-19, a Buckingham Palace source said. Reuters reports that the queen flew from Windsor Castle to the residence in Norfolk, where the monarch had spent Christmas with members of her family for decades before the pandemic struck in 2020. The 95-year-old monarch has been at Windsor Castle to the west of London for most of the pandemic. She will celebrate her Platinum Jubilee, marking 70 years on the throne, this year. Some American conservatives are taking aim at policies that allow doctors to consider race as a risk factor when allocating scarce COVID-19 treatments, saying the protocols discriminate against white people. The wave of infections brought on by the omicron variant and a shortage of treatments have focused attention on the policies, AP reports. Medical experts say the opposition is misleading. Health officials have long said there is a strong case for considering race as one of many risk factors in treatment decisions. And there is no evidence that race alone is being used to decide who gets medicine. The issue came to the forefront last week after Fox News host Tucker Carlson, former President Donald Trump and Republican Sen. Marco Rubio jumped on the policies. In recent days, conservative law firms have pressured a Missouri-based health care system, Minnesota and Utah to drop their protocols and sued New York state over allocation guidelines or scoring systems that include race as a risk factor. There were 74,799 new cases of Covid-19 reported in the UK on Sunday, the Government said. The Government also said a further 75 people have died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19, bringing the total to 153,862. A total of 52,223,105 first doses of Covid-19 vaccine had been delivered in the UK by January 22, Government figures show. Some 48,158,421 second doses have been delivered, an increase of 42,473. A combined total of 36,890,079 booster and third doses have been given, a day-on-day rise of 68,795. Here’s a round-up of today’s Covid-19 news so far. Russia has again broken its record for the number of new Covid-19 cases, after reporting 63,205 new infections.It is the third day in a row it has beaten its highest previous total. Another 679 people have died, bringing the death toll to 326,112. Two million people will be tested for Covid in Beijing, a fortnight before the Winter Olympics is set to begin. An outbreak of nine cases saw restrictions introduced as athletes, delegates and other personnel start arriving in the city. Thousands of protestors have marched through Brussels opposing coronavirus rules. Police have used tear gas and water cannon against demonstrators who are angry about restrictions including mandatory vaccinations and Covid passports. A hamster surrendered to Hong Kong authorities by its owners has tested positive for Covid-19 and more than 2,200 hamsters have been culled, as the city grapples to contain an outbreak of the virus. The UK is past the worst of the Covid pandemic but should be braced for some “possible bumps on the road”, according to the Prof Neil Ferguson, the scientist who helped shape Britain’s lockdown strategy. England has been labelled an “outlier” by Scotland’s first minister Nicola Sturgeon over vaccine passports and mask wearing in public places, she told BBC One’s Sunday Morning politics programme. Dominic Raab told Sophie Raworth, who is now fronting the BBC show, that Boris Johnson should resign if he misleads parliament, in keeping with the ministerial code. Senior World Health Organization official Maria van Kerkhove has said the Omicron variant will not the last mutation of concern, adding that globally the population is still vulnerable. New measures are being introduced in New Zealand as coronavirus cases could rise to more than 1,000 a day driven by the more transmissible Omicron variant. Prime minister Jacinda Ardern has postponed her planned wedding in response. As reported earlier, thousands of protesters are demonstrating in Brussels, Belgium today against Covid-19 measures in the country. Police have set off tear gas and used water cannon in an attempt to control and deter crowds. It’s not just people who are feeling the effects of the pandemic, as a cull of hamsters is underway in Hong Kong. On Tuesday officials ordered the killing of hamsters from dozens of pet shops after tracing a Covid-19 outbreak to a worker and asked people to surrender any of the animals bought on or after 22 December. One who had been surrendered to authorities has tested positive. While a handful of hamsters had already tested positive for the virus, this case is the first involving a hamster in the care of a pet owner that has tested positive. Read more: Dozens of Olympic Games personnel have tested positive for Covid, according to organisers of the Beijing event which starts in 12 days. They reported 72 cases among 2,586 Games-related personnel arriving in China from Jan 4 to Jan 22. But there were no cases among the 171 athletes and team officials arriving during that period, according to Reuters in the Chinese capital. Of the confirmed positive cases, 39 were found in testing at the airport and 33 inside the “closed loop” bubble that separates all event personnel from the public. Participants in the bubble are subject to daily testing. Thousands of protestors have marched through Brussels opposing coronavirus rules. A sprawling crowd appeared far larger than previous demonstrations that have paraded through the Belgian capital to the seat of the European Union, according to reporters from Agence France-Presse. Protesters carried signs slamming Belgium Prime Minister Alexander De Croo and the Covid Safe pass proving you are vaccinated or have tested negative that is required for entry into many venues. Organisers including the World Wide Demonstration for Freedom and Europeans United for Freedom had called for people to come from other EU states and flags from Poland, the Netherlands and Romania could be seen. “What has been happening since 2020 has allowed people to wake up to corruption,” said Francesca Fanara, who had travelled from northern France, “It’s a health dictatorship,” said Adolfo Barbosa from Portugal. “It warms the heart to see these people here.” Wedding bells are postponed for New Zealand’s Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern. The 41-year old had planned to marry next weekend but is putting her nuptials on hold following the discovery of nine cases of the omicron variant in a single family that flew to Auckland, Associated Press reports. Ardern announced new COVID-19 restrictions on Sunday to try and arrest the spread of the variant as one of the few remaining countries to have avoided any outbreaks of omicron finally succumbed. “I just join many other New Zealanders who have had an experience like that as a result of the pandemic and to anyone who’s caught up in that scenario, I am so sorry,” she told reporters. The so-called “red setting” of the country’s pandemic response includes heightened measures such as required mask wearing and limits on gatherings. The restrictions will go into effect on Monday. Businesses can remain open and people can still visit family and friends and move freely around the country. My colleague Nicola Davis has spoken to Prof Neil Ferguson, the epidemiologist who first raised the alarm over the scale of the threat posed by Covid cases in the UK in March 2020. The UK is past the worst of the Covid pandemic but should be braced for some “possible bumps on the road”, according to the scientist who helped shape Britain’s lockdown strategy. Neil Ferguson, a leading epidemiologist at Imperial College London, said things were looking up as the country passed the peak of yet another wave of coronavirus infections. “I am optimistic that the bulk of the pandemic, in terms of deaths and hospitalisations, is behind us. Though we should still be prepared for some possible bumps on the road,” he said, adding that any new variants – which were highly likely to arise – may have a less dramatic impact than Omicron. See more: Back to the UK, where the Conservative party’s Scottish chief whip says prime minister Boris Johnson’s resignation over parties during Covid-19 lockdowns is “inevitable”. Stephen Kerr told BBC Scotland’s Sunday Show that whatever the outcome of the investigation, it would likely end Johnson’s time in Downing Street, according to PA Media. The leader of the Scottish Conservatives, Douglas Ross, has already called for him to resign. “I think the longer it takes for the Sue Gray report to come out, the more detail there’s going to be in it, the more investigation that will have taken place,” Kerr said. “I think there’s an inevitability to what happens next and it gives me, as you can imagine, no joy whatsoever about a Conservative prime minister having to leave office, but I think that is where this ends up.” Here’s something a bit different. An Irish trainee nurse, who has previously adapted famous works of art for the Covid-era, has taken on Mona Lisa to raise money for charity. Chloe Slevin, a 21-year-old nursing student at University College Dublin, has painted the Corona Lisa, and is auctioning it off to raise funds for Ireland’s children’s hospice, LauraLynn. In it, the subject of Leonardo Da Vinci’s famous portrait is wearing full PPE. She told PA Media that she drew inspiration from working on a children’s emergency ward. “The PPE became normal to us and we were wearing it day in, day out and that’s kind of what inspired the Corona Lisa,” she said. “I loved this placement but it was a very tough time. There I experienced my first paediatric cardiac arrest and that’s something you’d never forget. You never forget the moment you got that phone call, we ran in to put on our PPE and we did everything we could. “It was probably the toughest thing I’ve gone through so far, it was an incredibly difficult time. The impact it had on me, I still get emotional talking about it today.” She has previously recreated Vermeer’s Girl with a Pearl Earring as Girl With a Surgical Mask. Slevin also painted The Separation of Adam, from Michelangelo’s The Creation of Adam, seen on the Sistine Chapel’s ceiling. The city government in Beijing has introduced new measures to deal with an outbreak of Covid-19, two weeks before the Winter Olympics begins in the city. Nine cases were identified on Saturday, with six in the Chinese city’s Fengtai district. Testing has been increased, with 2 million set to be checked, and authorities have asked residents from the district and other affected areas not to leave the city, and to avoid mass gatherings. In Fengtai, some kindergartens have told parents that children who have not been vaccinated against coronavirus will not be able to attend, two parents told Reuters. Some delegates, athletes and media personnel have already begun arriving in China ahead of the games which start on 4 February. Russia has again broken its record for the number of new Covid-19 cases, after reporting 63,205 new infections. It is the third day in a row it has beaten its highest previous total, Reuters reports. More than 57,000 new cases were reported the day before. Another 679 people have died, bringing the death toll to 326,112. A senior World Health Organization official cautioned against countries thinking they were over the worst of Covid-19 after infection rates dipped following the Omicron variant. Maria van Kerkhove, speaking to Sophie Raworth on BBC One said: “You may be out of the latest wave of Omicron. In many countries like the UK, that has a high population level of immunity level from infection and vaccination coverage, you will see a difference going forward. You’re in a different stage of the pandemic. “[However] out of the 10 billion doses of vaccines that have been administered to date, there are still 3 billion people waiting for their first dose. We still have a highly susceptible population, even if there are some countries further along, the rest of the world is still in it. It’s a global problem, we need to treat it with global solutions.” She added: “It will not end with this latest wave with Omicron, and it’s not the last variant you will hear us talking about.” As part of a series of questions asking whether the first minister has a deadline in mind for when Covid measures will end, Raworth asks how long masks in public places will remain in Scotland. Sturgeon replies: “I don’t want them to be in place for any longer than they should be. None of us enjoy wearing them, but they are not the biggest handicap to endure to stop transmission. While they make a difference, I think it’s something we should do. I’d suggest it’s England that’s an outlier, not Scotland, Wales or Northern Ireland or other countries across the world. “An opinion poll showed that 2/3 of people think we’ve taken the right approach during the pandemic. People understand to protect ourselves, each other and our society, doing things like wearing face coverings is a small price to pay, and allows the most clinically vulnerable to live something like a normal life.” Sturgeon talks about the impact on business. She said she realises that hospitality has been badly affected by the pandemic. “It’s not about having protective measures and businesses are damaged, or having no measures and everything is fine. It’s having measures than stem transmission, or allowing things to be controlled.” She says that vaccine passports don’t eradicate the chance of an outbreak, but reduces it. “If you do have an outbreak in one of these higher risk settings, you reduce the number of people who are likely to get very seriously ill and reduce the pressure on our health service. “If you look across Europe right now, many many countries have Covid certification schemes in place and many countries have them in place in a much wider spread of venues than is the case here in Scotland. Of course Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland have all chosen to do this… We feel as if we are being described as somehow doing things uniquely, and because England hasn’t done them we’re the outlier. “It’s a statement of fact that in many of these cases, it’s actually England that’s the outlier - not just the UK context, but in a European context. Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland are actually following the path that many European countries are.” First minister of Scotland Nicola Sturgeon is now up on the BBC. She says the decisions over the government easing measures in England is a matter for them, with her government taking a “cautious path” through the pandemic. “We have learnt from experience that this virus is unpredictable.” Raworth says infection rates are roughly the same in Scotland and England, have the stricter restrictions in Scotland worth it? “Overall throughout this pandemic, levels of infection have been lower in Scotland. “Yes, I think they were worth it. I know that they have had a big impact on businesses and individuals. While I understand the Scotland/England comparison, it’s not the most important one. “What’s important is are we in a better position than we would have been without these restrictions? It’s hard to absolutely prove cause and effect, but if you look at what we were predicting through our modelling, what we were on track for, 50,000 infections a day, we didn’t see that materialise. “That was a combination of an acceleration of our booster programme, Scotland is the most vaccinated part of the UK ... these sensible balanced protective measures introduced before Christmas, and the magnificent responsible response from the public who have changed their behaviour. We are hopefully now seeing Scotland very firmly on the downward slope.” An interesting exchange as Raworth asks Raab whether Johnson should resign if it’s found he had misled parliament. She mentions news that emerged overnight in the Sunday Times that Sue Gray’s inquiry has been expanded to include parties in the prime minister’s flat. Raab says it’s a significant and important development and Gray will look into it. In response to her asking about whether the prime minister should resign if he’s found to have lied. “We’ve been clear that ministerial code of conduct is there for everyone, including the prime minister. The facts are there for Sue Gray to determine. There will be full transparency and accountability. “The code of conduct for ministers is clear, if that you mislead parliament it is a resigning matter. I’m full square behind what the code of conduct for ministers says, it’s important for integrity in public office.” On the BBC, Sophie Raworth is still presenting its Sunday morning politics show since Andrew Marr’s departure. On Sunday Morning, her first guest in the studio is Dominic Raab. She asks him if he could be prime minister by the end of the week, given the upcoming publication of the Sue Gray report. He says not and adds: “The reality is Sue Gray will report on the issues around Number 10. We take these issues seriously and it;s right they’re investigated by Sue Gray properly and there’s that transparency and due process.” She asks if he’s preparing for a vote of no confidence. “There is a rallying of support behind the prime minister. You could feel it in the chamber. I think it’s because the booster campaign has been so successful. We’re coming out of lockdown measures. We’re coming out of Plan B, opening up the economy, and this is all because of calls the prime minister has made.” Appearing on Sky, former prime minister Gordon Brown said Boris Johnson’s government will end in scandal. He said: “My fear is that scandal is going to follow Boris Johnson as long as he is prime minister. “We don’t just have the scandal - and all the details will probably come out later this week about partying - we have the conflicts of interest, we have the dubious appointments, we have foreign money and question marks over that, who is paying the bills for what? “And I don’t think we are going to see this administration end in anything other than scandal.” Shadow attorney general Emily Thornberry on now. She says that on vaccines for NHS staff or they will be sacked, the priority should be working with people within the health service. “The principle behind [compulsory vaccinations for staff], we do agree with. The question is when should that policy deadline be implemented. There is discussion about putting off that deadline in relation to that, and if we are going to do that we need to work with the hospitals, trade union movement about how it is that we can convince as many people as possible who work in the health service to get vaccinated. “Nobody works in the health service for the money, but it’s to help others. Arguments need to be put forward to say they’re not helping people by not getting vaccinated.” Phillips says that partygate has made it look “grim” for the government and that it’s paralysing them. He says Dominic Cummings will be reinterviewed tomorrow by Sue Gray and another “red wall” Conservative MP has submitted a letter of no confidence in the prime minister. “I accept the seriousness of the issue, that’s why Sue Gray should determine who, when and how she investigates. I will point to decisions made this week, the success of the vaccine rollout, the measures that open up the economy, none of which would have happened if we’d have listened to the Labour party,” Raab says. “All of this shows that not withstanding these all of these other issues, the PM is taking the right calls, the big decisions to take us through the worst pandemic in living memory.” Phillips says that 73,000 health service staff will be sacked if they remain unvaccinated, and asks if it’s the right decision. The Royal College of General Practitioners has asked for it to be delayed. Raab replies: “We’ve got 9 out of 10 NHS staff vaccinated, there’s been a big push to encourage vaccinations. It shows progress being made. We encourage anyone to come forward to get those jabs before the deadline. But we’ve also got to think about people who would be at risk if NHS staff don’t have the vaccine.” We’re underway with Trevor Phillips on Sunday, on Sky. Deputy prime minister Dominic Raab is up first. He says that issues like partygate as a “distraction” while the government waits for the publication of the Sue Gray report. Johnson announced plan B lockdown measures will be lifted from January 26. “This week has shown that we’re dealing with the big issues, that we haven’t been distracted. We’ve been able to ease up on the lockdown measures, that only happens because of the success of the vaccine rollout, that only happens because the prime minister held his nerve, when others including the Labour Party were encouraging him to stay in lockdown measures,” he says. Good morning from London, I’m Harry Taylor and I’ll be bringing you coverage today, as the saga around parties in Downing Street during coronavirus lockdowns continues to unfold. The senior civil servant investigating allegations of at least nine events has been given access to a log of staff movements in and out of the building from security data, which includes swipecards. Sue Gray, the official putting the report together, is expected to publish her findings this week, and will examine the precise timings of arrivals and departures. The outcome could determine the future of UK prime minister Boris Johnson, with some of his MPs ready to submit letters of no confidence depending on what her report contains. The issue is likely to be explored in the Sunday morning politics shows. Dominic Raab, the justice secretary and deputy prime minister will appear on both Sky and BBC this morning. Nicola Sturgeon will also be speaking to Sophie Raworth on the Beeb, with Gordon Brown, Emily Thornberry, Rachel de Souza and Ukraine’s ambassador to the UK Vadym Prystaiko on Trevor Phillips on Sunday. While the focus in the UK is over parties that went ahead, in New Zealand it’s on one that won’t be, as prime minister Jacinda Ardern has cancelled her wedding to fiancée Clark Gayford amid the Omicron variant. It’s expected the country will see 1,000 cases a day in the coming weeks.Eighty-four percent of the population of Tonga has been affected by the ashfall and tsunami that hit the country, the Tongan government has said in its second update since the volcanic eruption on 15 January. Sixty-two residents of the remote Mango Island have had to relocate to nearby Nomuka Island after losing their homes and belongings, and the government warned they may have to relocate again to the main island due to food and water shortages. The government also released the names of the two Tongan nationals who died in the tsunami: Lataimaumi Lauaki, a 49-year-old woman from Nomuka; and Telai Tutu’ila, a 65-year-old man from Mango Island. They were buried in the days after the disaster. As well as the three fatalities, which included 50-year-old British woman Angela Glover, several people had been injured, the government said, including one person on Ha’apai who required emergency medical treatment, eight injuries on Nomuka Island, four minor injuries on Fonoi Island and two minor injuries on Tungua Island. A field hospital was set up on Nomuka, where the tsunami washed away the health centre. The government said communication between the islands, which was cut off when the eruption damaged the undersea communications cable, was “an acute challenge”, though some international calls were now possible. “A New Zealand relief flight arrived with much-needed telecommunications equipment to re-establish limited internet connection,” the statement said. The vessel that will attempt to repair the undersea communications cable, severed by the eruption and tsunami, is expected to reach Tonga “in the next few days”, the government said. “Although there has been no further volcanic activity, challenges to sea transportation remain as fallout on the surface of the ocean is causing damage to the vessels.” The National Emergency Operations Centre said water was their main request and they had distributed nearly 60,000 litres already. But the government said “water supplies have been tested: groundwater and clean water are safe to drink”. Bulk water supplies and relief stores, donated from New Zealand, arrived last week, with more due to arrive from Australia early this week onboard the HMAS Adelaide. Support has also been pledged from the World Bank, Asian Development Bank, Japan and China. “His Majesty’s government is deeply appreciative to the international community for their generous and timely assistance in response to this unprecedented event,” the Tongan government said.Barnaby Joyce has apologised for claiming “people aren’t dying” of Covid in Australia, while also blaming consumers and businesses for hoarding rapid antigen tests. The deputy prime minister made the comments on Monday, the first day that priority groups were due to gain free access to RATs, although supply shortages will likely result in a delay of a few weeks before they are widely available. Joyce told Radio National the “best test of a competent government is that people don’t die” and that Australia has one of the lowest death rates from Covid-19 in the world. Asked about the European Council applying a warning on travel to and from Australia due to the Omicron outbreak, Joyce replied: “Well, people are not dying.” There were 1,653 deaths across Australia from the beginning of the pandemic to 27 November 2021, when the first Omicron case was confirmed in the country. Since then, with a mix of the Delta and Omicron variants circulating, there have been more than 1,100 deaths, with the deadliest day of the pandemic recorded last week. When Radio National host Patricia Karvelas noted that “people are dying every day”, Joyce corrected himself. “Sorry, sorry. Correction, you were correct,” he said. “I made a mistake. I shouldn’t have said that. But the numbers in which – the fatality rate is very low. “Obviously, it’s a tragic thing for anybody who loses a family member for any reason – for catching the flu. But the fatality rate of Omicron is remarkably low and Australia has done a remarkable job.” Earlier, Joyce said the commonwealth has 70m rapid tests on order, including 16m arriving next week, and the states have ordered another 130m. Joyce claimed tests that have arrived already are “being hoarded” with some people and businesses buying more than they need. “It is not as if the tests aren’t there. The problems that Australia is experiencing is being experienced around the world. “We don’t manufacture RATs like other countries do, such as China … You can’t, years ago, predict RATs are going to be the things that you need. But what we are doing is making sure we deal with issues as they come along. That is what a competent government does.” The health minister, Greg Hunt, backed Joyce’s hoarding claim and said the commonwealth had stepped in to impose purchase limits in grocery stores and supermarkets. Supplies would be adequate for the partial free-access scheme “going forward”, he claimed on Monday, without nominating a date they would be widely available. Hunt also announced the Novavax vaccine had been recommended for use by the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation and will be made available from 21 February. Hunt told reporters there were “real signs of hope” with a new vaccine, “clear signs of the virus having reached peak in at least four jurisdictions” and the beginning of the partial free access scheme. Labor has stepped up its attacks on the government over the widespread shortages of RATs after the Coalition agreed to give free access to more than 6m concession card holders. Labor is calling for universal free access. Trent Twomey, the national president of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia, told Sky News on Monday that “clearly the majority of community pharmacies do not have tests to go live today” with the free-access scheme. Twomey said that supply is “patchy” at present. He noted that 16m tests are due to be supplied to community pharmacies in the next week, with a further 22m to arrive in the first fortnight of February – suggesting that like the vaccination rollout free RATs would be phased in as supply increases. Twomey said that pharmacies will use “real-time monitoring” to ensure that customers can only receive one free pack of five tests a month, but there was “nothing we can do” to stop people stocking up at other suppliers such as service stations. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning He blamed states and territories for giving just “hours’ notice on New Year’s Eve” that health orders would switch from requiring PCR tests to allowing rapid tests, as well as the Therapeutic Goods Administration for allowing general retailers –including tobacconists and service stations – to sell tests. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, said that many pensioners will “rock up to their local chemist and there won’t be a rapid antigen test available”. “It’s quite extraordinary that on the day on which pensioners are eligible to receive a RAT … what we heard from Barnaby Joyce then was blaming the Australian people for the unavailability of rapid antigen tests here in Australia,” Albanese told Radio National. “We all knew that once we opened up … elimination tests would be an important part of the response to keep people safe, and the government simply didn’t do anything about it.” The federal health department has bought $62m worth of rapid antigen tests using the “extreme urgency or events unforeseen” provisions of its procurement rules as it seeks to secure stock. Despite Joyce’s claim that none are made here, at least one company – Innovation Scientific Pty Ltd (Australia) – has been approved to make rapid antigen tests in Australia.Last week New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern said the arrival of Omicron was not a matter not of if but when. Days later, it arrived. With the highly contagious variant entering Aotearoa, officials say they expect cases to reach over 1,000 a day in the next two weeks. More broadly, New Zealand is entering a new stage in the pandemic: needing to reckon for the first time with the prospect of widespread Covid infections across the country, having kept the virus at bay for almost two full years. We want to hear from Guardian readers in New Zealand about how you’re feeling about this next phase (trepidation, frustration, confidence?) and your reflections on what’s to come. What was your response when the news of the “red” settings was announced? How are you preparing for Omicron, in both practical and psychological ways? What are you worried about? And what are your expectations for the year ahead? Share your thoughts and experiences You can get in touch by using the encrypted form below. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.French designer Manfred Thierry Mugler, known for the powerful-shouldered, cinch-waisted silhouettes that reigned over fashion in the 1980s, died on Sunday at the age of 73 of “natural causes”, according to his agent. A former ballet dancer, Mugler’s bold collections – presented at highly stylised, themed runway shows – were at the forefront of the structured, decadent style that came to be known as “power dressing”. “He was timeless and ahead of his time,” supermodel Jerry Hall – the face of his bestselling Angel perfume – said of the designer in 2019. “He knew all about gender fluidity and his clothes reflected the heat and sexuality of the late 70s and early 80s,” she told the New York Times. Though Mugler retired from the label that bore his name in 2002, he did not give up on making clothes. He was responsible for Beyoncé’s science fiction-inflected Sasha Fierce looks in the late 2000s. He also created costumes for Lady Gaga and Cardi B. In 2019, he created Kim Kardashian’s Met Gala look, a latex dress dripping in crystals. “We are devastated to announce the passing of Mr Manfred Thierry Mugler on Sunday January 23rd 2022,” said a post on the designer’s official Facebook account. Born in Strasbourg in December 1948, he arrived in Paris aged 20 and created his own label “Cafe de Paris” in 1973, a year before founding Thierry Mugler. The LGBTQ community was a frequent source of talent and inspiration for the designer. Mugler cast trans models in his runway shows as early as the 1980s, and frequently collaborated with drag artists and club kids on and off the runway, including corsetmaker Mr Pearl. By the late 1990s, the Mugler name was associated more with fragrance than fashion, thanks to his blockbuster perfume Angel. The rights to his name were acquired by cosmetics giant Clarins in 1997, and that fragrance and its offshoots, remain bestsellers. In 2002, the fashion division of Mugler shut down but the brand was revived in 2010 under the creative direction of stylist Nicola Formichetti and later Casey Cadwallader. Mugler’s use of corsetry and his exaggerated approach to the female body has drawn criticism, but the designer was no less extreme with his own physique. In 2019, the normally reclusive designer posed for a nude photoshoot with Interview Magazine and discussed his exhaustive body-building routine and cosmetic surgeries. “I think it’s important for people to be a complete realisation of themselves. I have always been fascinated by the human body, and I wanted to pay homage to what it can do,” he said. In 2019, the designer was the subject of a major retrospective exhibition, Thierry Mugler: Couturissime, which debuted in Montreal before touring to Paris in 2021. The designer had been due to announce new collaborations early this week, his agent Jean-Baptiste Rougeot told Agence France-Presse.So it has come to this. The coda to a long and storied history of Australian cricket memorabilia, from Don Bradman’s baggy green to Channel Nine’s deep vault of autographed ephemera: Steve Smith is becoming an NFT. In an Instagram post at the tail end of last week, the Australian vice-captain announced a partnership with Glorious Digital, a New Zealand NFT studio launched by All Blacks great Dan Carter. The studio plans to release a range of digital collectibles this month, with collaborators like Crowded House’s Neil Finn and the estate of Kiwi portrait and landscape artist Rita Angus. There’s no word on what Smith’s collection will contain just yet, but one can safely assume there will be no references to Sandpapergate, artistic or otherwise. Presumably it will offer more than just photos of Smith staring pensively into the middle distance, as the Instagram post might suggest. The price that devoted Smith-heads will end up forking out is also not clear, but Glorious Digital are currently selling a “founding membership” package for 0.75 Ethereum – or about $2,500. The response to the announcement has been, to put it charitably, mixed. Amid the onslaught of emoji love hearts from Indian cricket fans, a number of Smith’s followers are unsettled. “This ain’t it, chief,” one comment reads. “Congrats on a massive grift,” reads another. Smith is likely just searching for a way to eke out some more income from an audience hungry for collectibles and memorabilia. But, perhaps unknowingly, he has also stumbled into a burgeoning internet culture war. NFTs — or non-fungible tokens — have exploded into the mainstream over the last year, with clear battle lines drawn between passionate advocates and those who think they are, well, extremely stupid. You’ve no doubt come across many stories by now explaining what NFTs are – here’s one from the Guardian – but the simple version is this: they are bits of data stored on the blockchain providing proof of ownership of some asset or another. NFTs aren’t cryptocurrencies per se, but they’re in the same ballpark, and digital currencies like Ether are generally used to buy and sell them. They can represent ownership for all sorts of things, but the use that has captured the imagination of the internet and beyond is for digital art. For the true believers, NFTs are the tip of the spear for an exciting new economic order centred around artists and creators. The future is online, they say, and soon the division between the internet and “reality” will atrophy away, generating boundless economic growth — and, finally, the possibility for those artists to be properly compensated for their work. They envision a world where everything is associated with a corresponding blockchain token that can be sold, traded or lent out, from event tickets and club memberships to real estate. Critics say that’s all self-justifying bullshit, and that we’re in the midst of a speculative frenzy not unlike the tulip mania that gripped The Netherlands back in the 17th century. From this less charitable angle, the frothy NFT market is driven not by its potential to bring radical change to art and commerce but by a legion of housebound gamblers looking for ever more novel ways to secure their bag. Once the tide goes out, the Covid fog clears, and a red-hot, overstimulated global economy cools off a little, the notion of paying large sums of money for a ledger entry, corresponding to an array of ones and zeroes, in turn corresponding to a link to a picture of a cricketer, will seem far less appealing, these critics argue. Other critics, including many in Smith’s comment section, focus on the environmental impact of crypto mining, although Glorious Digital insists it is working to ensure the energy footprint of its ecosystem “operates at a bare minimum”. Somewhere in the middle of these epic debates about the future of capitalism and the internet is something far more anodyne: brands and public figures trying to capture a slice of the pie, for good or ill. That’s where we find Smith, along with a growing legion of sportspeople and other celebrities, trying to make a quick buck from an an audience that has shown itself willing to buy just about anything as long as it has been notched on the blockchain and offers the dim promise of big profits in the near future. There’s certainly money there. According to The Block Research, there were $2.2bn in sales volume across Ethereum-based exchanges in December alone. It’s safe to say that Smith probably doesn’t personally have a bold vision of shaking up the art world, unless the growing army of NFT brand strategists have really gotten in his ear. It’s far more likely he sees his upcoming collection as akin to flogging an autographed bat. But, in dipping his toe into this brave new world, he might find that digital collectibles are more politically fraught than a baggy green. JR Hennessy is a Sydney-based writer who runs The Terminal, a newsletter on business, technology, culture and politicsMuch like Jesus Christ, the friction between Kanye West and the general public comes from an attunement to the grandeur of his own destiny that can read like delusional arrogance. His first album as a rapper, 2004’s The College Dropout, is littered with nods to his significant place in history and how they foretell an auspicious future. He mentions his mother’s arrest at “the tender age of six” for Oklahoma City’s sit-in protests, declaring “with that in my blood, I was born to be different”. As he’d have it, it was no mere coincidence that on the fateful night of his near-death experience in a 2002 car crash, he was brought to the same hospital where Notorious BIG drew his final breaths. In one of the comedic skits breaking up the tracklist, a snot-nosed character delivers a line that rings out like a broad artistic statement of purpose for its writer: “This was meant to be.” And indeed, it was. Many of the claims that skeptics took as boastful chest-puffing – that he’d be one of the greatest emcees to ever pick up a mic, that he’d revolutionize hip-hop and fashion in his own image, that he would attain such notability as to make him one of the main characters of planet Earth – were borne out with time and recast as extreme yet correct self-assurance in the face of insecurity. (Crucially, The College Dropout is also shot through with feelings of inadequacy, West’s anxiety about living up to the stratospheric standards he feels God has set for him.) Though his belief in himself may have been expressed in the language of borderline-pathological ego, his later successes retroactively transformed that mentality into a defiant assertion of worth. The future’s context brings clarity to the past deeds and words of a confounding, complex figure, but in the new documentary jeen-yuhs, that cuts both ways to shed some insight on the chaos that’s engulfed West of late. The three-part bio-epic from music video stalwarts Coodie and Chike, now playing through the virtual Sundance festival before a Netflix debut in February, tracks West’s trajectory from an intimate on-the-ground perspective with the breadth of a bird’s-eye view. In covering 21 eventful years in the life of the enigma now known as Ye, with special focus placed on his formative pre-fame era, we can start to make sense of the erratic later period that’s seen West palling around with Trump, getting born again, and wilding out (even for him) on social media. Coodie and Chike’s diligent portraiture teaches any given viewer what armchair celeb scholars already know: with enough close study, even the most bewildering famous-person behavior can be rendered comprehensible. The recent name-change, for one – when a young West saw himself erroneously billed under the mononym of Kanye, he joked to Coodie that he’ll preclude disrespects moving forward by ditching his surname, or better yet, just going by Ye. The four and a half hours of jeen-yuhs yield a handful of prophetic moments like this, in which happenings decades down the road are foreshadowed with eerily specific prescience. In one of the dozens of cameos sure to please devotees of early-aughts hip-hop, Pharrell Williams stops by the studio as West prepares his sophomore LP to lay out the younger man’s next chapter. West will make it, Williams soothsays, and when he does, the greatest threat to his brilliance will be a complacency he can only stave off through constant hunger and self-doubt. With these words in mind, the shape-shifting that would define his career after he earned Goat-level plaudits for My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy in 2010 starts to resemble a master’s search for a new challenge, rather than a haphazard effort to see what works. Alexander wept, for there were no more rappers to conquer, so he made an indie rock album with Kid Cudi and then went gospel. More often, however, the connecting lines aren’t so direct. The structure of the film’s three sections (the first starts in 1999 and ends with West signing to Roc-A-Fella Records in 2001, the second makes it to his double-win at the 2005 Grammys, and the third blazes through the next 16 years) invites us to form an impression of West’s personality and then use it as a decoder. His meticulousness as a musical technician plays against a natural sense of humor in his come-up, a big grin and unchecked laugh gone from the final third aside from the briefest flicker. In his loping, endearing voiceover narration, Coodie states in plain terms that some inner glow seems to have faded from West in the time since they last met. We see that his shoulder is all chip, a complex he’ll spend the rest of his adulthood raging against. As a Black man in a racist country, as a preternaturally gifted producer no industry gatekeepers wanted to hear rhyme, and as a Chicagoan in a rap topography with peaks in Los Angeles and New York, he came to the game in a defensive crouch he never really left. Coodie and Chike emphasize the tooth-and-nail fight for every scrap of recognition; in a scene both funny and sad, West barges into offices at Roc’s headquarters and spits verses at a series of mid-level executives until he can find whoever will give him a deal. Having to take everything he’s ever been given permanently sculpted West’s psychology, making him an underdog surrounded by influential people who want to see him fail. West would later claim to relate to Donald Trump through their shared “dragon energy”, an inscrutable euphemism for the sheer might required for an outsider to bust into a power structure pitted against him. Every bit as telling is his relationship to his mother Donda, the only person more important to Kanye West than Kanye West. Beyond single-handedly raising her son in the wake of a divorce when he was only three, she’s supplied him with the unflagging, unambiguous encouragement he needs in his uphill pursuits. In one poignant scene at his mother’s apartment, West does an a cappella rendition of his devotion song Hey Mama for her, both smiling as he recalls her supporting his choice to bail on higher education despite disagreeing with it. He transforms around her, loosening into a happier, more relaxed version of himself. Her death in 2007 precipitates West losing the levity that animated his first three albums, and along with it, his sense of what matters to him. (It’s hard to discern the place family has in his life once he starts his own, as ex-wife Kim Kardashian is conspicuously absent in the film, surely due to some legal jiujitsu behind the scenes.) However sympathetic to its subject, the film isn’t flattering in its attempts at understanding. The notorious clip of Barack Obama referring to West as a “jackass” goes hand in hand with an embarrassing encounter in which West drunkenly refers to Coodie by the wrong name following a while apart. At one point, West mentions his difficulties with medication and drug use in passing. A few days ago, he took to Instagram to demand final-cut privileges over jeen-yuhs so that he can “be in charge of [his] own image.” But Coodie and Chike haven’t set out to get him, nor absolve him. They come from a place of genuine concern, helpless to watch a man with a turbulent brain losing his way, hoping only that he can find the aid he needs. At the heart of their before-and-after technique is uncertainty over the elusive question of the “real” Kanye. The directors leave us to ponder whether he’s a decent soul who’s gone astray or a megalomaniac who’s achieved his true form, each conclusion negating the other. Their film is a prism, refracting the image West is now fighting to control, its picture depending on the angle from which we view it. Early on, we see him lay down a verse from the College Dropout cut Never Let Me Down, saying that his fellow Black voters “can’t make it to ballots to choose leadership / But we can make it to Jacob’s and to the dealership”. At the time, it sounded like a callout to injustices stripping minorities of their political rights while they’re distracted by material riches. But in light of his outrageous third-act comments that slaves made the choice to remain in bondage for 400 years, that line takes on the tang of blame, as if he’s chastising the African American community for their own disenfranchisement. We can’t know which parts of Kanye West are sincere and which are a troubled distortion of the same. His past and present are inextricable, both in a state of continuous reassessment. All we can do is observe how they feed into and warp each other. jeen-yuhs is showing at the Sundance film festival and will be available on Netflix in FebruaryChildren aged 12 or over should be allowed to receive a Covid vaccine without the consent of their parents, leading ethicists and paediatricians say, while also calling for clearer national guidelines on the issue. John Massie, a professor of paediatrics at the University of Melbourne and a child bioethicist, said in a podcast published by the Medical Journal of Australia and in an accompanying piece co-authored with other experts that if those aged 12 and up “have the capacity to understand the nature of the illness … and the procedure and the side effects and the risks, then they should be able to give consent”. “Our clinical experience has been that some young people are motivated to receive a Covid‐19 vaccine, even when their parents do not wish for them to be vaccinated,” the authors wrote. “How vaccine providers should respond to this request has not been clear.” Traditionally, parents have been asked to consent to vaccinations of their children, including those in high school, with vaccine providers “usually reluctant to vaccinate, fearing legal consequences or complaints against them” if this consent is not given. While the federal and some state governments have developed guidelines that allow medical practitioners to treat mature minors without parental consent, some providers are not aware of these and even if they are, are still worried about potential legal issues or find them confusing, Massie said. “In some states, like Queensland and Victoria, it’s clear that the 12- to 15-year-old group should be able to get vaccinated under their own steam,” he told the MJA Insight podcast. “In South Australia, Western Australia and New South Wales, you need a parent’s consent, but in NSW it’s messy depending on who you ask.” However, it is always ethical to assess each child and teenager on an individual basis, Massie and his colleagues wrote, and to vaccinate if certain considerations have been made. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning For example, vaccine providers should consider the child’s knowledge about the illness they’re being vaccinated against; talk them through the risks and benefits; try to understand their family context and how their parents may react if they find out; check for any learning difficulties and medical conditions; and consider making the medicare record of 12-to-13-year-olds private. “This is sometimes called the mature minor doctrine… There is no minimum age for a mature minor, the critical issue is the capacity to make the specific health care decision,” the authors wrote. They called for any confusion about vaccinating children against parent consent to be cleared through the mature minor doctrine becoming accepted as “standard practice” throughout Australia. “Parents refusing Covid‐19 vaccination for their children is not in the best interests of the child based on medical recommendations and, further, could be conceived as harmful by failing to reduce the risk of disease due to SARS‐CoV‐2 [Covid-19] infection.” Dr Catherine Orr, a GP who works for a community vaccination clinic in Melbourne, said she agreed with Massie and his co-authors and that staff had been briefed about what to do if a child said they wanted to be vaccinated against their parent’s consent. In these cases, the clinician will assess the young person and ensure that they are a “mature minor” and can consent for medical procedures, Orr said. “It’s standard for medical procedures for children under 18. I support it, as I do for any other medical process.” Dr Nusrat Homaira, a paediatric respiratory epidemiologist in Sydney, said she always tries to work with and educate caregivers when conflicts about medical decision-making for their children arise. “Within Australia, the paediatric population is considered anyone less than or equal to 17,” she said. “I think for me, the more important issue when speaking about someone 12 or 13 especially is engaging in those vaccine conversations with their parents first. “We know from our work that healthcare providers like doctors and nurses play a huge role in in communicating risks to parents, and people do make informed decisions if you communicate properly with them.”A resident of the remote community of Yuendumu, who is caring for a toddler and a partner on dialysis, is pleading with the Northern Territory government to provide a local quarantine facility, after her Covid-positive elderly relative was forced to sleep outside on the veranda and spend three days under a tree in order to safely isolate from the rest of the family. The Warlpiri woman, who has asked not to be named, says she is “stressed and worried” that her child and partner remain exposed to the virus while the relative remains in their care. She says communication with health officials has left her confused about whether her relative will be sent to quarantine elsewhere or asked stay at home. “There should be a quarantine place somewhere in Yuendumu,” the woman says. “Positive people have been staying in their houses, in every house in Yuendumu, that’s how the spread went really fast.” The woman suggested vacant homes in town, or local public facilities, could be used for quarantine to take pressure off families whose homes are overcrowded, and where positive people are sharing the one bathroom or kitchen. In one Yuendumu home, it has been reported, 23 people are sharing the facilities. “It’s to keep the community and houses safer. That way we don’t have to be stressing out and frustrated, keeping positive people in our yard,” she says. An NT Health spokesperson said the situation in Yuendumu “changes daily and is responded to accordingly”. “NT Health tailors its Covid-19 outbreak response to meet the unique needs and circumstances of each community,” the department said. “NT Health, NT police, and other agencies work closely with local people to communicate clearly about testing and isolation requirements. “Flights are scheduled to transport residents from Yuendumu if required due to the Covid-19 outbreak. Priority is given to those people who are high risk. Further assistance will be provided by the Australian Defence Force to transport more people to appropriate quarantine facilities.” Last week, leaked minutes of the Yuendumu local emergency health response group – made up of NT police, health workers and key community organisations – expressed concern that the “urban model” of managing Covid at home was not working in the community. “It appears that the outbreak cannot be contained by using the tools (targeted testing) and practices (quarantine/lockout/living with Covid) in place. An approach that is not working for the community and more fit for an urban mainstream environment,” the minutes of the 17 January meeting said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Need to have an honest and transparency [sic] that it is not working and because of that it is placing everyone at risk. Futile to keep supporting an urban model.” On Friday, Yuendumu recorded 12 new Covid cases, bringing to 53 the total number of active cases in a population of about 750 people.Humanitarian groups have accused the Greek government of fomenting a hunger crisis in refugee camps with “conscious” policy choices that have left thousands unable to access food. Decisions aimed at deterring migrant flows had, they said, created an intolerable situation in which refugees have been left struggling to feed themselves for months. “It is unthinkable that people are going hungry in Greece,” said Martha Roussou of the International Rescue Committee. “Through no fault of their own they have fallen through the cracks and all because of a problem created by gaps in legislation and policy.” The IRC said it estimated that 40% of camp occupants – about 6,000 refugees – had been denied basic means of subsistence because of the centre-right administration’s decision to halt food provisions for those no longer in the asylum procedure. Worryingly high numbers were children. About 40% of the population residing in the state-run facilities are minors. “Teachers in local primary schools have reported children turning up to school without having eaten, without even a snack to see them through the day,” the New York-based group said in a statement. Although 16,559 refugees were registered in camps on the Greek mainland, new catering contracts had been agreed to provide food for only 10,213 people, it revealed. Aid organisations first raised the alarm in October after a change of law resulted in vital services not only being cut for recognised refugees and rejected asylum seekers but those who had failed to register applications, often because of chronic processing delays. In an open letter addressed to Greek and EU officials, the 33 groups demanded that food be given to all camp residents irrespective of their legal status. The European home affairs commissioner, Ylva Johansson, responded that Greek authorities had been repeatedly called on to “ensure that all persons, particularly the vulnerable” receive food and other necessities. Athens’ migration ministry vigorously rejects any suggestion of a hunger crisis. Manos Logothetis, who oversees refugee reception, described the allegation as “nonsense”, saying it had been manufactured by NGOs. “If there are 10 refugees in this country who have been denied food I will quit my job,” he said. “If a hunger crisis really existed there’d be riots and protests. We are in discussion with the EU commissioner every week and have reassured her that there is no issue with food, that everyone who is supposed to receive it, including the vulnerable and incapacitated, is getting support.” But in a written statement the ministry reiterated that under Greek and European law only people applying for international protection could be considered “beneficiaries eligible for material conditions of reception, and therefore food”. In recent months camp residents who do not fit that description have grown, despite Athens also being applauded for accelerating asylum claims. Rights groups said excessive expectations of successful asylum seekers are partly to blame. Under legislation implemented last year recognised refugees are quickly left to fend for themselves, with benefits they once enjoyed, including cash assistance and food, suspended after 30 days. In a society with little integration support, survival is often impossible, and most are forced to return to camps after confronting bureaucratic hurdles, linguistic challenges and difficulties finding work. Turkey’s refusal to readmit rejected asylum seekers has not helped either. A landmark deal reached between the EU and Ankara in 2016 aimed to send migrants who failed to win refugee status back to Turkey. The country has refused to take any back since March 2020 when the president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, encouraged thousands of asylum seekers to enter the bloc, via Greece, sparking a border crisis that further soured the Nato allies’ already strained ties. With their claims rejected and without anywhere to go, they, too, are forced to remain in camps. But rights groups say it is the Greek government’s controversial decision to rule Turkey as a safe third country that has mostly accounted for the build-up of people no longer considered part of the asylum process. Since June, Afghans, Syrians, Somalis, Pakistanis and Bangladeshis have been denied the right to seek refugee status, with Athens saying they should apply for asylum in neighbouring Turkey. “It has created a situation where thousands have been left in legal limbo and in utter destitution without access to food and other basic rights in the camps,” said Minos Mouzourakis, legal officer at Refugee Support Aegean, a migrant solidarity group in Athens. “What is absolutely clear is that the hunger crisis unfolding in Greece is a direct result of the conscious policy choices of the government.” It was imperative, he said, that given Turkey’s stance, Greek asylum officials ended the impasse by examining the asylum requests of all five nationalities based on merit. About 90,000 refugees currently live in Greece and arrivals are much reduced from the height of the migrant crisis when close to 1 million Syrians crossed the country en route to the EU. Kyriakos Mitsotakis’ administration has taken a much tougher approach to the issue than that of Alexis Tsipras, his leftist predecessor. Last year the government assumed control of the running of all 24 camps on the mainland, previously administered by the International Migration Organization, and in a much-delayed process took charge of a EU-funded cash assistance programme formerly run by the UN. The chaotic transition further exacerbated the food crisis and handouts for refugees who were eligible for cash disbursements in camps and private housing were frozen for three months. Logothetis acknowledged the problem but insisted that as of last week payments were being “rolled out”. “So much of this crisis is the result of mismanagement, disorganisation and not thinking policies through,” said Roussou at the IRC. “We work in Afghanistan where there is hunger and it is so difficult to resolve. Here in Greece it should be so easy.”The former Australian prime minister Paul Keating has accused Liz Truss of making “demented” comments about Chinese military aggression and urged the British foreign secretary to hurry “back to her collapsing, disreputable government”. Keating, in a blistering op-ed, also said Britain “suffers delusions of grandeur and relevance deprivation” and its tilt to the Indo-Pacific lacks credibility. The former Labor leader, who served as prime minister from 1991 to 1996, has long pushed for “engagement” with China but now finds himself increasingly at odds with the bipartisan consensus in Canberra to take a stronger line against Beijing. Keating took aim at Truss, who visited Australia for meetings with counterparts last week, after a report said she had warned that China could use a Russian invasion of Ukraine as an opportunity to launch aggression of its own in the Indo-Pacific. “I don’t think we can rule that out,” Truss was reported as saying during an interview with the Sydney Morning Herald and The Age. “Russia is working more closely with China than it ever has. Aggressors are working in concert and I think it’s incumbent on countries like ours to work together.” Keating, who has previously said Australia should not come to Taiwan’s aid in the event Beijing launches an attempt to invade the self-governed island, criticised Truss’s comments. “Remarks by the British foreign secretary Liz Truss that China could engage in military aggression in the Pacific, encouraged by Russia’s contingent moves against Ukraine, are nothing short of demented,” Keating said in an op-ed posted on the Pearls and Irritations public policy blog on Saturday. “Not simply irrational, demented.” Keating also said the reality was that Britain “does not add up to a row of beans when it comes to east Asia”. “Britain took its main battle fleet out of east Asia in 1904 and finally packed it in with its ‘East of Suez’ policy in the 1970s. And it has never been back,” Keating said in comments that gained prominence when reported by The Australian newspaper on Monday. “Britain suffers delusions of grandeur and relevance deprivation.” Keating said the British and Australian governments were “kidding the rest of us that their ‘cooperation’ added up to some viable policy”. “Truss would do us all a favour by hightailing it back to her collapsing, disreputable government, leaving Australia to find its own way in Asia.” During her visit, Truss addressed the Lowy Institute in Sydney and warned Russia that any invasion of Ukraine would only lead to “a terrible quagmire and loss of life” on the scale of the Soviet-Afghan war. Truss said after a meeting with the Australian foreign and defence ministers that Australia was “an absolutely crucial ally and friend” at a time of “increased economic coercion from China”. In Sydney she backed Boris Johnson, saying he was doing “a fantastic job” as prime minister, that he has her “100% support”, and should remain in No 10 “as long as possible”. It is not the first time Keating has taken aim at the UK over its “tilt” to the Indo-Pacific. In a speech in November, Keating said Britain was “like an old theme park sliding into the Atlantic compared to modern China”. Keating – a longtime advocate of Australia becoming a republic – was once dubbed the “Lizard of Oz” by British tabloids after he put his hand on the Queen’s back in 1992. He has strongly opposed the Aukus pact, sealed in September, in which the UK and the US have vowed to help Australia to acquire at least eight nuclear-propelled submarines. However the party Keating formerly led has largely sought to avoid major points of difference with the Morrison government on foreign policy in the lead up to a federal election, due to be held by May this year. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, has said China has become “far more forward-leaning” and Australia is “right to speak up for our own values”, saying Australian businesses have been “suffering” as a result of a range of trade actions launched by Beijing as the relationship deteriorated. The Australian defence minister, Peter Dutton, in November branded the former prime minister as “Grand Appeaser Comrade Keating”. Dutton later said it would be “inconceivable” that Australia would not join the US if the top security ally defended Taiwan in a war with China – prompting accusations the minister was politicising national security in the lead-up to the election.The Murugappan family from Biloela has won a court challenge against the immigration minister’s decision effectively barring them from reapplying for bridging visas. Alex Hawke’s move to revoke a decision allowing three family members to reapply for a visa was procedurally unfair, the federal circuit court’s judge Heather Riley held on Monday. In late June Hawke granted three-month bridging visas to parents Nades and Priya and their daughter Kopika, so they could live in community detention in Perth while the youngest daughter, Tharnicaa, received medical treatment after being evacuated from Christmas Island. On 15 June, the Department of Home Affairs wrote to the family advising them Hawke proposed to “lower the bar” in immigration law, which would then prevent three of the members of the family – Nades, Priya and Kopika – from reapplying for bridging visas. It gave the family until the close of business on 22 June to make submissions. The family’s lawyer, Carina Ford, made a submission to the department at 5.45pm AEST on 22 June, but it was disregarded because it was sent after 5pm and the email address wasn’t being monitored at the time. In September the family’s visas were extended again pending a decision over whether Hawke had afforded the family procedural fairness; the three now have bridging visas to December 2022. Tharnicaa has not received a bridging visa, and is subject to an order requiring her to live in community detention. Judge Riley found that the minister or his adviser were still working on the case at 7.21pm, when they sent the revocation to Ford, and therefore the submission should have been taken into account. “Whatever ‘close of business’ might mean in general, it must have meant at least 7.21pm for the Department of Home Affairs on 22 June 2021,” she said. Riley concluded it was “legally unreasonable” for the minister not to take into account “submissions that had been sent to his department, at the nominated email address, within the time specified in the invitation to comment”. “He thereby denied the applicants procedural fairness.” When proposing to revoke the decision lifting the bar, Hawke told the Biloela family that the critical issue was to align the position of Nades, Priya and Kopika with Tharnicaa. But Riley said that “cannot have been the critical issue, because, if alignment was the objective, it would have made more sense for the bar to be lifted in respect of the younger child, as that would have required only one decision to be made, instead of three”. “Moreover, alignment, or sameness for the sake of sameness, is not a rational basis for making a migration decision.” Riley found that the revocation was “based on some other critical issue, which the Minister has not made known to the applicants or the court”. The judge held that by failing to identify the critical issue on which the decision was based, the minister “thereby failed to afford the applicants procedural fairness”. The court ordered that Hawke’s decision revoking the lift of the bar be quashed, and for Hawke to pay the family’s costs. The decision, while a procedural win for the family, does not prevent Hawke from remaking a decision against the family on their right to reapply for visas. Ford told Guardian Australia the case “may not change the status quo” for the family, because Tharnicaa is still subject to a community detention order. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But Ford said given the judge didn’t accept that alignment of the family’s status was the “real purpose” of lifting the bar for Nades, Priya and Kopika, the minister will need to explain the reason before any attempt to remake the decision. “The minister should grant them a visa and let them go back to Bilo,” she said. “Community support is still so strong for this family being returned there. “It’s an exceptional case – it’s not going to mean whole ‘we will decide who comes here [and the circumstances in which they come]’ policy will fall apart.” Labor’s Kristina Keneally and the Greens’ Nick McKim both welcomed the court decision and noted Hawke could allow the family to go home to Biloela with the “stroke of a pen”. McKim said the government had “spent a fortune to pursue and detain the family, instead of simply allowing them to return to the community that made them so welcome”. “It has cost the Muruguppans years of their lives and caused extreme anguish.” A home affairs department spokesperson said it was considering the case but “it would be inappropriate to comment further during the appeal period”.The first full moon of the year has fallen like a dream in a clear spell. Its other name – wolf moon – evokes a folk memory of bone-deep hunger and boreal chill, which, if my social media bubble is anything to go by, still has the power to draw us outside, to our back gardens and city streets, to beaches and mountain tops. We are moon gazers still, and this night in particular is feeding an urge to make fire, immerse in water or get high, one way or another. My little family is doing so literally, with a walk on the northern edge of the North York Moors. It’s not a place I enjoy much by day – too scoured in the name of management – but it has undeniable grandeur tonight. What we really mean when we speak of dark skies is land dark enough to not be a distraction, and south of here is a vast mass of that. Not that this terawatt moon needs help. Torches are unnecessary. Each slab of the path is so silvered, my son can see well enough to run. Also shining bright and early are Orion and the Plough, and my personal lodestar at this time of year, Sirius, flashing hectically two or three random hues a second. I discovered only recently that not everyone sees these colours (binoculars apparently make it more obvious), but to my eye, it’s garish, blaring and impossible to ignore. Perhaps there’s something in old tales of it driving dogs and women mad. Ten miles north of the moor edge, dark yields to dazzle. Teesside shimmers like a fantastical treasure hoard: silver, gold and red, trickling and spilling into surrounding villages and towns. It’s eerily silent though, for a view so full of people, as if for a few sparkling minutes, life down there is on hold. A pulsating blue light appears in the dark below, tracking smoothly east. From this distance, its progress is painfully slow, and I want to reach down with a finger and whizz it towards its destination. It disappears among the pinprick lights of Great Broughton and I find myself muttering an almost-prayer, a plea for light on behalf of anyone who might need it, before we descend again ourselves. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryA great big crumpet appears to have landed in the middle of Budapest’s City Park, its circular hole-studded mass impaled on a thicket of trees. It droops down here and there, revealing little terraces cut into its top, and flares up elsewhere, showing off a sparkling underside of tiny golden leaves. This surreal sight is the work of Sou Fujimoto, a Japanese architect known for making his models out of piles of crisps, washing-up scourers, or whatever else may be to hand. In this case, it wasn’t a crumpet but a lotus root that inspired this canopy, which now provides an otherworldly home for the capital’s new House of Music. In a city that already has a renowned opera house, music academy and numerous concert halls, what could this €80m (£67m) project possibly add? “We want to show the wonder of music to a younger generation,” says music historian András Batta, managing director of the new centre, which opened on Hungarian Culture Day this weekend. He is standing in the building’s glade-like interior, where oval openings bring light down through the swooping ceiling, and an aperture in the floor gives a glimpse of the exhibition level below. Faceted glass walls enclose a 320-seat concert hall and a small lecture theatre, while a suspended staircase spirals up to a library, cafe and classrooms, housed in the undulating roof. “Budapest has a very rich musical life already,” he adds, “so we didn’t want to repeat what you can get elsewhere. This is not just for high and classical, but ethnic, folk and pop – the really exciting side of music.” The building is one of the first major elements of the €1bn Liget project, a controversial vision concocted by populist prime minister Viktor Orbán’s rightwing government to transform the Városliget area into a showcase of Hungarian national culture. A €120m Museum of Ethnography is nearing completion nearby, in the form of two gigantic sloping wedges rearing up out of the ground, clad in a strange lacy wrapping that nods to Hungarian national dress. A colossal €300m National Gallery is planned to the north, designed by Japanese architects Sanaa as a topsy-turvy stack of tilting white planes that looks caught in mid-collapse. There are plans to reconstruct a palatial neo-baroque pile, bombed in the war, as a House of Hungarian Innovation, as well as rebuild an art nouveau theatre, demolished in the Soviet era, as a children’s centre. And if that’s not enough, the construction of “Europe’s largest biodome” is under way in the zoo next door (unfinished and on hold after funding ran out). “Budapest doesn’t have an obvious identity for tourists,” says László Baán, ministerial commissioner in charge of the Liget project, standing over a large model of the park, dotted with the new attractions. “With these contemporary buildings we can put Budapest on the map, creating the most complex cultural district in Europe.” It is every (would-be) dictator’s dream leisure-scape, clearly conceived to echo the scale of ambition in the Habsburg era, when the park was laid out and flanked with regal palaces of art for the 1896 Millennial Exhibition. Critics suggest the scheme is chiefly motivated by Orbán’s desire to move the government to Buda Castle, where the National Gallery is currently housed, further aligning himself with imperial glory days. His self-styled “illiberal democracy” may have curtailed the free press, crushed academic freedoms and curbed gay rights, but he is keen to ensure a legacy of large cultural baubles. The future of his vision, however, is in jeopardy, after Gergely Karácsony – Budapest’s centre-left mayor who was elected on a green platform in 2019 – called for a halt to the “government concrete mania in one of the world’s first public parks”. Echoing the activists who chained themselves to structures to try to prevent construction of the House of Hungarian Music, he has said he will defend the park from future development “with my own body, if necessary, and I will encourage all Budapest residents to do so”. He has agreed that projects under construction can be completed, but no further work will begin – for now, at least. The changes to the park so far have had a mixed reception. A big new playground, running track and public sports pitches have been wildly popular with some, while others lament the transformation of what was a quiet and leafy, if rather scruffy, haven into a busy outdoor activity centre. An impressive new conservation and storage facility has brought world-class restoration labs, but the looming ethnographic museum, by local firm Napur, seems widely disliked. (Ironically, its cartoonish form was chosen in an anonymous competition by a jury who thought they were picking the work of Danish star Bjarke Ingels.) Given this context, the House of Hungarian Music stands out as the most thoughtful part of the jumbled offering. Replacing a cluster of dilapidated Soviet-era expo offices, which had been run down and off limits for years, the building keeps a low profile and does its best to nestle among the trees. The roof is sculpted and punctured to allow existing sycamores to rise through its holes, extending beyond the building line to shelter an outdoor stage. In Fujimoto’s words: “We wanted to transform the forest into architecture.” The architect grew up on the edge of woodland in rural Hokkaido, the northernmost of Japan’s main islands. He often talks of trees, glades and clearings as an inspiration, enjoying the sense of being in an open field while also protected and enclosed, encouraging people to walk and discover. Further probing of his intentions wasn’t possible: he declined interviews and hasn’t visited the completed building. The pandemic was cited as the reason, but perhaps he is also wary of being photographed with Orbán, mindful of the backlash after Ingels was snapped with Brazil’s president Jair Bolsonaro. This is Fujimoto’s first permanent public project in Europe, and it’s a departure from what you might expect, given his 2013 Serpentine Pavilion in London and his housing block in Montpellier, France. His competition-winning scheme depicted a smooth white world, in the familiar contemporary Japanese style, but his clients wanted something warmer and cosier. They took him to visit the secessionist palace of the Liszt Academy of Music, whose art nouveau ceiling writhes with gilded leaves, and inspired an about-turn. The seamless white pancake became encrusted with geometric golden leaves, and its roof cutouts also lined with gold, while the columns turned from mirror-finished to dark grey to match the tree trunks outside. In places, it can feel a bit much, Fujimoto’s organic minimalism dressed in a kitsch folk costume, but the festive garb is fitting for a place dedicated to celebrating the magic and theatre of music. The exhibition itself, curated by Batta and operational director Márton Horn, is a family-friendly riot, charting the history of European music through a sequence of interactive displays. Reached via a white spiral stair, it begins with a circle of drums, which must be pounded to lure wild animals out of a virtual forest, before introducing the Hungarian dance house movement, where you are invited to copy traditional folk dances on a responsive dancefloor inside a little wooden cabin. Next you can conduct a virtual choir of Gregorian monks, alongside a display of early codices, before being thrust into the holographic worlds of Haydn, Bach, Mozart, Beethoven, and into a section on opera – complete with an interactive screen of operatic face filters for the selfie generation. A section on technology charts innovations from the phonograph to the cloud while, elsewhere, you can remix classic film soundtracks, try your hand at DJing and learn a range of instruments. A second temporary exhibition space will open later in the year with a show on Hungarian pop music from 1957-93, which promises to be full of equally bizarre delights. The party continues in a room next door in the form of a “sound dome” inspired by the Kugelauditorium – a spherical concert hall created by Karlheinz Stockhausen for the 1970 World Expo in Osaka. With 32 speakers arranged behind a perforated hemispherical dome, it plunges visitors into an immersive audio-visual experience, beginning with a selection of short films shot in the countryside, but it promises to liven up with planned DJ nights and screenings. The spiral stair carries you into the depths of the crumpet, where Fujimoto’s vision begins to feel more compromised, the architectural idea trumping practical needs. The competition drawings looked seductive, showing a hidden world tucked inside the roof, but when you’re in the library, lit from above, it’s hard not to think it might have been nicer to have some windows looking out on to the park. The classrooms and offices also feel squeezed into the restrictive floorplan, rather than the form of the building being designed around them, although a cafe terrace does look out on a fun musical playground outside. The House of Music is, ultimately, a welcome addition to the park, but it’s not enough to convince that pursuing the rest of the Liget plan would be wise. With six opposition parties joining forces in an attempt to topple Orbán in the April elections, there is a chance that his overblown vision might remain just that.Ultra-Orthodox Jews in the UK are launching an organisation aimed at engaging with the wider British public in a move that may mark a significant shift from their traditional insularity. The Pinter Trust has the backing of rabbis and leaders from the main ultra-Orthodox, or Charedi, communities in north London, Manchester, Gateshead and Essex. Its aim is to “build trust and dialogue with other organisations and groups” and to “seek to provide an accurate and truthful portrayal of the UK Charedi community”. A website launching on Monday will include information about the community, a blog and points of contact. The trust is named after Rabbi Avrohom Pinter, a well-known figure in Stamford Hill, north London, and a former Labour councillor, who died with Covid in 2020. Pinter was regarded as an ambassador for the community. Rabbi Avroham Sugarman, chair of the trust, said the organisation hoped to build on his legacy. “The Pinter Trust will seek to tell the story of the Charedi community in the words of the community itself. Whilst we are not seeking external publicity for our community … we want to give people a greater understanding of who we are and our way of life.” The trust would work “to build meaningful partnerships” with the media, local and central government and other groups, Sugarman said. Charedi Jews are the fastest-growing sector of the UK Jewish population, mainly because of their large families: seven or eight children are common. They are rigorous in their observance of their faith. Operating electricity, phones or cars is prohibited on Shabbat, the Jewish sabbath. Men and women follow strict dress codes; school curriculums are dominated by religious teaching, with boys and girls segregated; access to television and the internet is tightly controlled. Charedi Jews publish their own newspapers and newsletters, and regard the mainstream media as unsympathetic to and ignorant about their way of life and concerns. Local authorities with significant Charedi communities liaise with community leaders to get across public service information – and, in the past 22 months, essential public health messages about Covid. Joel Friedman, the trust’s director of public affairs, said the community had been considering setting up a public-facing organisation for three years. “The Charedi community is growing,” he said, “but it doesn’t have a proactive voice telling our story to the outside world. Traditionally it has been an insular community. “But there are a lot of misconceptions out there, and if the community is represented in a bad light to the wider population, that has a negative impact.” He said the website would be “very basic” to begin with, but more content would be added over time. “This is a new thing for our community, we need to bring people with us.” The trust hoped to invite people outside the community for tours and visits to communal settings, and would engage with other faith organisations, government bodies and local authorities, he said. David Lammy, the Labour MP for Tottenham, welcomed the launch of the organisation, saying it would build inter-community awareness, dialogue and trust and was “vital at this pivotal moment in our nation’s history”. He added: “I know the community it represents, and all those who come into contact with [it] will be enriched.” Rabbinical authorities, including the Gateshead Kehilla, the Federation of Synagogues, the Union of Orthodox Hebrew Congregations (UOHC), the Machzikei Hadass Communities of Manchester and the Manchester Beth Din, have endorsed the trust. Rabbi Yehuda Baumgarten of the UOHC said: “The Pinter Trust will act as a credible and respected voice on matters concerning Anglo Charedi Jewry, under the guidance and leadership of respected community rabbis from across the UK.”The morning after Meat Loaf died, his former bass player Steve Buslowe was reading through the many celebrity tributes to the bombastic singer when he came across one that made him laugh. “I saw a comment that Stephen Fry had made about Meat being cuddly and frightening at the same time. I laughed because that’s perfect. He was such a big teddy bear. He was sometimes warm, but then he could also get a little manic, a little out of control, maybe a little violent. So you never knew who he was going to be. He was kind of fearless in being warm and generous, but also in his anger. If he got frustrated with something, he wouldn’t go in a corner and pout. He’d throw a chair. He’d be in your face to let you know how he felt.” Buslowe, 67, is in a contemplative mood as he speaks via Zoom from his home in Connecticut. The musician and backing vocalist, who is my uncle, played with Meat Loaf for the best part of the singer’s career, witnessing his rise to megastardom during the Bat Out of Hell tour in 1977-78, the wilderness years of dwindling sales in the mid- to late-80s, and his resurgent global success in the early 90s with Bat Out of Hell 2: Back Into Hell. The singer’s talent and temperament made a strong impression on Buslowe from their first meeting, after the bass player auditioned to join Meat Loaf’s live band, later called the Neverland Express. “When I first met him at the rehearsals, I knew he was a unique person,” he says. “I still remember having chills watching this man sing four or five feet away from me. He had this amazing operatic voice. I knew I was dealing with somebody very special but complicated. As time went on, I saw how complicated he would become.” Buslowe, who had been playing with funk fusion bands before the tour, admits he didn’t immediately get Meat Loaf’s dramatic sound. “I said to myself: I can’t believe I just joined a band that has a song called Paradise by the Dashboard Light. Though, of course, I grew to love it.” He was not alone in having this initial reaction. The band was met with a hostile crowd at their first gig in Chicago, opening for the rock group Cheap Trick. “People were swearing at us, throwing things, saying really nasty things about Meat Loaf being overweight,” says Buslowe. “It was horrifying. But I think it got us revved up, no pun intended, to say screw you, we’re going to push it.” This rocky start to the tour was amplified by Meat Loaf’s erratic behaviour. Buslowe recalls how the singer hired one of his friends to be their driver-cum-tour manager, despite having no relevant experience. On the way to a gig in Youngstown, Ohio, the friend’s fast, nausea-inducing driving led to a punch-up. “Meat had gone up to the front and said slow down, everybody’s going a little crazy,” says Buslowe. “Well, the guy wouldn’t. Meat went nuts and he goes: ‘Pull over!’ Well they pull over at a rest stop right off of this highway and the two of them get out and start beating the crap out of each other!” Buslowe remembers looking through the window of the band’s RV at the songwriter Jim Steinman, the creative mastermind behind Bat Out of Hell and Meat Loaf’s other most epic hits, watching bemusedly the fight on the grass in the truck stop. “I’m sitting there going: what did I get myself into? This is madness! Of course, Meat and the guy wound up being friends again. But that was Meat’s personality: he could get really angry with you, and after he gets that out of his system, he can be your best friend.” Steinman and Meat Loaf’s musical partnership was infamously fractious. Buslowe recalls how the balance of power shifted towards the singer as that first tour gained momentum and his star rose. “There were some people who said, not that I would use this expression, it was like Frankenstein and the monster – where Jim was really the brains behind the songwriting and Meat was just the singer,” he says. “As the tour developed, Meat got a more dominant role because he got the attention. But he also knew that instead of it just being like a theatrical show, he had to be more aggressive on stage and make it more rock’n’roll. And I think he was proven right.” However, as detailed in his 1999 autobiography, To Hell and Back, the singer increasingly struggled with the demands of touring. His voice began to give out on him. He started using cocaine. He raged at the band members and audiences, throwing microphone stands at them. Then in May 1978 he fell off the stage at a gig in Ottawa, breaking his leg and leaving him unable to perform. He had a nervous breakdown. “My memory, a lot of times, was sitting in a hotel lobby waiting for Meat to walk out of the elevator door,” says Buslowe, who did not discuss the singer’s drug and mental health issues. “Depending on the look on his face or the way he walked, I knew what kind of day I was going to have. I really learned to recognise what to say and when to say it, and, more importantly, if he’s in a lousy mood, when not to say anything. “Meat wasn’t always good with a lot of pressure. I felt sorry for him because he was a little fragile in that way. But without him there was no band. We were really hired musicians. For me, it was a struggle to be waiting on him because you have no control. There was also a lot of frustration coming from the record company and the managers because everybody’s trying to make money.” Amid the singer’s ongoing crisis, Steinman decided to make his own album, Bad for Good. Although he subsequently wrote Meat Loaf’s 1981 album, Dead Ringer for Love, best known for his hit duet with Cher, neither record performed on a par with Bat Out of Hell, which Buslowe partly attributes to them being released so close together. With this diminishing success, the singer and songwriter’s relationship fell apart. During this period, Buslowe co-wrote four tracks on Meat Loaf’s third album, Midnight at the Lost and Found, including the title track, which reached a disappointing peak of No 17 in the UK. “It was thrilling for me to perform my own songs,” he says. “Regrettably, the album didn’t get good reviews. I don’t think Meat cared for it all that much.” The bass player left the band in 1984, returning two years later when Meat Loaf began touring smaller venues, including pubs and clubs, in an attempt to revive his career back and stave off bankruptcy. Paradoxically, Buslowe says the singer’s voice was at its best during this low point of his fame. “It was fun for me because he was a lot more relaxed,” he adds, attributing much of this to the calming influence of the singer’s first wife, Leslie. “He didn’t have a big record deal. We were just going day by day, building it back up. It was a real healthy time for him, and also for me to watch him grow.” By 1990, Meat Loaf and Steinman had reconciled, leading, three years later, to the release of Bat Out of Hell 2. The album sold more than 14m copies worldwide, with its lead single, I’d Do Anything for Love (But I Won’t Do That), topping the charts in 28 countries. “When things got successful again, there was more money, but there was more pressure again, and I could feel that from him,” says Buslowe, who by this point had become the musical director of the Neverland Express. “I was kind of middle management between the band and Meat. I helped translate what he wanted. He liked to think of himself as an actor doing a role as opposed to just somebody singing words. He took it upon himself to do a lot of improvisation. You had to always watch him to make sure that you understood what he was going to do. It was always evolving because he was into the performance and really looking at and responding to the audience, and a lot of musicians can’t do that.” His time with the band ended in 1997, two years after the release of the seventh studio album, Welcome to the Neighbourhood. “I think the relationship ran its course,” Buslowe says, adding that this coincided with Meat Loaf moving from Connecticut to the west coast to pursue his acting career. “I could sense that there was a change in his direction. I’d been wanting to move away from the music business and I felt I wasn’t going to be rehired. I just didn’t feel it anymore.” Although I remember him being frustrated with Meat Loaf during this period, Buslowe, who has also worked with Bonnie Tyler, Air Supply, Céline Dion and Barbra Streisand, is now more sanguine about the split. “I wasn’t necessarily unhappy that it ended but it could have ended better. But I have heard from other people over the last couple of years that he still had good feelings about me. So that made me feel good. I think he always respected me and he knew that I was fairly loyal to him. But neither of us picked up the phone to call the other. “There was a time when I thought he would take a bullet for me,” he says. “I really think that he had this ability to be very protective of people that he cared for. Then there were times when he just didn’t handle people well. I could feel it happening to me a little toward the end of our relationship. I don’t want to say I didn’t take this personally but I just knew that’s the way he was. He really could be a very loving, warm, generous guy. But he had his demons and his struggles.”Jason Bateman appears on a Zoom screen from Los Angeles, bespectacled, calm and in uncluttered, butter-coloured environs. It’s as if Michael Bluth, the character he played in Arrested Development, had dressed up as a therapist for some hilarious purpose. To fans of the show, its entire cast will always have traces clinging to them, as if they have all been, well, arrested in that dysfunctional family. But today we’re here to talk about Ozark, a drama with a reputation that has been climbing each season (it’s now in its fourth and final) and so has, arguably, become even more defining for Bateman. Tense and lingering, Ozark has the dizzying pace and visual sumptuousness that the modern long-running box set demands. What was haunting about it from the start were the subtle performances of Bateman and his co-star, Laura Linney; just a regular, affluent, middle-aged couple, except he was about to launder $500m for a drug cartel and she’d just watched the murder of the lawyer she was having an affair with. They were on the run, but only sort of. They hated each other, except they didn’t. What passed between them gave such propulsive energy to their characters that from the very beginning you could trust one thing: it might be improbable, but it was never going to be boring. But all that nuance was a double-edged sword. “Marty and Wendy are really intelligent characters,” Bateman says. “Sometimes that narrows your options as a writer, trying to keep things plausible. They can’t do really stupid things. The smart thing to do is to turn yourself in. Then the show’s over.” Typically (although not this time, because of Covid) Bateman would direct the first two episodes of each season. He starts off describing the appeal of being an actor/director quite neutrally. “It’s more efficient for me to be playing a character in something, because that’s one less person I need to direct,” he says. “I don’t have to have any sort of creative negotiation with that actor.” Then he slides into the territory of the self-aware control freak: “Especially when I’m the lead character, I can just adjust my own performance to motivate a different performance out of the other actor. I can get them to speed up or slow down or trick them by being more emotional.” Finally, he clarifies forcefully and winningly, he’s not a control freak at all. “I had a very fortunate first experience. My first big job, Little House on the Prairie, had Michael Landon as the director, actor, producer – and sometimes writer. There’s this theory that you need to scream at people to get them to work their hardest. I saw by example there that the opposite is true.” It’s pointless of course to pretend not to have been a child star if you were one, but it also takes a certain kind of comfort in your skin to underline immediately how incredibly long your career has been. Little House on the Prairie first aired in 1974. Bateman didn’t join the cast until the early 80s. His career dates officially from a Golden Grahams advert in 1980, when he was just 11 (he’s now 53). He talks about his mother – a Pan Am flight attendant, originally from the UK – a lot. If something is hilarious to him, it’s because “my mother is British and everything is dry to her”. His father would be the more obvious role model in professional terms. Kent Bateman was an actor, writer and director, and the producer of the 1987 fantasy comedy sequel Teen Wolf Too, the lead role that sealed his son’s teen-idol status as mischievous, unthreatening and very 80s. Bateman became a complete sitcom fixture in titles that are familiar to US viewers but less so in the UK (TV didn’t travel so much then). Silver Spoons, the Hogan Family, “these shows in front of a live audience, where there’s a performance type of obligation: you’re incorporating their laughter, it’s more like being on stage”. Inevitably, trying to make the transition from child to adult, while simultaneously trying to morph for audiences from cute kid to serious actor, was fraught. He describes the 90s as effectively wilderness years, while robustly objecting to the term “wilderness years”. “It was a combination,” he says. “Me stopping everything on purpose, to catch up with all these inabilities I had as a kid, because I was always working.” (“Inabilities” is a curious word – he’s saying his early career meant he missed out on a carefree childhood and teenage years, trying not to offend his parents, perhaps.) “I wanted to get the wiggles out.” He has described in the past how his wife, Amanda Anka, also an actor and mother of their two daughters, Francesca and Maple, gave him an ultimatum about his partying. It’s such an imprecise term, “partying” – it can mean anything from too many beers to a heroin habit, but it’s nothing like as imprecise as “wiggles”. He has been less oblique in the past, describing all-night booze and drug binges (“It’s like French fries and ketchup – I don’t want one without the other”) before he finally decided to go into AA. Information, it seems, is often sprinkled, rather than hosed, with Bateman. Later, talking about Smartless, the podcast he started in 2020 with Will Arnett (a magnificent comedian and ex-alcoholic, who played Gob in Arrested Development), he says: “Will started everything by saying, ‘Who’s gonna listen to some boring thing about sobriety?’ And I said: ‘At least let me be on it, so we can talk about sobriety and “the journey”.’” When Smartless arrived, also featuring Sean Hayes (from Will &amp; Grace), it was nothing really to do with partying, it was all about friendship. It’s also absolutely stop-in-the-street-to-laugh brilliant. Back to the lost decade. “Having thought, ‘This is really fun,’ and staying at the party a little bit too long, I’d lost my place in line in the business; it was a case of trying to claw that back towards the end of the 90s, and not getting a lot of great responses.” The official end of that dry spell was Arrested Development, which first aired in 2003, but also, Juno, in 2007, a fascinating indie film about a teenager who gets accidentally pregnant and agrees to have the baby adopted. It’s quite an uncomfortable movie, seen, at the time, as implicitly anti-abortion, and deliberately vague and airbrushed on what the experience of giving a baby up for adoption is actually like. But the characterisation is complex and interesting, in large part because of Bateman’s prospective adoptive dad, reversing and messing with expectations. He starts out as something you think you understand – a wholesome everyman – then becomes a much darker character, on whom the coating of nice-guy shellac shimmers somewhere between shtick and active deception. It’s not a huge role but is a perfect distillation of Bateman’s mature performances; the guy who uses his everyman face like a Trojan horse. He says he likes to play characters as “not too far from the average person. Even if the part is not right in that lane, but maybe adjacent to it, I will pull the character into that. Even if they’re not vanilla on the page, I like pulling them into vanilla.” He has said before that he only took the role in Juno because Francesca, recently born, had colic, and it was a guaranteed three weeks out of the house. “No, no, no,” he now says, disapprovingly. “I said that to be fun. I said it with, hopefully, an obvious wink.” There he goes again, pulling himself back into vanilla. To rewind to Arrested Development: it started at Fox and was an immediate success, winning five Emmys for the first season. It was cancelled, because Fox is crazy. The first three seasons were breathtakingly good – and surprising. The way each actor was so distinct and yet so locked together in the ensemble, the sheer quality of the cast – Jeffrey Tambor and the late Jessica Walter as the parents, Bateman, Arnett, Portia de Rossi and Tony Hale as their adult children – was remarkable. Bateman is very clear about what made it funny: “This is not funny to anybody inside the show. This is a drama to them. Almost like an animal documentary, where you’re watching these freaks, and how they gather their food, and how they make their house. And let’s make sure we all whisper because we don’t want these folks to know how much we’re laughing at them.” Having been dropped, it was picked up six years later by Netflix, back when the streaming behemoth had no real track record of programme-making, except for David Fincher’s House of Cards. “What’s good for David Fincher sure as shit better be good enough for us,” is how Bateman describes the united attitude of the cast. There were plenty of people queueing up to say it wasn’t as good at Netflix, and truthfully, the fourth season wasn’t. Critically, the reception went up and down – at its putative worst, it’s still funnier than most things – and career-wise, he says: “I will always respect the access and relevance that that show gave me, and try not to take that for granted again, and do everything I can to earn this place in the business that I love. It created an environment; I loved going there every single day.” This is surprising, since if Arrested Development is famous for one thing, other than itself, it’s for a terrible atmosphere on set. Or at least, that was the story in a New York Times cast interview in 2018. Walter, who died in March last year, said of Tambor: “In almost 60 years of working, I’ve never had anybody yell at me like that on a set.” Bateman and Hale tried to damp down the situation, and the whole thing – particularly coming when it did, when the lid was just being lifted on Hollywood harassment, sexual or otherwise – saw them accused of minimising. Bateman remains adamant about his original stance and says of that interview: “Things got misinterpreted and there was a fallout – it was unfortunate. But it was an anomaly. Any family work environment, you’re going to have situations where things go a little pear-shaped every once in a while. I just have the fondest memories of 100% of that experience. You know, the ups and the downs, the good, the bad, the funny, the sad: all of it was a positive to me.” There’s a lively internet chat scene on the similarities between Marty Byrde in Ozark and Michael Bluth in Arrested Development – that they are morally so alike, Ozark must have been (consciously or not) conceived as a prequel to Arrested Development. In this fan-fictional universe, Michael is actually Marty post-witness protection scheme. I disagree with that. Part of the genius of Bateman’s Arrested Development performance is how completely, learning-resistantly hapless he is, while as Byrde he can see round corners and get the better of any situation. He doesn’t really want to adjudicate on this question and ruin any fan debates, so says mildly: “I think they have similar blind spots. Their arrogance and hubris leads to early decisions. Perhaps they should think a little bit longer about what they do.” If there’s another through-line, Bateman says, it’s that: “I’m not too far removed from a drama when I’m doing Arrested Development and I’m not too far from a comedy when I’m doing Ozark.” He reaches to describe some quintessence to his acting another way: “In a drama, I’m not the person with a knife, I’m the person getting chased. In a comedy, I’m not the person farting, I’m the person who smelled it.” It’s so neat, so succinct, and so drolly sums up the paradox: it’s actually terribly rare to meet an everyman, almost unique to meet one who’s everymanning on purpose. Ozark is available to stream on Netflix. The “Smartless” podcast live tour kicks off on 2 February with sold out shows across six cities in the USHere’s a special challenge for the week: rise early and find a good view of the southern and eastern horizon to watch the sunrise. It is a magical moment in the day, even if you are rushing off to get to work, and this week brings with it some astronomical jewels to pick out of the twilight. This week, from London the sun rises at about 7.45am GMT, so your vigil needs to start about an hour before then. Looking low in the south, you will see the beautiful red jewel of Antares. Further east will be the brilliant white beacon of Venus, and between these two will be a difficult-to-spot Mars. The chart shows the view looking south-east from London at 7am GMT on 28 January. On this morning, a waning crescent moon will join the tableau. The morning after, the moon passes Mars, helping you pick it out. The view is much easier to see in the southern hemisphere. From Sydney, Australia, at about 5.30am AEDT, Antares, Venus, and Mars will stand proud from the eastern horizon, and the moon will appear to be plunging downwards on successive mornings.By the time the rising sun breaks through the morning mist over the Mongla River, the rhythmic chug of motors strapped to wooden canoes is already audible as thousands of workers are hurriedly ferried across the waterway. They jump on to the small landing dock, pick up a potato-stuffed shingara pastry for pennies and rush towards the factories in Mongla’s export processing zone (EPZ), which has transformed the small town into an employment hub in a part of Bangladesh ravaged by the climate crisis. About 30 miles (50km) inland from the Bay of Bengal, Mongla is the gateway to the Unesco-listed Sundarbans mangrove forest, home to the endangered Bengal tiger. Its port, founded in the 1950s, has been the focus of an ambitious, decade-long project led by one of the world’s leading climate scientists to transform it into a town that actively welcomes climate refugees. “In my 30 years here I’ve seen so many changes. The roads, the docks, the number of people coming here. It has all changed,” says Abdul Jalil, a 52-year-old boatman on the Mongla River. “We used to have a lot of problems; after rains the roads would be flooded, we had very little infrastructure around here.” He used to row manually but says all the boats have motors now, with each carrying about 700 people a day across the river, on their way to work in the export zone or in Sundarbans tourism. “These people crossing, they’re all from other places, from the villages near the Sundarbans. They work here in the EPZ, for tourism in the Sundarbans, instead of going to places like Chittagong. It’s safer here, there isn’t crime, there are jobs and the living standards are better.” Bangladesh is an internal migration pressure cooker. There is nothing new in the country’s rural poor moving to cities in search of work. But catastrophic weather events are speeding up the waves of people flowing into the urban centres. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 4.1 million people (2.5% of the population) were displaced in Bangladesh as a result of climate-induced disasters as of 2019. A recent World Bank report predicted that the country will have 19.9 million internal climate refugees by 2050, almost half the projected number for the entire south Asia region. Most of those forced to leave their homes head to the capital, Dhaka, one of the fastest growing megacities in the world and among the least liveable. Home to 20 million people, over a third of whom live in slums lacking even the most basic infrastructure, the city is dangerously overcrowded. Against this grim backdrop of daily struggles and looming catastrophe, Prof Saleemul Huq, director of the International Centre for Climate Change and Development (ICCCAD), has formulated a vision of “transformative adaptation” to alleviate pressure on Dhaka and its conurbations. It aims to divert people to smaller urban centres with the capacity to expand and, crucially, jobs to sustain a rapidly growing workforce. “The phenomenon of migration is age old – there’s nothing new here – but climate change is causing people to move and we are having to deal with this very, very quickly – that is what made us work on the idea,” says Huq. More than a dozen satellite cities and towns, all adjacent to economic hubs such as sea and river ports or export processing zones, have been identified as potential migrant-friendly locations. “They are all secondary towns with populations of between a few hundred thousand and half a million which can absorb up to half a million climate migrants each,” says Huq. Among those towns, Mongla stood out for the progress it had already made on climate breakdown mitigation, driven by the town’s dynamic mayor, Zulfikar Ali. In his 10 years in office, from 2011 to 2021, an array of infrastructural developments made Mongla a safer, more resilient town. They include a 7-mile raised embankment along newly built Marine Drive designed to protect against flooding; two flood-control gates; an improved drainage system; two 40 hectare (100 acre) reservoirs and a fresh water treatment plant that has increased the proportion of houses with running water from a third to a half. Sheikh Abdur Rahman, who took over from Ali as mayor of Mongla in January 2021, has picked up the baton. “At one time the city was regularly flooded by high tides. Now it is being brought under climate-friendly city planning,” he says. A public address system was installed to announce changes in weather to the community. The town’s proximity to the second largest port in Bangladesh and an export processing zone that already employs 8,000 people also made it economically attractive, says Huq. “The primary carrot [in luring people to a town] is jobs,” he says. “But that’s the easy part.” The challenge, he says, is the “softer interventions”, the social and cultural changes required to bring about his vision of a network of towns whose existing residents welcome newcomers. “Hostility between host and migrant happens everywhere,” says Huq. “In Bangladesh, we have several big advantages – one is that we look the same so migrants are not distinguishable; second, there is one language – we all speak Bangla; and third, we all have the same religion. What we do have is a class barrier, so the newcomer is a poor person eking out a living – and that is what we are working on, humanising what is initially seen as ‘other’.” These softer interventions include making sure the children of migrants are well integrated in schools and encouraging them to go on to university to break the cycle of poverty. These may be relatively modest aims on paper but they require buy-in from educational institutions. Huq and his team have spent time talking to schools and universities to gain their support for the concept. Mongla’s population was below 40,000 in the 2011 census but a decade later three times as many people are thought to be living there. Huq’s mission to actively encourage migration to the town is likely to swell that figure by tens, possibly hundreds of thousands more. Mongla is the first town to adopt ICCCAD’s recommendations, but others will follow. “This is a 10-year action programme and we are taking it town by town, mayor by mayor,” says Huq. Over time, towns will set up outposts in the coastal areas and villages where the majority of climate migrants come from. Huq envisages these outposts as mini embassies that will act as information hubs for migrants, steering them away from Dhaka and towards host towns that are better equipped to cope with an expanding population, and where migrants can be fully fledged, as opposed to second-class, citizens. It is early days in a long-term process that has been hampered by Covid and the UK government cutting the aid which was funding the research, but Huq is confident that Mongla and its sister towns will become models of disaster management, adaptation and resilience. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Have you ever had an accident at work that wasn’t your fault? A delve into the archive of a major insurer has revealed some of the strangest valid commercial claims, including recompense for a defenestrated dentist and a farm worker blown into a vat of liquid manure. The trawl through 325 years of business insurance claims received by Aviva also reveals instances where policyholders found themselves a part of events that would end up in history books. They include investors who lost money in the 1963 Great Train Robbery and a fishmonger caught up in the 1984 Libyan embassy siege – the van was parked nearby and could not be moved until the siege ended, by which time the fish had rotted. Among other notable claims unearthed as part of an exercise linked to the anniversary of its commercial lines arm was the £1,000 payout for the “Dundee whisky fire” of 1906. Eyewitnesses described “rivers of burning whisky” flowing through the Scottish city after a fire at the warehouse of the merchant James Watson &amp; Co. It might be nearly 60 years ago but the Great Train Robbery, in which £2.5m was stolen from the Glasgow to London Royal Mail train, continues to fascinate the British public. The Aviva archives reveal it paid out just over £1m to owners of securities that were among the loot. That sum equates to £59m in today’s money [see footnote]. The records also reveal that the insurer found itself on the hook after another dramatic heist, this time in the 1990s when thieves made off with “Woody the Cuprinol man”. The wooden figure, who appeared in the wood preserver brand’s TV adverts, was recovered with Aviva telling the special effects company to “lock Woody up at night”. The trawl through history also reveals some tales of unexpected woe. A slightly built farm worker tasked with carrying large sheets of corrugated iron was carried away by a gust of wind and deposited into a liquid manure storage tank. According to the claim “the employee’s clothes were ruined”. There is also an account of a dentist who similarly experienced a crash landing. In the early 1960s, they received a payout after being kicked out of a window by a patient coming round from an anaesthetic. Perhaps predictably for an insurer, Nick Major, commercial lines’ managing director, suggested the long list of weird and wonderful claims showed “planning for the unexpected is good business practice”. “Aviva has played an important role helping businesses protect what’s important to them, enabling them to continue to trade through good times and bad, something we have continued to focus on through the Covid-19 pandemic,” he said. • This footnote was added on 25 January 2022 to explain Aviva’s £59m figure. To calculate, it opted for the “relative income” method (using the measuringworth.com/calculators/ukcompare/ site). Had the “purchasing power” method been used, the £1,091,340 payout would have been roughly £20m in today’s money.A former Young Liberal, Alex Dore, nephew of the Australian’s editor in chief, Chris Dore, is set to be springboarded into the federal seat of Hughes under a complex factional deal to avoid contentious NSW Liberal preselections. The backroom deal – if it sticks – will bypass plebiscites in several seats. New rules introduced in 2018 – the Warringah rules, championed by former prime minister Tony Abbott – were designed to give more say to local members. But as the federal election looms, preselections have been delayed by factional manoeuvring and the failure of the committee that vets potential candidates to meet, even though nominations closed last May. There is now white-hot anger among some Liberal members about the manoeuvring and the attempts to sidestep the Warringah rules. “We criticise the Labor party for using their N40 rules to choose candidates, but we are no better. We might even be worse,” said one senior Liberal. The deal, hammered out by factional negotiators on Saturday, involves avoiding rank and file votes in all seats held by federal MPs who were facing challenges. It also springboards candidates into several winnable seats, including Dobell and Hughes. But the deal still has to be put to state executive council on Friday and requires 90% support by the 27-strong state executive to pass. Among the right faction, there is particular anger at the negotiations, which included Charles Perrottet, the brother of the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, and Dallas McInerney, the chief executive of Catholic Schools. Some said the deal had no chance of passing at state executive council this Friday and was instead a further ploy by factional leaders to engineer a crisis within the NSW Liberal party that would prompt federal intervention on the grounds of urgency. The federal election must be held by May and NSW Liberals are still to choose candidates in several key seats. Others pointed to the fact that the negotiators had perceived conflicts of interest because their seats were under threat. Several sitting MPs are facing preselection challenges and, after a surprise result in the state seat of Willoughby where a rightwinger won the moderate-held seat, those concerns have become sharper. Trent Zimmerman, MP for North Sydney, and a moderate faction leader; environment minister, Sussan Ley, who holds Farrer; and immigration minister, Alex Hawke, the convener of the centre right faction who holds Mitchell; will be confirmed as the Liberal candidates under the deal. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The foreign minister, Marise Payne, will be confirmed as top of the NSW Liberal Senate ticket. The second spot is a Nationals spot. The third spot, however, will go to a vote, which could see senator Concetta Fierravanti-Wells challenged by Senator Jim Molan, who filled a Senate vacancy. The deal would mean seats like Hughes will again not get to choose a candidate. Under the rules, Dore, who is said to have the backing of broadcaster Alan Jones would be anointed to fill the vacancy created by the current MP for Hughes, Craig Kelly, who became an independent after being reprimanded for spruiking unproven Covid -19 treatments. Kelly himself had been saved twice in the past from a challenge by prime ministerial interventions when he was the Liberal candidate. This means that in Hughes there will not have been an opportunity for locals to have a say for almost a decade. But within hours of the deal, there were already doubts about the Hughes component because Dore, who hails from the northern beaches, had not nominated for Hughes while three high profile local Liberals had. In the Central Coast seat of Dobell, the plan is to anoint Jemima Gleeson, a pentecostal preacher, who is backed by the centre right and Morrison over the right’s preferred candidate, Dr Michael Feneley. Under the deal, votes under the Warringah rules will go ahead in Bennelong, Warringah and Parramatta. However, the outcomes in each of these contests are said to be more certain. But whether the deal will be accepted is far from certain. Senior party figures have warned that the attempt to avoid the new rules will cause havoc in the party, particularly among the right, and result in the Liberals being unable to man polling booths with local Liberal members.A legal challenge over a decision to ban media organisations from a court case about the Duke of Edinburgh’s will is to be heard by the court of appeal. The Guardian has been given permission by a court of appeal judge to bring the challenge against the attorney general and the Queen’s private lawyers. Its legal action has been brought after the president of the family division of the high court, Sir Andrew McFarlane, ruled last September that the will of Prince Philip should be hidden from the public for 90 years. It followed a private hearing that media organisations were not told about and were consequently prevented from attending. The Guardian intends to argue that the case should be reheard in the high court because McFarlane failed to properly consider whether reporters should have been permitted to attend the original hearing, or make representations in favour of being allowed to attend. The paper argues that this was a serious interference with the principle of open justice. Lady Justice King, a court of appeal judge, gave permission, stating that: “There is a real prospect of the applicant [the Guardian] succeeding on the ground that the high court erred in law in denying the media an opportunity to make submissions, or at least to attend and hear submissions, as to whether the substantive application to seal the will of His Late Royal Highness, the Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh should be heard in private.” Judges only grant permission for a case to be heard in the court of appeal if they believe there is real possibility of winning or if there is some other compelling reason. At this stage, they are not making any decision on the ultimate outcome. The legal challenge will focus attention on the secrecy that surrounds an obscure exemption that has been granted to the royal family. Wills made by members of the Windsor family are kept secret, in contrast to ordinary members of the public. British law dictates that wills drawn up by members of the public are ordinarily made public after they die. Wills are published in order to ensure that they are correctly implemented, prevent fraud and alert all those who may benefit. Since 1910, the wills of more than 30 members of the royal family – including distant relatives – have been concealed after legal applications. The high court granted these applications in private hearings. A list of the wills that have been kept secret for more than a century are kept in a locked safe in the high court. In November, in a move towards transparency, McFarlane decided to publish the list of those royals whose wills have been sealed, although the contents of the wills are still concealed. In September, McFarlane ruled that Philip’s will should be kept secret, adding: “The answer to the question ‘why should there be an exception for senior members of the royal family?’ is, in my view, clear: it is necessary to enhance the protection afforded to the private lives of this unique group of individuals, in order to protect the dignity and standing of the public role of the sovereign and other close members of her family.” “While there may be public curiosity as to the private arrangements that a member of the royal family may choose to make in their will, there is no true public interest in the public knowing this wholly private information … The media interest in this respect is commercial.” He made the ruling after a hearing at which only Philip’s executor, Farrer and Co Trust Corporation, a subsidiary of the Queen’s private solicitors Farrer and Co, and the acting attorney general, Michael Ellis, were permitted to attend. Both parties successfully persuaded the judge to exclude the media from the hearing. McFarlane said he “accepted the argument that only the attorney general can speak, as a matter of public law, to the public interest, and that there was, legally, therefore no role for those who might represent the media at a hearing (public or private) in putting forward any contrary view of the public interest”.Tennis great Martina Navratilova has condemned as “pathetic” the Australian Open’s decision to stop fans wearing ‘Where is Peng Shuai?’ T-shirts, accusing Tennis Australia of “capitulating” to China. Late last week spectators at Melbourne Park were asked to remove their T-shirts and security confiscated a banner emblazoned with the same words, on the grounds that TA prohibits “clothing, banners or signs that are commercial or political”. The governing body stood by its rationale on Sunday and stated Peng’s “safety is our primary concern” and continued to work with the Women’s Tennis Association to “seek more clarity” on the Chinese star’s wellbeing almost three months after she accused a senior Chinese official of sexual assault and then virtually disappeared from public life. But Navratilova, the retired Czech who won 18 grand slam singles titles, said she found it difficult to believe. “That’s just pathetic,” Navratilova tweeted. “The @wta stands pretty much alone on this.” She then appeared on the Tennis Channel alongside Lindsay Davenport and spoke more expansively on the issue. “Sport has always been on the forefront of social issues, pushing them forward, and we are going backwards I feel … I find it really, really cowardly,” she said. “This is not a political statement, this is a human rights statement. And chances are Peng Shuai may be playing here but, she couldn’t get out of the country? Anyway, I think they’re wrong on this. “The WTA has been so strong on this issue … and the players, really taking a chance on their pocket book. The ATP was pretty weak on this. The IOC, well we know where they are. And just really capitulating on this issue from the Aussies, letting China dictate what they do at their own slam.” Peng has appeared only rarely on Chinese social media since early November when her post on Weibo, in which she accused the former vice-premier Zhang Gaoli of sexual assault, was quickly deleted from China’s heavily censored internet. In late December, Peng retracted her allegations in an interview with Singapore media outlet Lianhe Zaobao, a Chinese-language publication under the state-controlled Singapore Press Holdings Limited. “First, I need to stress one point that is extremely important, I have never said or written that anyone has sexually assaulted me, I have to clearly stress this point,” Peng said in the video posted by Lianhe Zaobao. She said her deleted Weibo post was a “private matter”. Davenport, the American former world No 1, described the situation as “absolutely heartbreaking”. “The WTA used so much good, strong language when this first went down, and unfortunately this story just seems to … be quiet, just push it in the back,” she said. “People in tennis, we want to see her. She was a real part of this tour. But most importantly we want to know she’s OK.” Numerous players at the Australian Open have spoken of their concern for Peng’s safety, and Frenchman Nicolas Mahut tweeted about the incident at Melbourne Park. “What’s going on!? What lack of courage! What if you did not have Chinese sponsors?” Mahut tweeted. He added the hashtag #1573 in reference to one of the Open’s major sponsors, Chinese premium liquor brand Guojiao 1573. A fundraising page to raise money to print more ‘Where is Peng Shuai?’ T-shirts to be handed out for free during the women’s final has reached more than $12,000 in two days. “We understand and appreciate that people have strongly held personal and political views on a range of issues,” TA said in a statement on Monday. “Peng Shuai’s safety is our primary concern. We continue to work with the WTA and the global tennis community to do everything we can to ensure her wellbeing. Our work is ongoing and through the appropriate channels. Today we have again reiterated our strong support to the WTA and we extend this to all the players. “To ensure that the Australian Open remains a welcoming, safe and inclusive event for everyone, we have a longstanding policy of not allowing banners, signs or clothing that are commercial or political. “On this occasion, the security guard was simply enforcing this policy and while we have reviewed this and are happy to welcome the patron back to Melbourne Park, the policy will continue to be applied in relation to any items that compromise the safety and comfort of AO fans.”China’s air force flew 39 warplanes into Taiwan’s air defence identification zone on Sunday, the largest daily number since record-breaking incursions in October. Taiwan’s Ministry of Defence said it had tasked aircraft in response, issued radio warnings to the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) pilots and deployed missile defence systems to monitor the activity. In recent years the PLA has ratcheted up its incursions, which it says are training drills, to near daily frequency. Over four days in October nearly 150 planes were dispatched, breaking previous records and coinciding with China’s National Day, a key patriotic holiday. Sunday’s sorties into the Taiwan Strait included 34 fighter jets, one bomber, two electronic warfare planes and two intelligence-gathering planes. They flew near the disputed Pratas Islands and close to the edge of the median line, an unofficial border of set length through the Strait between Taiwan’s main island and China. Longstanding tacit agreement over the marker appeared to be thrown out by China in 2020, when a foreign ministry spokesperson said there was no such thing. No Chinese missions crossed the line between its declaration by US military figures in 1955 and 1999, and remained rare in the years after. In September 2020 Taiwan accused China of flying dozens of planes across the line after a visit by senior US official Keith Krach. On Sunday the Financial Times reported China had established a permanent presence of at least one warship in the waters between Japan’s southern islands and Taiwan for the last six months, the first time it has done so on the eastern side of the islands between it and the Pacific. Beijing considers Taiwan to be a province of China, and has not ruled out taking it by force. The PLA flights into the Strait are grey-zone tactics – war-adjacent strategies which do not meet the threshold of combat – which are thought to be designed to intimidate Taiwan and wear out its military by forcing constant responses. Taiwan, which is a self-governing democracy with open elections and free press, maintains it is a sovereign nation. In response to Beijing’s threats it is strengthening its military with assistance and weapons purchases from the US, but faces challenges. Earlier this month it suspended combat training for its F-16 fleet after a recently upgraded model of the plane crashed into the sea, presumably killing the pilot, whose body has not been found. The Chinese planes did not fly into Taiwan’s sovereign airspace on Sunday, which would represent a significant hostile act. The ADIZ is a self-declared airspace which Taiwan’s government monitors for defence purposes. China’s military did not give a reason for the missions on Sunday, but it came days after a US warship conducted a freedom of navigation exercise near the disputed Paracel Islands. US and Japanese naval forces were also conducting exercises in the Philippines Sea over the weekend, which the US Pacific Fleet said included two carrier strike groups “conducting training to preserve and protect a free and open Indo Pacific”.The European Council has removed Australia from the “white list”, a register of countries from which it recommends travel restrictions should be lifted. The council’s list of epidemiologically-safe third countries is non-binding and countries within the European Union are able to set their own border requirements, which may involve quarantine or testing requirements. What did the European Council decide? The European Council said on 17 January it had updated its list of countries for which travel restrictions should be lifted, and removed Argentina, Australia and Canada. The decision is non-binding on European Union member states and reviewed every two weeks. Under the criteria used by the European Council, all restrictions on travellers from a third country can be lifted if the rate of Covid-19 infections in the past 14 days is less than 75 in 100,000. The criteria also states that if countries accept proof of vaccination to waive travel restrictions such as testing or quarantine requirements, they should in principle lift restrictions on travel for all double-dosed international travellers. This decision to remove Australia from the list was made in the 14 days in which Australia’s daily Covid numbers shot up from 30,000 to more than 100,000. In the past week, Australia has averaged 274 cases per 100,000, a 20% drop on the previous seven days. The European Council criteria also includes an “emergency brake mechanism”. It states: “Where the epidemiological situation of a third country or region worsens quickly, in particular if a variant of concern or of interest has been detected, member states should adopt an urgent, temporary restriction on all travel into the EU”. At the moment, the list of countries for which European countries are recommended to allow not-restricted travel is: Bahrain, Chile, Colombia, Indonesia, Kuwait, New Zealand, Peru, Qatar, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, South Korea, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, and China, subject to confirmation of reciprocity. What does that mean for Australians planning to travel to Europe? The chief executive of Flight Centre, Graham Turner, says the removal of Australia from the EU white list will have “minimal effect on vaccinated Australians travelling to Europe”. “Each EU country has their own protocols and if you are vaccinated most do not require pre-departure testing and isolation at arrival,” he said. “I believe the indications are that within three to six weeks Australians will be able to fly to North America and UK/Europe without pre-departure tests and tourists will be able to fly here under the same conditions.” Cyprus, Greece and Italy have already said they will not restrict travellers from Australia. Germany, meanwhile, has listed Australia as a high-risk area since 9 January, but quarantine-free travel is still allowed for fully-vaccinated Australians who test negative after arrival. Does this affect travel to the United Kingdom? No. The United Kingdom is currently open to quarantine-free travel from all countries. If you are fully vaccinated with an approved vaccine and have a vaccine certificate, you are required to book and pay for a Covid-19 test before getting on your flight to be taken within 48 hours of your arrival in the UK. If you test positive you will be required to isolate but there are no separate quarantine requirements. If you are not fully vaccinated you must take a Covid-19 test within two days before travelling to the UK, and then book and pay for PCR tests to be taken on day 2 and 8 after your arrival. There is still no requirement to quarantine.The Responder 9pm, BBC One “I’m a shell, the job has ruined me. Every night there’s spit in my face, blood on my face, and it never stops.” Welcome to the world of Chris Carson, a police response officer who can’t remember the last time he did something good and is struggling with his mental health as he juggles life as a “bizzie” with his other roles – husband, dad and son. In the first of five episodes of this gritty drama – the second episode airs on Tuesday, with the series continuing next week – Carson (an at-the-end-of-his-tether Martin Freeman with a convincing scouse accent) comes to the aid of a young heroin addict, as his colleagues question his behaviour. Have they got good reason to? Hollie Richardson Geordie Hospital 8pm, Channel 4 The latest hospital documentary series continues. Eight-year-old Violet’s life is transformed by corrective surgery to her feet, and reconstructive plastic surgeon Dan performs complex surgery on skin cancer patient Bill, whose tumour returned after 16 months. HR Keeping Up With the Aristocrats 9pm, ITV More asset-rich, cash-poor exploits from the blue bloods who are monetising their heritage by taking centre stage in a documentary series. Tonight, Princess Olga is trying to raise cash by hosting tours of Provender House. Meanwhile, to the dismay of Alexandra, builders leave Renishaw Hall looking like a bomb site. You just can’t get the staff these days … Phil Harrison I, Sniper: The Washington Killers 10pm, Channel 4 “Do not make this personal. This is not a person. This is simply an end.” Lee Malvo was 16 years old when he killed young mother Keenya Cook in 2002. He then joined John Muhammad in shooting dead a further nine people in the Washington DC sniper case. This harrowing, often hard to watch six-part documentary – which took four years to make – gives a blow-by-blow account of what happened, with haunting recordings from surviving perpetrator Malvo. HR Couples Therapy 10pm, BBC Two Tonight, a major row about the politics of bed-sharing. Or is it actually about rejection? Or power dynamics? Or who should try doing the bloody dishes once in a while? As ever, the series digs below all the trivial issues to find deeper-rooted problems, shifting our allegiances with the characters in the process. Alexi Duggins Euphoria 10.05pm, Sky Atlantic Tonight’s gorgeous opening sequence provides a much-needed change of pace for Euphoria and gives us a backstory for one of its least likable characters, Cal. Then it’s back to usual for the high-octane high school drama: Rue and Jules play truth or dare with Elliot, while Cassie (played by this season’s MVP, Sydney Sweeney) comes undone. Henry Wong Live sport Championship Football – Blackburn v Middlesbrough 7.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event Promotion contenders meet at Ewood Park. • This article was amended on 2 February 2022 to correct a picture caption. Baroness Alexandra Sitwell and her husband were pictured at Glyndebourne opera, not at their home, Renishaw Hall.Top story: Westminster on edge for Gray report Morning everyone. This is Martin Farrer bringing you the best stories of the day. Boris Johnson is facing calls to launch an independent inquiry into Islamophobia in the Tory party after the former minister Nusrat Ghani claimed she was told her “Muslimness” was “making colleagues uncomfortable”. The prime minister was dragged into the controversy as he awaits the findings of a make-or-break investigation into alleged lockdown-busting parties in Downing Street. No 10 conceded on Sunday that Ghani had raised her concerns personally with Johnson at a meeting in 2020, and said he had responded by encouraging her to make a formal complaint with the Conservative party. Ghani says that when she was sacked as a junior transport minister in a reshuffle in 2020, Tory whips told her that her “Muslim woman minister status was making colleagues feel uncomfortable”. In a sign of the tensions with the party, chief whip Mark Spencer called the claims “completely false”. Ghani, the first female Muslim Tory MP, has described the comment as like being “punched in the stomach”, and has reignited fears about racism in the party. The case added to the febrile atmosphere at Westminster where the findings of Sue Gray’s investigation into alleged parties at Downing Street are expected this week. Doing the rounds of TV stations yesterday, Dominic Raab, deputy PM, refused to say whether the report would be published in full. * * * Ukraine order – The US government has ordered the families of all American personnel at the US embassy in Ukraine to leave the country amid heightened fears of a Russian invasion. The US also issued a statement last night noting the buildup of Russian troops on the border and that “security conditions are unpredictable and can deteriorate with little notice”. Anthony Blinken, US secretary of state, said Nato would be united and respond “swiftly” if Russia crossed the border. It came as Ukraine’s government said it was reacting “seriously” to UK allegations that Moscow has plans to invade the country and install a puppet government, adding that Kyiv is resisting Russian efforts to destabilise its government and economy. * * * Long Covid impact – NHS trusts in England lost nearly 2m days in staff absences due to long Covid in the first 18 months of the pandemic, according to an all-party group of MPs. The group’s chair, Lib Dem MP Layla Moran, said the government had paid “almost no attention to long Covid and the severe impact it was having on vital public services”. In another study into the impact of Covid, nearly half of those who became ill in the first wave of infections may have long-term and even permanent changes to their sense of smell. * * * Peng ‘capitulation’ – The tennis legend Martina Navratilova has condemned as “pathetic” the Australian Open’s decision to stop fans wearing “Where is Peng Shuai?” T-shirts, accusing Tennis Australia of “capitulating” to China. Late last week spectators at Melbourne Park were asked to remove their T-shirts and security confiscated a banner emblazoned with the same words, on the grounds that TA prohibits “clothing, banners or signs that are commercial or political”. * * * Exclusive – A committee of MPs has produced a report which says the gambling watchdog is “too harsh” on the industry and criticises the regulator’s attempts to reduce addiction. The MPs accuse the Gambling Commission of a “bullying attitude that has caused mental harm” within the industry and calls for it to be placed in special measures. The findings by the all-party parliamentary group (APPG) on betting and gaming have been described as “ludicrous” by a campaigner for regulatory reform and met with a frosty reception from the regulator. Several members of the committee have faced criticism for taking thousands of pounds worth of freebies from betting firms. * * * Truss accused – Paul Keating, the outspoken former Australian prime minister, has accused Liz Truss of making “demented” comments about Chinese military aggression and urged the foreign secretary to hurry “back to her collapsing, disreputable government”. Keating also said Britain “suffers delusions of grandeur and relevance deprivation” after Truss visited Australia for meetings with counterparts last week. * * * Thierry Mugler dies – The French designer, Manfred Thierry Mugler, who was at the forefront of the 1980s power-dressing look, has died at the age of 73 of “natural causes”. A former ballet dancer, Mugler’s continued to dress the world’s most famous women such as Beyoncé, Lady Gaga and Kim Kardashian. “He was timeless and ahead of his time,” supermodel Jerry Hall said of the designer. Today in Focus podcast Nipsey Hussle was one of LA’s most-loved rappers and a pillar of his community. But records disclosed after his death revealed that he was also the target of an extensive Los Angeles policing operation. Guardian tech reporter Johana Bhuiyan explains. Lunchtime read: Jason Bateman on family, partying and Ozark As the drama series Ozark returns to streaming screens for its fourth and final season, Jason Bateman – AKA Marty Byrde – discusses the ups and downs of his acting career and how fondness for having fun meant he “stayed at the party too long”. Sport Antonio Conte bemoaned the “incredible” decision to disallow Harry Kane’s first-half strike as his unbeaten league start as Tottenham manager came to an end against Chelsea, before admitting his former club are on “another level” to his present squad. A livid Patrick Vieira was unsparing in his criticism of the referee, Kevin Friend, and VAR after his Crystal Palace side were beaten 3-1 by Liverpool. An injury-time strike from Tobin Heath salvaged a point against Manchester City at the Academy Stadium but there was controversy about the opening goal that led the Arsenal manager Jonas Eidevall to call for greater support for WSL referees. England won the second T20 international at Kensington Oval after Jason Roy provided the platform to survive a late surge from the West Indies, who finished with the highest-ever ninth-wicket stand. Tennis Australia maintains Peng Shuai’s safety is its “primary concern” despite asking fans at Melbourne Park to remove T-shirts and a banner bearing the words “Where is Peng Shuai?” The Los Angeles Rams and Kansas City Chiefs advanced to the championship games after two thrilling NFL clashes on Sunday. On a weekend where complaining golfers were hardly difficult to come by, Thomas Pieters delivered a timely redemption tale with a one-stroke victory at the Abu Dhabi Championship. And Youssef Msakni scored with a long-range shot to hand Covid-hit Tunisia an improbable 1-0 win over 10-man Nigeria in Garoua to advance to the Africa Cup of Nations quarter-finals. Business Large cities have lost almost a year’s worth of sales during the pandemic thanks to lockdowns, resulting in a “levelling down” of historically more prosperous high street destinations, a study by Centre for Cities says. London lost 47 weeks’ worth of sales between March 2020 and November 2021, while Birmingham, Edinburgh and Cardiff also lost nearly a year’s worth of sales as people stayed away from big cities. The FTSE100 looks like dipping around 0.2% at the opening bell, while the pound is on $1.355 and €1.196. The papers The Guardian leads with “PM pulled into row over Tory party Islamophobia” as Boris Johnson also faces the findings into the partygate affair this week. That’s the lead in the Telegraph – “No10 police questioned by Gray over ‘parties’” – while the Express has “Boris accepts ‘need for change’ at No10”. The Mail reports that “Entire cabinet would back a tax hike delay”. The Mirror focuses on what it calls the “Scandal of cold Britain” with a headline “Freezing” while the Daily Record in Scotland has “Power struggle”. The Times looks further afield with “Fears mount Russia will weaponise gas supplies”, and the FT says “Unilever faces pressure on new front as US activist builds stake”. The Scotsman leads with “Airline steps up flights ahead of rush for summer holidays”. Sign up The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendThe Law Council and defamation experts have panned the Coalition’s anti-trolling bill, warning it will deprive defamation victims of redress and does little to solve the problem of online trolling. The Law Council and academics David Rolph and Michael Douglas have warned giving companies operating social media pages a defence may worsen online abuse and harm victims’ access to justice, while new complaints procedures still allow anonymous commenters to block release of their details. The submissions were made to the attorney-general’s department, which is conducting consultation on the draft bill yet to be introduced to parliament. The Morrison government released the proposed anti-trolling bill in early December, claiming it could help victims of trolling by incentivising social media companies to set up complaints-handling procedures that can reveal the identities of anonymous commenters. The bill primarily helps operators of social media accounts by deeming they are not the publishers of comments by other users on their posts. Instead, the social media companies will be held liable as publishers, although they can access a defence if they have an appropriate complaints procedure. The Law Council submitted that the reform should wait until after a separate review by state and federal attorneys-general into liability for digital defamation, which was launched after the high court found media companies could be liable for third-party comments on their social media posts. Rolph also warned the reform could be “premature” as the court in Dylan Voller’s case is yet to decide on the defence of innocent dissemination, and media companies could seek to recover any damages ordered against them from Facebook or the commenters. The Law Council submitted that “defamatory material comprises only a small component of ‘trolling’ activity online”, while Rolph agreed the bill’s title was a “misnomer” because it is “not really concerned with ‘trolling’”. The Law Council warned a “blanket protection” for companies running social media pages “does not adequately balance competing public interests, may leave victims without recourse and … provide unwarranted complete protection from liability”. Rolph warned this “is likely to increase, rather than decrease, poor online behaviour”. That is because page owners will not be liable “even if they have actual notice of the defamatory third party comment and have the power to remove the comment” – thus alleviating them of a need to moderate comments. Rolph suggested that social media page operators should still be liable if they are given notice of a defamatory comment. Douglas submitted that the bill will benefit commercial media companies and internet giants but does “very little for the vast majority of ordinary working Australians”. “It will do nothing to better protect children online.” Douglas warned the bill “would remove the ability of those who suffer reputational harm online to obtain meaningful remedies”. “If the government wants to reduce online harms inflicted on Australians, then it should incentivise those with the power to moderate social media comments to do a better job.” Douglas submitted “legislation could mandate that providers have a complaints scheme” rather than creating an incentive to set one up. Creating a defence for social media companies is “undesirable” because “it removes one of the more effective avenues for Australians to protect themselves from harm caused by social media”, he said. Rolph noted that under the proposed complaints procedures, anonymous users can block the release of their identifying information, and they are “unlikely” to regularly agree to be unmasked. A group of top defamation barristers and solicitors led by Sue Chrysanthou submitted that “no change” was required to the law to respond to the Voller case. The decision “has no impact on the law” of publication or the defence of innocent dissemination which is still available, the submission said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The submission by prominent plaintiff practitioners was co-signed by solicitors Patrick George and Rebekah Giles, and barristers Richard Potter, Kieran Smark and Nicholas Olson. The defamation practitioners warned against giving media companies immunity for social media posts “no matter how defamatory, and even once they had been put on notice of the defamatory character of the comments”. Given that “non-defamatory trolling may still be deeply hurtful”, the practitioners suggested giving federal courts the power to issue injunctions to prevent publication of cyber-abuse material, to supplement eSafety commissioner powers to force such material to be taken down.A month ago my four-year-old Mercedes-Benz GLC had a serious malfunction as I was driving through town. On a bend, the power steering failed causing the car to jerk severely to the left and leaving me with no control over the steering. The fact that I was driving slowly almost certainly saved me and our one-year-old child from an accident. The car had to be towed to the local Mercedes dealer which has identified a faulty power steering electrical motor. I have been told that this is only supplied as part of a complete steering rack, and have been quoted about £3,500 plus labour costs. I bought the car used from another Mercedes dealer two years ago and it has a low, 34,000, mileage. I was not told of the importance of having the car serviced at a Mercedes dealership, and it has received two services at local garages. This has seemingly nullified any goodwill that my local Mercedes-Benz branch is able to offer. It feels unreasonable to have to replace a sealed unit which you would expect to last the lifetime of the car. To me, it is clearly not fit for purpose. It would seem there is no course of action other than a small claims case, but who do I level the charge against? EF, Guildford I am always amazed at how the German carmakers treat customers, many having spent well in excess of £30,000 on vehicles that develop serious faults not long after the warranty has expired. Mercedes recalled GLC cars made in 2019 and 2020 in both Australia and the US for having faulty power steering, but claims those problems are unrelated to your earlier model. A search online will show that GLC models have been beset by steering problems. I asked the company about your case, and it has now offered to repair the car for a discounted rate of £2,250 as a gesture of goodwill. It has also offered a courtesy car while this is resolved. This leaves you with a dilemma: you can either take its offer, and stump up the cash through gritted teeth then seek to recover some of your losses in the courts; or get the car fixed more cheaply by an independent garage. The Consumer Rights Act allows you bring a claim against the retailer – the dealer you bought from, rather than Mercedes itself – for up to six years. I think most courts would agree that an electric power steering motor should last longer than four years, or 34,000 miles, and would make some kind of award in your favour. The lack of a Mercedes service history should not make any difference because the power steering motor would have not been touched. The dealer has so far refused to reply to your letters, but will probably have a change of heart when presented with the official court claim. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include a phone number. Letters are subject to our terms: gu.com/letters-termsQ I am a single first-time buyer in Wales and am struggling to get my foot on the housing ladder. I am currently 29, have saved up £50,000 and think the maximum mortgage I could get by myself is £140,000. I currently rent a house from friends, so have been able to save a bit each month, but I am very aware that my savings are not keeping up with house prices or inflation. As in many places, the property market has ballooned here and there are very few houses for sale within my price range. The ones that are in my price range aren’t where I want to live long term and don’t look particularly easy to sell on, which concerns me. I am now considering whether I should borrow more money from my parents to bolster my deposit and stretch for a £210,000 property so I can buy something that gives me more options such as renting out a room or Airbnb. However, I am concerned that with wages stagnating and interest rates and the cost of living set to rise that things could get financially sticky. There’s also the property price bubble. I appreciate that you need a crystal ball to answer these with certainty but my questions are: am I better off buying something within budget or stretching myself for something that I want to live in longer term? Or am I better off waiting, continuing to rent and investing my money elsewhere? AN A There is one thing I can say with total certainty: you shouldn’t buy in an area where you don’t want to live long term and where you think properties don’t look easy to sell on. If you did, you would regret it. I can also be certain that in purely financial terms you are better off upfront buying something within your original budget. If you stay within budget and buy a property costing £190,000 (your deposit of £50,000 plus a mortgage of £140,000) you will pay £350 in land transaction tax (LTT) – the equivalent of stamp duty land tax in Wales. If you buy a £210,000 property, your LTT bill will be £1,050. Note that Wales doesn’t have first-time buyer relief from LTT whereas first-time buyers in England do get SDLT relief on the first £300,000 of the price of a property costing up to £500,000. However, if stretching your budget would mean that you could buy somewhere where you would be happy to live for several years – especially if it meant that you could have a lodger, for example, who could help with the extra cost – it could make more financial sense in the long term. While I don’t think it’s wise to compromise on buying in an area you would be happy to live, you may need to make compromises in other aspects. Would you be prepared to buy a flat rather than a house, for example? If you would be happy in a new-build property, would you consider stretching your budget by making use of the Help to Buy Wales scheme which runs until March 2023 (but doesn’t let you sublet any part of the property)? Finally, it might cheer you up to know that the mortgage lender Halifax’s crystal ball suggests that house prices may rise by only 2% in 2022 or even not rise at all. So waiting before you buy shouldn’t be too detrimental if an afternoon with your calculator shows that stretching your budget isn’t an option. • Want expert help finding your new mortgage? Use our new online tool to search thousands of deals from more than 80 lenders with the Guardian Mortgage Service, powered by L&amp;C.Police officers called to a Maryland residence by a concerned neighbour found a 49-year-old man dead – and surrounded by more than 125 venomous and non-venomous snakes, held in tanks on racks. The discovery by Charles county sheriff’s deputies and emergency responders at the house in Pomfret became even more bizarre when they established that none of the reptiles, including a 4.3m (14ft) Burmese python, had escaped or were slithering free. “At last count it was over 125 individual snakes that were racked or in cages inside the home,” Jennifer Harris, a Charles county government spokesperson, told WUSA news. “I want to assure anybody living within this neighbourhood that we have not seen that any of the snakes were not properly secured or could have escaped. People were concerned there was some danger but we’ve not determined any of the snakes were not secure after this gentleman’s death.” The reptiles were removed in the county animal control department’s largest rescue operation to date. The deceased man, who was not immediately named, and who lived alone according to neighbours, was taken to the medical examiner’s office in Baltimore. Harris said locals appeared unaware that he kept snakes. A statement from the Charles county sheriff’s office said first responders were alerted by a neighbor “who indicated he went to check on the resident, whom he had not seen since the day before, and observed the resident lying on the floor and unconscious”. Deputies broke down the front door. They called animal control when they found snakes of varying species and sizes in rooms throughout the house. There were so many, Harris said, that snake experts from Virginia and North Carolina were called in to help. Not all of the reptiles were immediately identified, she said. According to the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), between 7,000 and 8,000 people are bitten by venomous snakes in the US each year. The average number of fatalities is five. The US is home to numerous species of venomous snakes, including rattlesnakes, copperheads, water moccasins and coral snakes. Most snake bites happen outdoors. “The number of deaths would be much higher if people did not seek medical care,” the CDC says.Do a speed check Find out the speed you are getting using a computer connected to your router via an ethernet network cable. Many routers and other devices come with one, or they cost about £5 separately. You may also need a USB ethernet adapter (about £10) if your computer does not have a port built-in. If you can’t connect via ethernet, use a modern phone, laptop or tablet on wifi as close to your router as possible with a clear line of sight. Ookla’s Speedtest.net and Netflix’s Fast.com are reliable speed-testing services. Some more advanced routers have speed testing services built into them, too. They are typically accessible via a router’s settings pages in your browser or a companion app, if they have one. If your broadband is slow at the router, it might be time to switch providers. Some fixed-line ISPs offer speeds in excess of 200Mbps in certain areas, while 4G/5G home broadband is an alternative. If you are not getting near the speed your ISP advertises, you may be able to get a discount, or switch to a plan with higher speeds. Work out what you need When it comes to broadband the faster the better, particularly with multiple people and devices using the internet at once. However, the minimum speed needed for most online activities is fairly slow. Video calling services, such as Zoom, typically need up to 4Mbps upload and download. Online gaming services, such as Xbox Live, need at least 3Mbps down and 0.5Mbps up, while game streaming services need a minimum of 10Mbps down. Video streaming, such as Netflix, needs at least 5Mbps for HD or 25Mbps for 4K content. The median broadband speed in the UK is 50.4Mbps down and 9.8Mbps up, according to data from Ofcom in March 2021. That means that the majority of connections should be able to handle most popular services. But bear in mind that with more than one device, or person, using your connection simultaneously, including updates and downloads when idle, slower broadband packages can quickly get choked. Reposition your router If your broadband connection is fast enough but your wifi is weak, there are things you can do. If possible, move the router closer to the centre of the house, or towards the rooms in which you need the strongest signal. Keep it in the open, not in a cabinet, and away from solid and metallic objects. And try to position it away from dense walls, particularly those made out of concrete blockwork or with pipes and wires running through them. Check your settings Most modern routers will automatically select the best settings for your home, but you can manually check using the web interface of your router accessed through a browser on a computer. Consult the help pages for your ISP’s router for how to do so. Wifi operating at 2.4GHz uses a range of frequency “channels”, only some of which do not overlap with each other. To reduce interference from your neighbours’ wifi, switch to channel 1, 6 or 11, which do not overlap, and therefore are less likely to cause or suffer interference. If you have a connection under 200Mbps, enabling prioritisation or “quality of service” for your key devices, might help. This stops other things from sucking up all the available bandwidth – it will prevent a game download on an Xbox cutting off a video call on your laptop, for instance. Set a strong wifi password using at least WPA2 security, not the lowest WEP option. This will make sure no wifi thieves can log on to your network and steal your bandwidth. Check your devices An internet slowdown may be down to your devices rather than your router. For older computers, upgrading the wifi adapter may help. USB wifi 5 adapters cost under £15, while the latest wifi 6 models cost about £50, but you will need a compatible router to take advantage of the extra speed. For a non-portable device, such as a media streamer or a console, use an ethernet cable if it is close to the router, as this will be faster and more reliable than wifi. If you have about 40 devices connected at once, consider disconnecting unnecessary ones to help provide more bandwidth for those you need most. Weaker routers struggle with lots of devices connected at once. Extend the wifi reach If your wifi can’t reach parts of your house you can extend the signal of your current router with add-on gadgets. Powerline networking devices use your home’s power cables to transmit data. They typically cost between £20 and £70. They plug into standard electrical sockets with one connected to the router via an ethernet cable, and others placed about the home providing ethernet ports and/or wifi for your devices. The speed you get through them is dependent on the condition of your electrical wiring. Wifi extenders (£25-70) do a similar thing, but simply connect to your router via wifi, then rebroadcast it for other devices. A network switch (under £20) can add more ethernet ports to your router if you need to connect more devices. Upgrade to a better router Replacing your existing router is often the most effective way to improve your wifi, but is also the most costly. Before committing to a third-party router, speak to your ISP as it may be able to provide you with a more modern one for free. Virgin and other ISPs are currently rolling out more powerful wifi 6-capable routers. Otherwise, there are broadly two options: a beefy single router with much more powerful wifi broadcasting ability than the cheap one provided by your ISP, or a mesh system, which uses a series of satellites dotted about your home to blanket it in wifi. Both typically use your existing router as a modem and then broadcast their own more robust wifi network. Single unit wifi 6 routers start at about £60 but can reach the hundreds for powerful gaming-orientated devices. They connect to your old ISP box via ethernet cable, which means they are often easier to place in a more central area of your home. Running a long ethernet cable under floorboards, carpets, behind skirting boards or picture rails, or just under furniture can help keep things neat. Good wifi 5 mesh systems start at under £100 for a triple pack of satellites, which should be enough for most homes with connections under 200Mbps. For those with faster broadband, good tri-band wifi 6 models cost about £300.Lately, the prospects for young, straight, male American novelists of unruly talent who aspire to more than underground recognition haven’t looked particularly bright. Stateside culture war partisanship has narrowed the bandwidth of permissible literary expression, with the heterosexual white male regarded as inherently suspect. To get along under the new order, ambitious young Americans might be tempted to walk on eggshells while presenting themselves as paragons of virtue – and dissent could spell career suicide. (If the general point seems exaggerated, recall that Americans elected Donald Trump as their president, then ask yourself how many pro-Trump literary novelists you can name.) Into this vexed monoculture steps Sean Thor Conroe, with his winningly titled first novel, Fuccboi. The challenge he confronts is a real pickle: how to update the tradition of the American male autobiographical novelist, writing about the concerns of a twentysomething on the make (which naturally include wrong-think and that notoriously problematic condition, lust) without censoring himself into insipidity. To pull it off and remain credible, he may have to play both sides: writing neither as simpering literary beta-cuck, nor as obtuse and toxic reactionary. Magas to the left of me, wokists to the right! Set between late 2017 and summer 2019, Fuccboi is an autobiographical picaresque that follows its narrator, Sean, as he attempts to become a published writer, endures an alarming skin condition, cycles around Philly in his job with a food delivery company, hustles on a book podcast and deals with the fallout from his sex life (“ex bae”, “side bae” and “editor bae” are his love interests, while male friends go by single initials: Z, C, V). Back in 2014, he tried and failed to walk across the US, then wrote a novel about it which he is now trying to sell with the help of editor bae, a woke feminist starting out in New York publishing (their working relationship is complicated by our hero having slept with her). History simmers just out of shot – “After navigating past two police blockades for an anti-Proud Boys march, I finally found a sign to lock my bike to.” This isn’t a plot novel, nor even much of a story novel. Conroe bets most of his chips on voice and by and large his writing has enough charm and freshness to keep him solvent. Americans have always been at the vanguard of minimalist prose, from Hemingway to Tao Lin. Conroe’s punchy variant includes rap slang and internet speak, bc that’s how it is now, bruh. He also fucks with those one-line paras. Quick blunt insights, stacked up n shit. It’s kinda fun. Often funny! No verbs needed in this dude’s bars. Word. What book people have lately started calling autofiction has a clear parallel in rap – a lingual art form in which practitioners exploit their life stories in intimate first-person reports, inviting the listener to both thrill at the personal disclosure and identify with the rapper’s struggles and triumphs. The egotism is franker (rappers are less embarrassed to drop a sex boast) but the narrative strategy is basically the same – a crossover was only a matter of time. Sean is a SoundCloud rapper and along with his digressive hot takes on poetry and books (Knausgaard, Sheila Heti) are reflections on rappers such as XXXTentacion and Lil B. Fuccboi’s main claim to newness lies in the narrator’s middle-way attitude to the ball-aching social justice religion that clogs the air of American cultural life, demanding moral and doctrinal purity. A reader of Nietzsche and Houellebecq, Sean cultivates a “hatred of neoliberal feminism” and rankles at “woke kids” and the “puritanical, ultimately fascistically western roots of their apparently woke language-censoring” (his spleen fuels such tin-eared, adverb-clogged phrasing). Elsewhere, though, the internalised contradictions of his dementing culture manifest in amusing ways. Unable to get an erection while in bed with “side bae” and offering her medical advice instead, Sean feels intoxicated and “almost turned on” by his “wokeness”. In another scene, he is thrilled to move in with a female housemate because doing so “immediately established me as non-predatory. Like Fuck outta here – I live with a woman!” Those who fear that US writers now come to us filtered through a de facto system of censorship will not be reassured by a scene in which Sean’s unpublished novel is subjected to an edit that erases “every savage, ugly, testosterone-fuelled, shameful thing it had been most difficult to write”. By this meandering novel’s final third, I was no longer sure what the story was meant to be about, beyond the narrator’s ongoing presence on the page. The auto-novelist’s liberation from plot comes at the cost of submergence in life’s essential formlessness. Nevertheless, I enjoyed being led through the vagaries of Sean’s “sus hetero bro” existence and appreciated his attempt to do what in 2020s America is tricky verging on taboo: to write like a man, not an ideal. Rob Doyle’s most recent book is Autobibliography Fuccboi by Sean Thor Conroe is published by Wildfire (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyCovid cases are rising rapidly among US nursing home residents and staff, causing shortages in admissions, exacerbating bed shortages at hospitals in turn, and in some cases requiring the national guard to be called in. The Omicron wave has sent many staff home sick at care facilities and rehabilitation centers that offer round-the-clock medical care. As a result, hospitals that would normally release patients into such stepped-down care are now holding off, creating a backlog of patients stuck in hospital. “Things are condition critical today. Individuals can’t find an empty or staffed bed out there,” said David Grabowski, professor of health care policy at Harvard Medical School. “It really puts hospitals in a difficult position,” he said, noting that they can’t admit new patients until they find a spot at a care facility for those patients well enough to be transferred. “That’s a huge problem, because they’re occupying a bed that would otherwise go to a new patient.” There were more than 31,500 cases among nursing home residents in the week ending 9 January, nearly as many as last winter’s peak, according to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Cases among staff are even higher – more than double last year’s highest record, with more than 57,000 confirmed cases in the week of 9 January, a tenfold increase in just three weeks. The rapid rise in infections compounds existing worker shortages, with 234,000 caregivers having exited the industry during the pandemic so far – a 15% reduction in the workforce in only two years. In Wisconsin, the shortages are so acute that more than 200 members of the national guard will be trained to work as nursing aides. “Right now, the only thing that is on their minds is the essential of, ‘How do we stay open without shortchanging our patients?’” said Leemore Dafny, professor at Harvard Business School. Yet the acute care offered by some nursing homes is “a really important release valve for the hospitals”, she said, adding that without it hospitals may become even more overwhelmed: “It causes this ricochet effect.” Care facilities, already buffeted by the pandemic, are a little-acknowledged part of the health system, particularly for patients who don’t need hospital-level care but aren’t yet ready to go home. “Nursing homes, including the post-acute care parts, have just always been kind of secondary to hospitals, and I think that comes back to bite us. Because it turns out they’re a pretty essential link in the chain,” said R Tamara Konetzka, professor of public health sciences at the University of Chicago. “Nursing homes throughout the early part of the pandemic were really the epicenter of the tragedy of Covid-19,” Konetzka said. At various times, they accounted for 30% to 50% of the total deaths in their areas. Residents of nursing homes have had some of the highest fatality rates of the pandemic, because of their close living quarters and the increased susceptibility of residents to Covid-19. The pandemic was also brutal on staff. “They put themselves at risk. Cases among staff have been among the highest” among workers, Grabowski said. At one point in the pandemic, he said, being a nursing home worker was the most dangerous job in America, based on the death rates. Nursing homes had already struggled with understaffing for decades, and the pandemic amplified those problems. Workers feared getting sick and bringing the virus home to vulnerable family members. Some struggled to find child care during school and daycare closures. Others became disabled, and still others died. Some, meanwhile, found they could work elsewhere for equal or better pay. Yet having enough staff during nursing-home outbreaks can be a defining factor in how well residents do, according to research from Konetzka, Grabowski, and others. “You really need enough staff to try to stem the outbreak,” Konetzka said. Nursing home staff test patients regularly, move those who are positive into isolation areas, and provide care both for Covid and any underlying conditions. Admissions to nursing homes remain below pre-pandemic levels. The pandemic has seen some patients defer care and hospitals delay scheduled procedures, such as hip replacements, that would require a stay in a step-down facility. Many patients were worried by headlines about high rates of cases and deaths in nursing homes, as well as isolation and loneliness. “There was a real reluctance to enter a nursing home during the pandemic,” Grabowski said. Omicron has so far led to significantly lower deaths than previous Covid waves, though deaths can be a lagging indicator, following cases and hospitalizations by a few weeks. High vaccination rates among residents – 87% are fully immunized – may keep fatalities low. “The original vaccine effort was one of the real success stories during the pandemic when it comes to nursing homes,” Grabowski said. However, there is high turnover in care facilities, both of staff and residents. “Even if you got everybody vaccinated the first time around, a few months later, there are going to be different people there,” Konetzka said. Residents of nursing homes are also at generally higher risk of breakthrough infections, in part because the vaccines don’t work as well to spark lasting immune systems of older adults. Boosters can help, Konetzka said, but “that’s also not been very organized or systematic.” Staff vaccination rates are lower, too, at 81%. That means one in five nursing-home employees are unvaccinated, putting them at higher risk of passing the virus on to residents and getting ill themselves. Even if staff are out for a few days, it puts pressure on the entire system. But staff vaccination rates may soon increase with the federal vaccine mandate for facilities accepting Medicaid and Medicare, which could help reduce soaring cases and shortages.Ruth Crocket is too modest to say life was busy when she worked as a risk modeller for a leading bank. “Not busy, but occupied,” she says. Always dashing for a train, she was rarely in her village of Hitcham, Suffolk. But occasionally she popped into the village’s only shop for fresh bread rolls, which were very, very good. One day, she heard the shop was to be sold, possibly converted into housing. The village pub had recently gone the same way. “It seemed impossible not to do something,” she says. “So I did it. I bought the business.” Six years on, at the age of 66, she is postmistress and owner of Hitcham Post Office and Stores. When Crocket took over, she shifted things around and made the space feel more inviting. A community grant paid for new floors and counters. After a few months, she went part-time at HSBC. But after a year, the shop ran up a sizeable five-figure loss. “I thought I could do it without completely overwhelming or bankrupting myself,” she says. “Even if it wouldn’t make a profit, at least it should be able to run itself.” But seven months after buying the business, Crocket was made redundant by the bank. “I was terrified,” she says. “I felt I’d got on to a tiger and I couldn’t work out how to get off. I was living through my reserves.” Buying the shop might seem like a curious move for a risk modeller. But, Crocket says: “If you are very short-term protective about things, often that’s a long-term high risk.” Besides, she adds, “I haven’t got children. My parents had gone.” Her late brother Martin, who had schizophrenia, was then “fairly stable”, and her partner is of an independent bent. “I didn’t have that much to lose … I suppose I could risk it.” As an economist, Crocket says, she is fascinated by her experience. But she admits that her actions “would have looked very out of character to anyone who knew me”. So why did she feel the urge to step in? At Oxford University, Crocket studied philosophy, politics and economics. “What I should have done is join an aid organisation or something,” she says, to give “on-the-ground help. Doing-things-for-people sort of stuff … I suppose the family intention was in that direction.” Her father, a psychiatrist, “was very interested in the theory of therapeutic communities and how to make organisations or groups of people work together to be effective”. Crocket applied for positions as an economist with international aid organisations, “but it wasn’t a path that opened up to me”. In any case, her brother was severely ill. “That really dominated a lot of my time … I didn’t feel I could go away,” she says. Perhaps the shop felt like a kind of hyper-local aid. “It was what was needed,” she says. “And it was right there in front of me.” When the pandemic hit, the shop, which had run at a decreasing loss for five years, came into its own, and became a hub for a volunteer delivery network. Crocket bought huge sacks of flour, sugar and rice, which she and her colleagues doled out by the kilo. Now the shop is not only breaking even, she says, but “a bit over”. Crocket always “had visions” of things working. She stocks local bread and meats, homemade cakes and a deli range, and has made a start on click-and-collect. She is pondering serving coffee. She has nine years on the lease, still enjoys “the sheer fun of ‘playing shops’” and has “more ideas to try out”. “The shop has changed everything, really,” she says. “I know a lot of people in the village, which I didn’t before. It’s really educated me in the economics of an on-the-ground business.” She has wonderful colleagues. And as a reader for the local church, she feels there’s a lot of resonance in “the idea that, whatever happens with people’s souls, it doesn’t do any harm to feed their bodies”. The shop is “a touchstone, a connection into reality at a very practical, hands-on level … I just wish I had been a bit younger when I did something like this. But then I probably wouldn’t have done it, would I?” Tell us: has your life taken a new direction after the age of 60?The first song I remember hearing It’s a family legend that even before I was forming sentences, I knew how to request I’ve Got You Under My Skin sung by Frank Sinatra on the record player. Of course I’m biased, but my wife [jazz musician Diana Krall] does the other, definitive version. *** The first record I owned In 1962, I heard my dad [singer Ross MacManus] rehearsing a song from Georgie Fame’s Fame at Last EP and he gave me the record. Georgie is an unsung great advocate for other artists. I once got to sing with Count Basie and totally humiliated myself because I’d learned his classic Lil’ Darlin’ off a Georgie Fame record. *** The song that is my karaoke go-to Maybe it is because I gave up drinking 25 years ago, but my exposure to karaoke is limited to watching Bill Murray doing (What’s So Funny ’Bout) Peace, Love and Understanding in Lost in Translation. I would pick King of the Road by Roger Miller; it is a song where you could make up anything and nobody would notice. *** The song I inexplicably know all the lyrics to I have on many occasions recited Noël Coward’s The Stately Homes of England. It’s a beautiful lyric and very, very funny. *** The best song to play at a party I’m thinking of the parties I went to as a teenager, so the Isley Brothers’ Behind a Painted Smile is my pick. I was the person who would haunt the edge of the dancefloor, open the Party Seven pale ale and hope to fascinate some girl with my wit and charm, usually unsuccessfully. *** The performance that I’ll never forget For me, Aretha Franklin doing Don’t Play That Song (You Lied) live on The Cliff Richard Show. After a moment like that you’re never the same again. This song is rich in the gospel she absorbed as a young girl. I’d happily listen to her piano intro alone over 20 times. *** The best song to have sex to Behind Closed Doors by Charlie Rich. It’s not the song, it’s the statement in the title. Then we fade to black … *** The song I want played at my funeral Louis Armstrong singing Fats Waller’s Keepin’ Out of Mischief Now. I walked down the aisle to this – that’s another kind of pledge, isn’t it? So if I must die, I’m keeping out of mischief after that. Elvis Costello’s new album, The Boy Named If, is out now.Netflix is facing a fight to stop as many as 750,000 UK subscribers defecting as its rival Disney takes back exclusive control of hits such as Modern Family, How I Met Your Mother and Sons of Anarchy to bolster its own service. The streaming company, which last week forecast the lowest number of new global subscribers in the first quarter since 2010, has lost the UK rights to five popular titles to Disney+ this month, with more set to follow. Analysts at the research firm Digital i estimate that the loss of the titles – which also include Prison Break and New Girl, with Homeland expected to follow soon – could cost Netflix UK as much as £90m annually if all of the 750,000 subscribers were to follow their favourite shows and leave. Their report has identified this core of users as “high risk” of unsubscribing because a large proportion of their viewing was of these shows. “The viewing to these six titles, five of which have already left Netflix, was significant in the UK,” said Ali Vahdati, the founder and chief executive of Digital i. “This means a significant number of subscribers will begin to question their Netflix subscription and look to the new home of their favourite content, Disney+.” The UK is fast approaching peak Netflix, last year recording the lowest number of new subscribers since it launched a decade ago. Digital i estimated that content licensed from Disney accounted for about 12% of the viewing of Netflix’s most popular content in the first quarter of last year, with the company removing nearly all of its top-ranking titles in the UK since then. “Modern Family was the most streamed Netflix show in Europe in 2020,” said Vahdati, who has estimated that the loss of that show could have the biggest impact, with almost 270,000 subscribers deemed to be hardcore fans. “Our previous research showed that over half of Netflix’s top viewing was to major [Hollywood] studio content.” As the streaming wars intensify, Netflix is expected to spend more than $17bn on content this year, an increase of a quarter over 2021. There will be an increasing focus on creating original productions as it attempts to replace TV shows and films licensed from third parties with its own content. Last week, Netflix pointed to upcoming fare such as the Ryan Reynolds sci-fi film The Adam Project and the return of hit series Bridgerton and Stranger Things as attractions that would help it to pull in and retain subscribers. At the same time, it increased the price of its monthly subscriptions in Canada and the US, its biggest market. UK subscribers saw prices rise last March as the company looks to fund its content budget in the face of ever-increasing spend by rivals. Netflix is still the most popular streaming service in the UK, with an estimated 14 million subscribers as at the end of last year, ahead of Amazon at 12.3 million and Disney+ at 4.7 million, according to Ampere Analysis.In whitewashed Strandkorbs, families huddle together, enjoying the last of the warmth from the faltering autumnal sun on their upturned faces. These striped beach baskets, some owned, others rented, are dotted along large expanses of windswept sands that seep into the inky Baltic sea. The island of Usedom in Pomerania, surrounded by forests of beech trees, is known by some as the “bathtub of Berlin” and by others, slightly more poetically, as “sun island”. Dietrich Gildenhaar, a local author and guide, tells me that the island, north of the Szczecin lagoon in the huge Oder estuary, has been a luxury tourist destination since the Gründerzeit (Germany’s mid-19th-century economic boom), having been crowned one of the country’s sunniest places, with an annual average of more than 1,900 hours of sunshine. It is in two halves, the west side belonging to Germany and the eastern part to Poland, and has some of the region’s best beaches, with designated strips of sand for dogs and other sections reserved for nudists partaking in Freikörperkultur or “free body culture”. However, despite being popular with Germans who flock to its spa resorts or explore inland on bike rides and long hikes, the island remains largely undiscovered by international visitors. In search of an alternative winter break, I’ve arrived to sample one of its many spas for some much-needed health and wellbeing maintenance. On a Saturday afternoon in mid-October, with temperatures struggling to creep over 12C, the sky is dotted with colourful kites, many reaching dizzying heights above us. Most of the people on the seafront are German families in thick wool sweaters, who walk along the piers and bustle into coffee shops to escape the Baltic breeze. We are in Bansin, one of three resort towns on the German side. Gildenhaar, standing outside a powder-blue house built in the Russian style, explains that many of the island’s buildings were financed by the wealthy German Delbrück family. Visitors included Russian poets, Berlin’s elite, and the king of Prussia, Wilhelm I; an annual parade in his honour is still held today. “It was a place where you would often see nobility and aristocrats mixing with artists, and they would all come here for the wellness. Some of them were very ill and were ordered by their physicians to take the good air of Usedom,” he says. Until the early 19th century, passengers arriving at the station were picked up in wooden carriages and transported to villas set back from the sea in private, landscaped gardens. All three of these coastal towns – Ahlbeck, Heringsdorf and Bansin – remain connected by rail. The legacy of this aristocratic wealth has seeped into every corner of the architecture, and the island has an air of understated elegance, with many of the buildings now in private ownership and rented out as holiday homes. There are also many tastefully decorated hotels overlooking lawns behind the beach: ours is the Steigenberger Grandhotel and Spa in Heringsdorf, with its heated outdoor pool and saunas. Another big draw of this region is the seafood. There are wood-fired huts for smoking fish dotted along the coastline, and nautical themes aplenty in the restaurants and hotels. Close to the Polish border is the Fischräucherei Kamminke smokehouse, jutting out to sea. Large picture windows on its semi-enclosed veranda offer sparkling views over the Szczecin lagoon and create sun traps, protecting us from the bitter breeze. As we drink in the view, the waiters deliver huge plates of smoked butterfish fillet and stremel salmon, with steaming hot potatoes and dollops of braised cabbage. Our chunky wooden tables groan with the heavy plates, and the fish has a sweet pungency from the smoking process. Further north there is Koserower Salzhütte, an old fishing hut converted into a restaurant, where only beechwood is used to smoke the fish. Its recipes have been passed down from a grandfather who, as a fisherman, owned two of these work huts and fished in nearby Koserow. The restaurant’s owners have created a small museum telling the story of the island and its dependency on fishing. Herrings were particularly plentiful off this coast in the decades after 1815, and the Prussian state took measures to support the fishermen and supply the wider population. Under state supervision, the herrings were salted and stored in large wooden barrels, giving the fish a long shelf life. The salt huts on the site, also known as herring huts, date from that time and have been listed as historical monuments. A small, dark dining room in one of these herring huts tempts us inside with smells of sea and wood and a promise of fish smoked in large wooden barrels. There is gravlax, entombed to perfection in coarse sea salt, served with a sweet cucumber dill salad that cleanses the palate with every mouthful; raw smoked herring, a delicacy that melts on the tongue; and large chunks of lightly fried halibut with the requisite cabbage and potato. All washed down with sweet German Scheurebe wine, it is a feast, an ode to the ocean. The island has a haunting beauty. In his new film Usedom: A Clear View of the Sea, Heinz Brinkmann says: “When I was a child, the story of the discovery of my home town of Heringsdorf seemed like a fairytale. In spring 1863, the brothers Hugo and Adelbert Delbruük, bankers from Berlin, walking through a dense forest, proclaimed at the site of the Baltic sea: Here we will stay!” And it is indeed a fairytale. The trip was provided by the German National Tourist board. Rooms at Steigenberger Grandhotel and Spa in Heringsdorf cost from €159.75.Give or take the Guardian’s Dining across the divide feature, who these days has forthright debates with their ideological opposites? That’s what playwright Mark St Germain orchestrates in his 2010 play imagining an encounter, on the eve of war, between arch-rationalist Sigmund Freud and born-again Christian CS Lewis. Spoiler alert: they do not settle the question of God’s existence. But the only thing more futile than having the conversation, argues Freud – and I found this point curiously touching – would be not having the conversation at all. You have to invest, then, in the idea of civilised argument for argument’s sake – because that’s all you’re getting with Freud’s Last Session. Why would God allow such pain in the world, asks Freud, a question sharpened by arbitrary deaths in his family, and the terminal oral cancer whose effects are gruesomely enacted here. “God wants to perfect us through suffering,” ventures Lewis, who – under no obligation to be rational – has a nonsensical answer to everything. The dialogue ranges from the pair’s sex lives to the veracity of the New Testament, and is sustained by a series of “touché” moments, when they catch one another out in ideological frailty – sometimes triggered by news on Freud’s wireless of the outbreak of the second world war. Whether this more or less familiar debate would long detain anyone were it not between the Freudian slip guy and the Lion, Witch and Wardrobe guy, I doubt. But director Peter Darney measures its beats with precision. And the trenchant exchange of ideas between Séan Browne’s Lewis and Julian Bird’s ailing yet indomitable Freud may itself restore your faith – if only in the virtues of cordial disagreement. Freud’s Last Session is at King’s Head theatre, London, until 12 February.“Hey Google, what’s the factorial of 100?” There are several clips doing the rounds of what happens when you ask Google Assistant this question. The response is both hilarious and terrifying. The factorial of 100 is the multiplication of 100 by every whole number less than it. In other words, 100 x 99 x 98 x 97 x 96 x …. x 3 x 2 x 1. The answer is a big number. Clearly. Yet Google Assistant gives the wrong answer. Or rather, its answer is rounded up. (Siri abbreviates in a more sensible way.) Today’s puzzle is to do the sum properly: How many zeros does the factorial of 100 really have at the end of it? All that is required to solve this puzzle is knowledge of elementary arithmetic. Such as the fact that, if a number has a 0 at the end, it means this number is divisible by 10. I’ll be back at 5pm UK with the solution. PLEASE NO SPOILERS Please discuss your favourite Siri and Google Assistant responses. UPDATE: The solution is now up here. I set a puzzle here every two weeks on a Monday. I’m always on the look-out for great puzzles. If you would like to suggest one, email me. I’m the author of several books of puzzles, most recently the Language Lover’s Puzzle Book. If you are addicted to Wordle, I promise you will like this book. I also give school talks about maths and puzzles (online and in person). If your school is interested please get in touch.Accidentally shooting someone in the head can really put a downer on a holiday. Just ask the two protagonists in Netflix’s unbearably tense Scottish thriller Calibre. Marcus (Martin McCann) and Vaughn (Jack Lowden) are two old friends embarking on one last trip before Vaughn ruins his social life forever by having a kid. Marcus, played with mesmerising intensity by McCann, is taking them on a hunting trip in the Scottish highlands. It’s a slow buildup as they leave the city behind and journey into the beautiful Scottish wilderness. They’re staying in a remote village where the locals have just a hint of The Wicker Man about them – you’re half expecting Christopher Lee to pop out in a kilt at any second. When one of them casually mentions that this very weekend also happens to be the date of an obscure ancient solstice festival complete with a bonfire, you start to really worry for the boys. And your worries are not unfounded, although the trouble they get in is of their own making. Trouble starts the moment they arrive after Marcus buys a drink for a local girl and almost comes to head-butts with a jealous onlooking man. The warning to “keep an eye on your friend” from local bigwig Logan has a ring of ominous foreshadowing about it. Unfortunately for the mild-mannered Vaughn it’s clear that Marcus is the one in charge, which is a bit like appointing a lit stick of dynamite as the babysitter. Marcus is the kind of character who finds trouble just by existing. He’s Withnail without the jokes. The sort of guy you’d run a mile from if you had any sense but you don’t because he’s your friend. The lads wake up the next morning with a hangover and head off into the woods to kill something. They succeed but suffice to say that if you tried to mount the head of their prey above the fireplace, you’d get some awfully funny looks from the neighbours. It’s a sickening moment that from then on infuses every second of the film’s remaining runtime with a dramatic tension that turns your palms into reservoirs. Watching it is excruciating, like being stuck on a broken-down Tube train with stomach cramps. And as the lads panic and make increasingly bad decisions to cover their tracks, it only gets worse. It’s a measure of the film’s quality that this fairly unoriginal premise is still packed full of surprises, misdirections and twists. Just when you think you know where it’s heading, it veers thrillingly off track. The deft handling of these well-worn genre tropes is down to the skill of Matt Palmer, the writer and director of this fantastic debut feature. It’s the kind of confident work you’d expect from a film-maker with much more experience and its raw power brings to mind some of Ben Wheatley’s best stuff. Palmer’s script is taut and clever and he elicits some wonderful performances from his actors, from menacing thug Brian McClay (Ian Pirie), to the simpering wreck of Vaughn. The whole film is beautifully shot by cinematographer Márk Györi, who manages, as the story unfolds, to turn the Scottish highlands from a picture postcard into a prison. Its beauty becomes claustrophobic as the net closes around our boys and the scenery that was meant to offer a relaxing escape, becomes a labyrinth. Calibre’s power is such that it could make even the most psychotic big-game hunting American dentist think twice before picking up a rifle. If Walter Palmer had watched this before his trip to Africa, Cecil the Lion might still be with us. It packs more of a punch than films with 100 times the budget and shows that you don’t need a superhero to grab an audience. You need atmosphere. And the atmosphere conjured by Palmer et al doesn’t let you go for a second. In fact, even after the credits roll and you’ve turned back to the latest reality dating show, you’ll still be thinking about the final haunting image even as Chad from New Jersey licks maple syrup off an influencer. It’s a film that also explores some big questions: what would you do to save someone’s life? What would you do to save your own? What is justice? But never gives any easy answers – except perhaps one. What would you do if you found yourself being chased through the woods by a group of irate Scotsmen? Run. Calibre is available on Netflix in the US and UKWith that, we will wrap up the blog for the evening. Here’s what we learned today (not including this extremely funny video I have watched approximately a dozen times since this morning): The health minister, Greg Hunt, has announced that the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation has recommended the use of the Novavax vaccine. The vaccine will be available in Australia from 21 February. Terence Kelly has pleaded guilty to kidnapping four-year-old girl Cleo Smith while she was on a family holiday and keeping her captive for 18 days. Fallout is continuing from a WeChat scandal which saw prime minister Scott Morrison’s account hijacked and renamed. China has been accused of foreign interference, with some MPs citing they will no longer use the platform for political campaigning. The ACT has released its back to school plan, which is fairly similar to NSW and Victoria’s. Two rapid antigen tests will be provided per week to students and teachers for the first month of term, but testing will only be for symptomatic students and staff. Masks will be compulsory for teachers and students above year 7. WA has recorded 15 new Covid cases, including 13 local cases and one mystery case. A number of exposure sites are expected to be added as contact tracing continues. NDIS participants will be able to dip into their core funding to purchase rapid antigen tests for themselves and their support workers under changes announced by the government. The new policy still falls short of demands from disability advocacy groups and the opposition, who say the tests should be free. The tests today became freely available to concession holders, but the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, said it was “easier to catch Covid than a RAT”, a sentence that would’ve been nonsensical in 2019. It came as deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce, in an interview with ABC Radio National this morning, said individuals “hoarding” RATs was a big problem, and people weren’t dying from the pandemic (his second comment was later retracted). Speaking of which, the EU and US have issued Covid travel warnings about Australia in light of peaking case numbers. And it’s Pride Day at the Australian Open, but backlash is continuing for the decision to stop fans wearing “Where is Peng Shuai?” T-shirts. A parent teacher advocacy group says they plan to commence legal action to ask the NSW supreme court to compel the Department of Education to grant pandemic leave for families who want to keep their children home from school. Covid Safe Schools say they are resorting to court for the right to keep their children home in the wake of the Omicron outbreak hitting NSW. The group met today with senior members of the NSW Department of Education to air their concerns. It says a senior executive of the department confirmed today that the pandemic is not a valid reason for keeping kids home. The group argues it’s a parent’s right to decide what’s safe for their family during the pandemic, with spokesperson Elizabeth Rosewall arguing granting pandemic leave would be a “win-win”. Parents can do without the extra fear of breaking the law. It would also reduce the number of children in the classroom which reduces the risk for kids who have no choice but to be there and makes it a bit safer for teachers too. Shadow treasurer Jim Chalmers appeared on Sky News earlier this evening, talking, among other things, about rapid antigen tests (or lack thereof). He said the government was “stupendously out of touch” if they believed there were so many rapid antigen tests available they were being stockpiled – which deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce said this morning. Chalmers: They’re in such a rush to say everything is fine that they’re completely blind to the fact a lot of people, a lot of families, a lot of small businesses are still doing it extremely tough. This hasn’t been independently confirmed by Guardian Australia, however SBS is reporting the new owner of Scott Morrison’s WeChat account said the acquisition “has nothing to do with the government and is purely a legitimate business transaction”. The new account owner is displayed as Fuzhou 985 Information Technology Co., Ltd. Tennis great Martina Navratilova has condemned as “pathetic” the Australian Open’s decision to stop fans wearing ‘Where is Peng Shuai?’ T-shirts, accusing Tennis Australia of “capitulating” to China. The governing body stood by its rationale on Sunday and said it continued to work with the Women’s Tennis Association to “seek more clarity” on the Chinese star’s wellbeing almost three months after she accused a senior Chinese official of sexual assault and then virtually disappeared from public life. But Navratilova, the retired Czech who won 18 grand slam singles titles, said she found it difficult to believe. Appearing on the Tennis Channel alongside Lindsay Davenport, she said: Sport has always been on the forefront of social issues, pushing them forward, and we are going backwards I feel … I find it really, really cowardly. This is not a political statement, this is a human rights statement. And chances are Peng Shuai may be playing here but, she couldn’t get out of the country? Anyway, I think they’re wrong on this. The WTA has been so strong on this issue … and the players, really taking a chance on their pocket book. The ATP was pretty weak on this. The IOC, well we know where they are. And just really capitulating on this issue from the Aussies, letting China dictate what they do at their own slam. If you needed a boost to kick off your week, First Dog is back from a well-deserved holiday which included, among other things, naps, snacks, Wordle and chickens. Labor MP Bill Shorten has weighed in on Reynolds’ expansion of access to rapid antigen tests amongst NDIS participants. I can’t believe I missed these absolutely chaotic scenes in Tasmania earlier today. A cursed magpie that has since passed on to the next world flew into equipment lodged on a power pole in Hobart, causing a burst water main that went on to spark a mass power outage. What a way to go. Returning to that previous tweet, which was quite a staggering number, it’s interesting to compare current vaccination rates amongst five to 11-year-olds by jurisdiction. Nationally, 29.09% of children in that cohort have received at least one vaccination. The ACT is leading the way at 50.43%, followed by Tasmania at 40.71%. Victoria and South Australia are relatively even stevens at around 31.5%, followed by NSW and the NT at around 28.5%, Queensland at 26.54% and WA coming in at 21.31%. So we’re seeing similar trends that we saw earlier in the vaccination rollout. If the ACT can get to 90% first doses amongst school aged children by the start of the term, though, that will be a huge feat. I’ve taken that data from my boys at Covidbase AU, by the way, so it may be slightly out of date. McGowan confirms of the 13 new local cases, one case remains under investigation and is believed to have been infectious in the community. Exposure sites are expected to emerge for cases that have been infectious “over the past few days” while out and about. McGowan: WA Health recorded 13 new local cases of Covid-19 in WA to 8pm last night. Of the 13 new local cases, 10 are linked to the Coolbellup cluster, including eight household contacts and two close contacts. One other local case is a household contact from the Safety Bay cluster, and one other case attended Willagee IGA. The 13th case relates to the Greater Bunbury region, and remains under investigation. It is believed this case was infectious in the community and contact tracers are working to identify potential exposure sites. Contact tracers are working to determine potential exposure sites for cases that may have been infectious in the community over the past few days. All cases are now in quarantine and public health will continue to monitor them. Two cases have also been recorded related to travel. Here’s a breakdown on those new Covid cases detected in WA: National disability insurance scheme participants will be able to dip into their core funding to purchase rapid antigen tests for themselves and their support workers under changes announced by the government. The policy shift is aimed at addressing an inequity in the system that meant some NDIS participants who lived in their own home, rather than in a group home, were being forced to spend hundreds of dollars on rapid antigen tests for their support workers, as revealed by Guardian Australia last week. In one particularly shocking case, Carolyn Campbell-McLean, who has muscular dystrophy and, as a result, limited lung capacity, had spent $1,300 on tests for her carers. However, the new policy still falls short of demands from disability advocacy groups, who say the tests should be free. The new scheme means NDIS participants will use their existing “core” budget funding funds to buy the tests. This pool of money is allocated for use on core services, such as support workers, transport, and other everyday items related to a person’s disability. The government said NDIS participants would be able to use these existing core funds to buy tests for themselves or their carers. About 18% of all NDIS participants are not eligible for the 10 free tests over three months that are being provided to concession card holders. Minister for government services and the NDIS, Linda Reynolds, said it was “another example of how we are supporting participants to use their funding flexibly during the Covid-19 pandemic”. She said: We know that rapid antigen tests are an important tool for ensuring that participants continue to access their disability-related supports. NDIS participants can claim rapid antigen tests to ensure their continuity of services. Unlike the aged care sector, NDIS providers do not have access to the federal government’s national stockpile of rapid tests, meaning they have been forced to compete with other businesses to source them in the free market. Meanwhile, the ACT today released it’s back-to-school plan, following Victoria and NSW who were fairly uniform in their approach. All students will resume face to face learning across public schools from 1 February, with new students to start a week earlier on 31 January. The ACT will provide two rapid antigen tests a week to students and teachers for the first month of term, but testing will only be for symptomatic students and staff. Mandatory twice-weekly surveillance testing will not be required, but masks will be compulsory for teachers and students above year seven. Assemblies are off the cards, and only “essential” excursions will go ahead, which begs the question, what is an essential excursion? The Murugappan family from Biloela has today won a court challenge against the immigration minister’s decision effectively barring them from reapplying for bridging visas. Alex Hawke’s move to revoke a decision allowing three family members to reapply for a visa was procedurally unfair, the federal circuit court’s judge Heather Riley held on Monday. Read the full story from Paul Karp: Stay safe out there, Victorians. Western Australia has recorded 15 new Covid-19 cases to 8pm yesterday, two of which are “travel related”. There are no cases currently being treated in hospital. It brings active cases in the state to 96, including 27 in hotel quarantine. La Niña is having a busy start to the year. Here’s more on Terence Darrell Kelly’s plea from AAP’s Daniel Norrish: A man has pleaded guilty in court to abducting Cleo Smith from her family’s West Australian campsite, sparking a widespread search and attracting global attention. Kelly, 36, today admitted taking the four-year-old from a tent at the remote Blowholes campsite last year. He faced a magistrate via videolink from custody, pleading guilty to forcibly taking a child under 16. The matter has been adjourned to Perth district court on 20 March. Kelly is also facing other criminal charges, including assaulting a public officer. Those matters have been adjourned to a later date. Kelly remains in custody. Cleo was found alive and well in the early hours of 18 November, days after she went missing from the campsite. She was rescued from a property just minutes from her family home in the nearby town of Carnarvon, almost 1000km north of Perth. Police forced entry to the home and found the little girl alone in a room, physically unharmed and playing with toys. Kelly was arrested on a nearby street around the same time. He is alleged to have acted alone and is yet to enter a plea to his other charges. Police have said he has no connection to Cleo’s family. Kelly was shackled and accompanied by armed riot squad guards on a charter flight from Carnarvon to Perth after his first court appearance. The extra security was put in place after Kelly was twice hospitalised with self-inflicted injuries while in custody. This is interesting. Member for Chisholm Gladys Liu is pulling out of WeChat as fallout from Morrison’s ban continues. According to the 2016 Census, just 49.4% of her electorate was born in Australia, with the most common overseas countries of birth including China, Hong Kong and Taiwan. Some 19.7% of Chisolm had Chinese ancestry and 50% spoke a language other than English at home. With over one billion active users, the Chinese-owned WeChat accounts for a huge chunk of the social media market in China and abroad. Here’s a further breakdown of South Australia’s Covid update: Six days in a row over 40 degrees in Perth. Meanwhile, more flood updates have been issued in NSW: Breaking news from Western Australia. Terence Kelly has pleaded guilty to kidnapping four-year-old girl Cleo Smith on a family holiday and keeping her captive for 18 days. The Australian economy remains in solid shape in the face of the coronavirus pandemic with Tasmania the stand out state for the eighth quarter in a row, AAP’s Colin Brinsden reports. In its quarterly State of States report CommSec says Tasmania has again held on to top slot and is likely to remain so in the short-term, but it warns much can change over 2022. The other state and territories followed closely together, with South Australia ranked second, Victoria third, Western Australia fourth, Queensland fifth, NSW sixth, the ACT seventh and the Northern Territory eighth. WA has benefited from a surge in iron ore exports and prices, while SA has enjoyed strong government and business investment. Each quarter CommSec assesses state and territory economies on eight key indicators – economic growth, retail spending, equipment investment, unemployment, construction work done, population growth, housing finance and dwelling commencements. Tasmania leads on four of the eight indicators – equipment, unemployment, retail spending and dwelling starts – and ranks second on another two – economic growth and construction work done. CommSec chief economic Craig James: Lockdowns have weighed on the economic performances of NSW and the ACT in the last survey. While both of these economies could scale the rankings again, new challenges are presented by Covid-19 restrictions and the resulting labour shortages – not just for NSW and the ACT but for all economies. He expects the opening of domestic and international borders is also likely to further support the Queensland economy. James said all Australia’s state and territory economies are supported by strong fiscal and monetary stimulus with unemployment rates historically-low across much of the nation: Labour is in short supply across many industries, a reflection of current Covid-related self-isolation requirements and border restrictions. Ahead, the country will continue to face challenges managing the latest Omicron wave with infrastructure spending continuing to be a key driver of growth in 2022. Over in Melbourne, it’s the first Pride Day at the Australian Open, featuring, among other things, stylish sweatbands sported by Thanasi Kokkinakis. But amidst rainbow flags is one glaring lack, after Tennis Australia was forced to maintain a ban on ‘Where is Peng Shuai?’ t-shirts at the tournament: Back in South Australia, and the Novavax vaccine is expected to be available from next month following Greg Hunt’s announcement today. More wild weather is on the cards in New South Wales: Back in South Australia, there have been 2,009 Covid cases detected overnight. There are 294 people being treated in hospital, including 29 in ICU and six requiring ventilation. Sadly, two more lives have been lost overnight - a woman in her 40s whose death will be referred to the coroner and a man in his 70s who was in a residential facility. There are 27,991 active cases in the state with 3,508 people having recovered from Covid-19. Before we do though, health minister Natasha Fyles is providing an update from Darwin. She says there are about 3,900 active cases in the NT after 286 new Covid cases were recorded overnight. Hospitalisations, though, have increased to 78. There are eight people receiving oxygen and four in intensive care. The total active cases in the NT is stable at about 3,900 cases in the territory. We have now had a couple of days of lower numbers in the NT...and seen that seven day average come down to under 400. We acknowledge that usually earlier in the week, we see a lag in testing because of the weekend, we also are seeing bumpy results in our testing because of the isolating conditions within the NT...so we are using that rapid antigen test in some situations. We’re about to hear from SA premier Steven Marshall, live from Aldinga Payinthi College. Here’s the latest on the WeChat fallout from AAP’s Dominic Giannini. A reminder - TikTok (wildly popular social media app) is also owned by a massive Chinese company - ByteDance - worth more than US$37bn. Tencent, the company behind WeChat, is worth US$36.4bn. So Morrison could always jump ship, so to speak. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg has called on WeChat to restore access to the prime minister’s account and allow politicians from all persuasions to use the platform. Scott Morrison’s account on the Chinese social media platform was taken over and rebranded to “Australian Chinese new life” earlier this month, according to the Daily Telegraph. Frydenberg says it’s not good enough the Labor leader still had access to WeChat while the prime minister did not: It’s something we would like to see rectified because it’s a method of communication to the Australian Chinese community which is very important. It should be on offer to politicians of all political persuasions, it shouldn’t be a political football. It’s very, very disappointing to see the prime minister prevented from having that access. But Frydenberg didn’t join his colleague’s call to boycott the platform amid the controversy. Liberal chair of the parliamentary intelligence and security committee James Paterson said WeChat had not heeded requests from the government to restore access to Morrison’s account. He called on all Australian politicians to boycott the platform: The government has directly appealed to WeChat to restore access and no response has been given, which seems pretty clear WeChat has no intention on allowing the prime minister to continue to post. The Victorian senator also revealed the prime minister’s WeChat account has been plagued with problems for at least six months, with issues starting around the time he attended G7 meetings in the UK. An agent running Morrison’s account due to the app’s terms and conditions experienced trouble posting in the middle of 2021, which was around when the prime minister lobbied global government heads not to become overexposed to Chinese influence. The initial problems came as he took a list of 14 demands handed by the Chinese embassy to an Australian journalist to the G7 to warn world leaders about the dangers of giving China too much leverage. Paterson said it was also concerning 1.2 million Chinese Australians who use the service couldn’t access news from the prime minister, but could still see government critiques on the platform from opposition leader Anthony Albanese. More fallout from the resignation of Nikola Stepanov in Queensland: Good news coming out of the Northern Territory. From today, a full-time Auslan interpreter has been hired to support accessible information for the next three years. The local interpreter will work across government services, in health, education and justice as well as providing emergency support and public messaging during emergencies like Covid-19. There are more than 230 Territorians who are Deaf or hard of hearing. Chief minister Michael Gunner said Covid-19 had highlighted the need for an Auslan interpreter in the NT to deliver public health messages - which was previously lacking throughout the first two years of the pandemic. CEO of Deaf Connect, Brett Casey, said he was pleased tangible outcomes for Deaf Territorians had been realised. The Australian Council of Social Service has raised concerns rapid antigen tests will not be available to the most vulnerable despite changed regulations. From today, rapid antigen tests have become freely available for concession holders - at least in theory. ACOSS CEO Dr Cassandra Goldie says RATs should be made available to people on low incomes, but many pharmacists are already raising the alarm about lack of supply. The body has said people on the lowest incomes may not be able to get rapid tests from pharmacies because of the ongoing supply chain issues. She spoke on ABC News this afternoon: People on lower incomes have been desperate to get their hands on their home testing kits like many across the community. Of course, the price has been prohibitive for people on low incomes. When you’re talking about $15 for a single test, that’s a lot of money if you’re on JobSeeker, that payment is almost $41 a day. We’ve been calling on the government to make these kits free right across the community. We’ve got them now available for free, at least in some circumstances today, for people who hold a concession card. But...the Pharmacy Guild and others all acknowledge that’s not going to be the reality in many pharmacies today. It will still take time. The supply issues are still chronic out there. Many thanks to the indomitable Matilda Boseley for guiding us through this morning’s news. I’ll be with you for the rest of this (depending on where you are) sunny Monday. With that, I shall pass you over to the wonderful Caitlin Cassidy to take you through the afternoon’s news! See you tomorrow! The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners [RACGP] has warned that general practices participating in the vaccine rollout need more assistance in the months ahead following approval of the Novavax vaccine in Australia. RACGP president Dr Karen Price said the decision was a positive step forward in the vaccine rollout. “The most important thing is that people get vaccinated against Covid-19... But we are under enormous pressure. Term one of school starts next week, yet just one-in-four children aged five to 11 have had their first Pfizer vaccine dose and the vast majority of kids must wait eight weeks before receiving their second. Although there are plenty of children’s vaccine doses in Australia, the challenge is getting those supplies into practice fridges and then into arms. So, the current deliveries of 100 or 200 vaccines a week per practice are not enough when you consider that some practices have well over 1,500 children in this age group on their books.” GPs are still reporting doses not arriving on time or insufficient stock being delivered, she said. So general practice teams then have the unenviable task of ringing families and telling them that their child’s appointment must be cancelled. This is causing a lot of stress and anxiety and, unfortunately, some people are once again taking their frustration out on exhausted nurses and receptionists... we need the federal government to step up and provide greater assistance to our hardworking general practice teams. Here is the official Queensland infographic for the day. Australia has experienced another deadly day in the pandemic with 58 deaths recorded so far on Monday. Here is a summary of the daily numbers so far: NSW Deaths – 24 Cases – 15,091 Hospitalisations – 2,816 (196 in ICU) Victoria Deaths – 17 Cases – 11,695 Hospitalisations – 998 (119 in ICU) Queensland Deaths – 13 Cases – 10,212 Hospitalisations – 879 (50 in ICU) Tasmania Deaths – 0 Cases – 619 Hospitalisations – 41 (three in ICU) ACT Deaths – 2 Cases – 756 Hospitalisations – 68 (three in ICU) South Australia Deaths – 2 Cases – 2,009 Hospitalisations – 294 (29 in ICU) Northern Territory Deaths – 0 Cases – 286 Hospitalisations – 74 (four in ICU) Western Australia Deaths – 0 Cases – 15 Hospitalisations – 0 SBS is reporting that the Biloela family have won their federal circuit court case after they appealed the immigration minister’s ruling that prevented three of the four family members from applying for a further bridging visa. The court found that this rule was unfair. I’ll bring you more updates as soon as I can. Thanasi Kokkinakis has lifted the lid on a fiery exchange with an opponent’s trainer after he and Nick Kyrgios dumped top seeds Mate Pavić and Nikola Mektić out of the Australian Open doubles. The Australian pair put on a typically energetic display on Friday as they upset the Croatian duo, whipping the Kia Arena crowd into a frenzy during the straight-sets win. Local fans lapped up their antics but the home players seemingly riled Pavić’s trainer, who they allege confronted them in the players’ gym after the match. You can read the full report below: The Queensland press conference has wrapped up, concluding with an assurance the return to school plan will be released sometime in the coming week. Palaszczuk said the delay of the school year in Queensland gave health authorities time to hammer out a decent plan (not in those words), and regular asymptomatic testing of students was unlikely to be a feature. Gerrard said the vast majority of young people would not have a severe illness if they acquired Covid-19, but the mere fact of the “sheer number” of people who acquired the virus meant some people would experience complications. There will be a small number of children who get complications from this virus ... I’m not sure how frightened young people are, actually, my impression is most young people are not afraid of this virus, which is probably legitimate, but we want them to get vaccinated because there are rare complications. The ACT has had another deadly day with two more people dying with Covid-19, a man in his 40s and a man in his 90s. Sadly, ACT Health has been notified of the deaths of a man in his 40s and a man in his 90s with Covid-19. ACT Health extends its sincere condolences to their families and friends at this difficult time. The state also recorded 756 new Covid-19 infections, a slight increase from yesterday’s 666. Palaszczuk is asked about Queensland integrity commissioner, Dr Nikola Stepanov, who was revealed to have quit today following concerns about interference with her office. Palaszczuk says people change jobs all the time, “even in the media”: The integrity commissioner has taken another job. People take different jobs from time to time, even in the media, people take different jobs ... some of these matters were before the Crime and Corruption Commission so I’m not going to get into these matters publicly. People change jobs all the time. She has indicated she has taken on another role in Queensland ... I don’t think it’s a problem at all – we’ll advertise and have a new commissioner, honestly. Queensland health minister, Yvette D’Ath, lays down some striking statistics. Only 8.2% of the population over 16 is unvaccinated, but the same demographic makes up 21% of people who have died with Covid. Of 111 deaths reported in the state, only five people have had their booster shots. Back in Queensland, chief health officer, John Gerrard, is breaking down the 13 deaths reported in the state. Four people were in their 70s, seven were in their 80s, and two were in their 90s. Three were unvaccinated, and none had received a booster shot. There are 878 people being treated in public hospitals with Covid-19, up “very slightly” from yesterday’s figure of 863. Numbers from private hospitals will be reported “later in the week”. There are 50 people being treated in intensive care, also up slightly from 47 people yesterday. Of the 50 in intensive care 40% are unvaccinated. In good news, Gold Coast Covid numbers have declined “very slightly” every day for the past four days, which would suggest the Gold Coast is past the peak of transmission. The number of hospital staff in isolation or quarantine has also declined steadily in the past few days. Gerrard says the number of overall hospitalisations is significantly lower than was expected at this stage in the pandemic, likely due to self-imposed restrictions: The Gold Coast was always likely to be the first area to peak, Brisbane should follow within seven days, possibly Cairns as well, and then other regional areas as well. I would remind everyone, though, that this is the peak, not the end ... the end will not be for a number of weeks ... the impact of the epidemic is less than we expected in this wave, but I’m trying to be cautious as we still haven’t reached the peak in Brisbane. Gerrard says with the return to schools, transmission is likely to increase, which may see a “longer, flatter peak”. At this stage, hospitals are keeping up with demand, but the next seven days will be crucial. Andrews confirmed that Victoria’s 7-day rolling average case numbers are down significantly from this time last week. In fact, it has nearly halved. The average case numbers for the last seven days has been about 17,412. So roughly 17,500 and the seven days before that, it was 32,316. So again, about 32,500 ... It’s critically important to reduce case numbers and therefore, reduce the pressure on our health system. I’ll again make the point – we’re not seeing as many people in intensive care, but we are seeing people that are quite unwell. They’re not critically unwell, but they are unwell enough to need a hospital bed. They’re going into general ward beds and with so many staff away sick, with so many staff, thousands of them, away because of or with COVID, that means that the system is under significant pressure. Victoria press conference - Premier Daniel Andrews: 998 people are in hospital. That’s down from 1,002 who were in hospital yesterday. And down from the 7-day average of 1,065. 119 people are in ICU – down from 120. 47 people are on a ventilator – up from 44. And, sadly, I have to report, that 17 Victorians have passed away with COVID and we send our deepest sympathies and sincere condolences and best wishes to their families. This will be a very, very difficult time for them Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, is up now. There have been 10,212 new Covid cases reported overnight, including 3,615 positive cases detected from rapid antigen tests. Sadly, 13 people have lost their lives in the latest reporting period. All deaths were of people aged 70 and above. 25.7% of five- to 11-year-olds are now fully vaccinated, two weeks out from school returning. Palaszczuk says the following fortnight would be “critical” in reaching the peak of the Omicron wave. Andrews: In terms of child vaccinations, 3,562 children got their first dose through state-run centres yesterday. A big and indeed solid performance across the weekend for children’s vaccines. 176,371 kids aged 5-11 have received their paediatric first dose to date. That’s 30% roughly of that age group. Andrews has stressed that there are plenty of vaccination appointments available across the state, for both first and second doses and boosters. There are something like 161,000 bookings available for first, second or third doses. That’s just across state clinics over the next 30 days. Let’s head to Victoria now, where the premier Daniel Andrews is speaking. Queensland integrity commissioner, Dr Nikola Stepanov, has quit following concerns about interference with her office, reports AAP. Stepanov, who maintained the state’s register of lobbyists and confidentially advised politicians on integrity matters, reportedly raised concerns about the Public Service Commission last year. The PSC confiscated Integrity Commission staff mobile phones and laptops, deleted records from those devices and altered security permissions and access to the commission’s offices, News Corp reported in September 2021. Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, at the time dismissed some parts of that report as “speculation”, but told parliament it had been referred to the Crime and Corruption Commission. She then refused to comment further as the matter was yet to be finalised by the watchdog. Stepanov also revealed the number of Integrity Commission staff had been cut from four to one in her 2020-21 annual report, released in October. She was “very concerned” about illegal lobbying after a surge in recorded contacts between the state Labor government and lobbyists. Opposition integrity spokeswoman Fiona Simpson said the integrity commissioner had held the government to account on “some really serious issues”. Integrity matters, and it matters when a government … undermines the very statutory independent roles that are there to keep them honest. The commission also said complaints about lobbying and requests for advice about lobbying were on the rise in Queensland. There were 38 requests for advice and 988 contacts recorded between lobbyists and government ministers, MPs, public servants, councillors or local government staff in 2020-21, she wrote. That compares with an average of 239 contacts per year between January 2013 and June 2020. Stepanov said there were 46 discrepancies in the records held by chief executives of state government departments and lobbyists. There were another 57 discrepancies between the records held by chief executives of local governments and the lobbyists’ register. Almost all related to lobbyists failing to record contacts with people on the government register, Stepanov said. If you want to revisit that press conference with the health minister, Greg Hunt, you can catch up on the important Novavax update below: Speaking of Victoria, we will be hearing from them at the same time as Queensland at 11am AEDT. Lots of booster bookings in Victoria the CHO says (although I’m pretty sure that sweet deal where you get a free Golden Gaytime is no longer in place.) Perrottet: We have a highly vaccinated population, and yes, as a parent as well I know that many parents across the state are anxious about sending it back to school, many teachers are anxious, I was speaking to a teacher on the weekend who was anxious about the return of school. That is understandable in a pandemic, but it is really really important for our kids’ educational, mental health and social outcomes that they are back in the classroom. I accept it will not be perfect, there will be issues moving through this but this is the right approach, and I am very confident that by setting out this part, as we move to this next four weeks, and it’s pleasing to see the case numbers coming down. The press conference paused as a helicopter took off and it seems during the break the premier was joking about teaching his small tribe of children how to take a RAT test. And you might be saying, “Matilda! You can’t make fun of someone for having a small army’s worth of children!” To which I say, “it wasn’t me, it was Brad Hazzard”. Here is what the health minister had to say: The premier was saying that is going to be a fun game, making sure that the kids know about the testing. So good luck to him with his six and a half children. Hazzard has advised parents to be patient with their kids as they adapt to having to take two (often nasal swab) rapid tests a week. This may be especially challenging to neurodivergent kids, such as those with autism or ADHD who are very sensitive to sensory stimuli. I think as a parent, we all know and have those moments ... we worry about our children. I can remember worrying about issues when my kids were little and understand. What I would say is just quietly and calmly to them and make sure they understand that this is a very simple process, not going to have any negative effect on them ... I’m absolutely certain that the children will learn very quickly to accommodate to having the rapid antigen tests. The NSW education secretary, Georgina Harrisson, has urged parents to be patient as rapid tests arrive at schools and staff prepare to hand them out to families. We have 5m rapid antigen tests out on the road today and another million expected to be out on the road by the end of today. They will be arriving at schools over the coming days and can I ask parents to be patient with your school, they will be in touch with you about when you can pick up your test ... NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, says that only two of the 24 had received three doses of a Covid-19 vaccine. I want to say this, out of the 24 people, there were only two, only two that had three shots, in other words, only two people out of the 24 have had the booster shot. That’s a very clear message to all of us that we need to listen to the advice of the premier and Doctor Kerry Chant, boosters are actually absolutely critical to keeping us safe. The two people who did have the booster ... sadly, had very serious preexisting medical conditions. Boosters are critical, boosters are what makes a difference. For adults, go and get boosters. NSW chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, says two of the 24 people who died in the latest reporting period were in their 50’s. And can I please induce a sense of urgency in the community to get their booster, we have appointments and it is despairing when I read out the tragic death numbers which I am now going to do. Some of these people have missed that opportunity afforded by the booster. Sadly today New South Wales has reported 24 people who have died from Covid, 16 men and eight women, and again, can I express my sincere condolences to their families. Of the 24 people had died, two people were in the 50s, one person was in the 60s, two people in the 70s, 12 were in the 80s, and seven people in the 90s. And of the two people under 65, both were men who had serious underlying health conditions, one man had received two doses of the vaccine and one had received three doses. Okay, jumping over to NSW and the state’s premier, Dominic Perrottet, is giving a Covid-19 update. Today the state finally ticked over 95% first dose vaccination for those over 16. Perrottet: It is pleasing to see that we have 95% of people aged 16 plus who have had one dose of vaccine, and 93.9% aged 16 plus who have had two doses of the vaccine. In the 12- to 15-year-old age group we have 82.7% to have had their first dose, and it is pleasing to see that has increased but I would urge all parents to take their children to get vaccinated in that age group before school commences. In the 5- to 11-year-old age group we have 28% of children who have had their first dose and we are really hopeful that will increase significantly this week ahead of school commencing. Almost 40% of the eligible population have received a booster. Guardian reporter Paul Karp has asked the health minister if the Commonwealth was doing anything to limit the types of businesses that are able to sell rapid antigen tests. Karp: Why are we in the situation at all where retail stores, rather than pharmacies are able to sell the tests if there is this concept of them stepping up to profiteer, and what should the Commonwealth have done to redirect orders towards priority people instead? Hunt: We have been in the market and supply since August and we have been able to provide a continuous supply of over 6.6m rapid antigen tests to aged care, so in relation to priority populations, that is one of the things that we have been able to do, to foresee, to acquire and supply throughout the course of not just Omicron, but before Omicron ever existed, we have been doing this since August and it has been a continuous Commonwealth process. ... And then in relation to private supply, what we have put in place with the supermarkets and the pharmacies was that anti-hoarding program in conjunction with price gouging, so that that meant anybody who was reselling was clearly on notice that the ACCC would come down on them like a ton of bricks. If there are more outlets procuring TGA approved tests and bringing them in using additional supply lines, that simply means more tests for more Australians. The health minister has also noted that the hoarding of rapid tests has played a part in Australia’s spluttering rollout, but unlike his Nationals colleague Barnaby Joyce, he seemed to focus the blame on bad-faith suppliers and re-sellers rather than individuals. Hunt says anyone caught hoarding or price gouging RATs will face “the wrath” of the ACCC. Hunt: There were clear cases where there had been some hoarding. Unfortunately it does include people that were scooping up to resell at inflated prices and that’s why the anti-hoarding measures are in tandem with the price gouging measures which we have been pursuing, and what we have seen is that ... there is increasing evidence that those who sought to do that are very quickly realising that they will face the wrath of the investigative body. Hunt says that, as far as the federal government can tell, there will be an adequate supply of RATs going forward. (Famous last words perhaps?) The advice we have from the pharmacies is that there will be adequate supply going forwards, and it’s been a global challenge, and I think I want to put this in context for a minute, and I will come back to the question in a second, but what we’re seeing is this will see very significant supplies coming in, and industry has said to me, the pharmacy sector, both at the Guild level, and the team leader level of pharmacies such as Chemist Warehouse, with whom I was speaking yesterday, that they are expecting very significant supplies. When asked about the possibility of price gouging of RATs from suppliers, Hunt says that the pharmacy stores that are participating in the concession card RAT program have been putting stock aside for some time, which I mean isn’t really an answer to that question, but oh well. Greg Hunt: All the participating pharmacists are putting aside tests. I think that’s really important. I spoke to one pharmacy chain CEO yesterday, they were prioritising for early on this week, where they were expecting to have 500 packs of five tests available in the vast majority of their pharmacies which, had been put aside specifically for pensioners, concession card holders, low income healthcare card holders and our veterans, and we’re seeing that across the system. And so, they’re actually reserving spaces. That’s not to say that every pharmacy on day one is participating. It’s a phased program and importantly it’s a supplementary program. Australia’s offshore processing regime on Nauru will cost taxpayers nearly $220m over the next six months as it holds 107 people on the Pacific island. Brisbane firm Canstruct International has been awarded a new extension – its eighth non-competitive contract extension – for $218.5m to provide six months of “garrison and welfare services” on Nauru. The company’s total revenue from island contracts over the past five years now totals more than $1.8bn. It currently costs Australian taxpayers more than $4m a year to hold one person within the Nauru offshore regime – a little over $11,000 per person per day. The government’s latest figures, revealed in Senate estimates, stated 107 people – 81 refugees and 26 asylum seekers – were still held on Nauru. The 81 refugees have had their claim for protection formally recognised. Australia is legally obliged to protect them and they cannot be returned to their home country because they face a “well-founded fear of being persecuted”. The Canstruct group of companies, or entities associated with it, have made 11 donations to the Liberal National party in Queensland. You can read more about this below: Now the health minister has moved on to the start of the concession card holder RAT rollout, which starts today (in theory). Hunt: The second thing I want to mention is the concessional rapid antigen tests, which supports the health testing program, for pensioners, Commonwealth seniors, department of veterans gold, white, or orange cardholders and low-income healthcare cardholders commences this week. We’ve had positive reports from the public and pharmacies that already led to supply this morning. This is a screening program, if you have symptoms, you’re a close contact, please continue to go through the principal health screening program, and health testing program, which has always been free and continues to be free, and has seen over 60 million tests delivered around Australia. Hunt says that between 800 and 1,000 pharmacies will begin providing the free tests today, with more to be onboarded in the coming weeks. This was a national cabinet decision, a 50/50 program in the same way the schools program is 50/50, this is a 50/50 program, with the states, and so we thank them and support them but also thank the Pharmacy Guild which has co-designed and engaged in the program. But Hunt has urged people not to hold out for Novavax if they are able to get Pfizer, Moderna or even good old AstraZeneca today. (Basically, Novavax is different because it’s a protein-based vaccine, which is an older, more well-understood vaccine technology. So therefore some who may be cautious about mRNA vaccines or AZ may be more inclined to roll up their sleeves.) Hunt: I do want to encourage everyone unless there’s a contrary indication, please continue to come forward and take the existing vaccines, the Pfizer, the Moderna, the AstraZeneca, depending upon your circumstances, but if you do have a contraindication, for those for whatever reason have not felt comfortable joining the program so far, this is your opportunity. It can be taken by those who have had Covid on the advice of ATAGI, and for the severely immunocompromised, three doses are recommended, as is the case with the other vaccines. Hunt says Novavax will start going into arms around Australia on 21 February: To begin with, in terms of ATAGI, we have received a second green light in relation to the Novavax vaccine. I have spoken with the company both last week and this morning among many conversations and we’ll be able to commence that program in the week of 21 February. What happens from here is now that we’ve got the double green light in Australia, stocks will be released, provided to Australia, the TGA will go through a detailed batch testing process, as this will be the first such shipment we have received, and presuming that’s deemed to be safe and in line with all of the data and science that we have received to date, then that fourth vaccine will be made available from week of 21 February. The specific advice of the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation is that it will be a 2-dose course, with a minimum of three weeks between the first and the second doses. It’s a protein-based vaccine, for some, who may have had contrary indications or reactions with regards to other vaccines, this will provide an additional opportunity for them, as well as those who for whatever reason have not taken up the program so far. Along with the Novavax news, Hunt says that Australia is seeing a “clear decrease in cases”, as Omicron passes through the nation. We are seeing two critical developments. The first is a clear decrease in cases, hospitalisations, and that in turn will have an impact on ICU and ventilation numbers and lives saved. And secondly, continued enormous uptake of the vaccination program with 48m doses passed and almost 2m doses in the last week. The pensioners concessional scheme will also commence, the first phase today, this is supplementary to the health testing, the health testing through the clinics remains the principal avenue, but this is an additional avenue and it’s started with greater numbers earlier than anticipated. I’m very pleased with that. The health minister, Greg Hunt, has announced that the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation has recommended the use of the Novavax vaccine. The vaccine will be available in Australia from 21 February. Novavax was already approved by the Therapeutic Goods Administration, but Australia has a “double green light” approach that requires a separate recommendation for use. Hunt also declared there is a “clear decrease in cases, hospitalisations, and that in turn will have an impact on ICU and ventilation numbers”. BTW we will be hearing from the Queensland leaders at 10am AEST (11am AEDT). Federal health minister, Greg Hunt, is speaking now, let’s listen in. Police are investigating the suspicious death of a man at a property in a small town in Tasmania’s northwest, reports AAP. The man’s body was found by emergency services at Sprent on Sunday night. Tasmania police said in a statement: The death is being treated as suspicious and an investigation is under way. Police are asking anyone with CCTV footage of roads in the Sprent area to come forward, as well as people who saw people or cars at Sprent Forest on Sunday afternoon. Those on the Yorke Peninsula in South Australia have been warned to prepare for flooding, the SES urging people to move valuables inside, and if it’s safe clear gutters and drains to try and mitigate damage to homes. The New South Wales government could be forced to spend another $4.1bn over the next decade to address “significant uncertainties” surrounding a controversial $40bn rail corporation it set up to inflate the state’s budget bottom line. The auditor general, Margaret Crawford, has given the long-awaited signoff on the state’s finances after a three-month delay caused by concerns surrounding the establishment of the Transport Asset Holding Entity, or TAHE, which holds $40bn in NSW rail assets. In 2021 Crawford delayed the release of the state’s audited finances as a result of “significant accounting issues” with TAHE – a move that forced the state to inject $1.1bn into the transport system to meet the auditor’s concerns. While she has now signed off on the state’s finances, the auditor has flagged that significant uncertainties remain surrounding the financial assumptions underpinning TAHE. You can read the full report below: However, in NSW hospitalisation numbers have gone back up. There are currently 2,816 people in hospital with Covid-19, up from 2,712 on Sunday. There are now 196 Covid-positive people in ICU in the state, compared to 189 yesterday. Now that we have the case numbers out of the way, let’s talk about hospitalisations. Victoria recorded a slight decrease in hospitalisations, with 998 today, down four from Sunday. The state’s ICU number also dropped by one to 119. Victoria has recorded 11,695 new Covid-19 cases and sadly 17 deaths. The New South Wales Covid figures are out and the state has recorded 15,091 new cases and sadly 24 deaths. Senator James Paterson, the chair of the parliamentary joint committee on intelligence and security, has called for a boycott of WeChat over the takeover of Scott Morrison’s account. Paterson revealed on Sky News that Morrison, who uses an agent to post to the account, lost access to it in the middle of 2021 and “repeatedly tried to regain access” but failed to do so. “It’s clear WeChat has no intention of allowing him [the PM] to post,” he said. Paterson said this happened about six months ago, as Morrison attended the G7 and cited China’s 14 demands of Australia as evidence of the “dangers of being over-exposed” to China. It wouldn’t be at all surprising if those two events connected. Paterson said the account takeover amounted to China making a “partisan intervention” in Australian politics by blocking one side from posting. He called on all politicians to boycott WeChat, arguing that Anthony Albanese “shouldn’t allow a foreign power to dictate” the terms of who and how political leaders can speak to the people. Australians may not be able to travel without quarantine to Europe even if they are fully vaccinated, with both the European Council and the United States issuing warnings about the severity of the Omicron wave down under. On 17 January, the European Council removed Australia, Canada and Argentina from the “white list”, the list of countries for which restrictions on non-essential travel should be listed. One day later, on 18 January, the United States updated its travel advice for Australia to “do not travel” after the Centre for Disease Control issued a level four travel health notice for Australia due to “a very high level of COVID-19 in the country”. That was about a week after reported case numbers peaked at more than 100,000 on 8 January. The European Council list is reviewed every two weeks, so if Australia’s case numbers continue to fall it could be reinstated as early as next week. The recommendation is not legally binding, and countries can set their own border restrictions. Italy, Greece and Cyprus have already ignored the ruling. Many European countries are also experiencing a large number of Covid cases, including France, Italy, Spain, Germany and Denmark. The European Council recommended that states gradually lift their travel restrictions for people coming from New Zealand, Indonesia, South Korea, Bahrain, Chile, Colombia, Kuwait, Peru, Qatar, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, UAE, Uruguay, and China, subject to confirmation of reciprocity Google has warned of a “devastating” impact on the internet if a court ruling that the search giant is liable for defamatory material contained in hyperlinked pages is not overturned. Google warned in a submission to the high court it will be forced to “censor” its search results if a $40,000 defamation damages award to George Defteros, a solicitor who represented Melbourne gangland figures, is allowed to stand. Defteros successfully sued Google, arguing its publication of search results that included a 2004 article in the Age about his arrest on conspiracy to murder charges – which were later dropped – defamed him. In 2020, the Victorian supreme court justice Melinda Richards ruled the article had implied that Defteros crossed a line from professional lawyer to confidant and friend to criminal elements. Victoria’s court of appeal rejected a bid from Google to overturn the result. You can read the full report below: OK, this has nothing to do with Australia or Covid but I just have to share this with you, as a little morning treat. Please enjoy the woman in the background of this snow report FIGHTING FOR HER LIFE on those stairs. The Daily Telegraph is reporting that Scott Morrison’s WeChat account (which has 76,000 followers) has been hijacked and was renamed “Australian Chinese new life” earlier in January in a change made without the government’s knowledge. Morrison’s profile photo was reportedly deleted and the account description changed to “provide life information for overseas Chinese in Australia”, according to a translation. The alleged “foreign interference” has prompted the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Intelligence and Security chair, Senator James Paterson, to call on all Australian politicians to “voluntarily boycott” the hugely popular platform. WeChat is a popular Chinese social media app, which has been used to run viral negative campaigns targeting Chinese Australian voters in past elections. On Friday Morrison blasted China for alleged foreign interference and malicious cyber activity in a speech to the Davos World Economic Forum. On New Year’s Eve, on the other side of the world, Ash Fadian’s brother-in-law died of Covid-19. Devastated by the news, Fadian’s thoughts quickly turned to getting from her home in Sydney to the funeral in London. Fadian is on a bridging visa, one of the only visa types still subject to harsh Covid travel bans preventing her from re-entering Australia without an exemption. Six times Fadian applied for an exemption on compassionate grounds. She showed authorities her brother-in-law’s death certificate and the funeral notice. You can read the full report below: Albanese: Whether you are a pharmacist or a medical centre what they have been doing is getting phone call after phone call as people search desperately for a test. In so many communities around Australia, it is easier to catch Covid than it is to catch a RAT. The lesson of the pandemic is that if you don’t get the health outcomes right, the cost to the economy will be more and we are seeing that play out ... People are unable to go to work and that has an economic consequence. Jumping back to Anthony Albanese – the opposition leader has slammed Barnaby Joyce for his “people aren’t dying” slip up. What we heard from Barnaby Joyce was blaming the Australian people for the unavailability of RATs. He said people aren’t dying when they’re dying in record numbers and he criticised the WA government for its economic and health performance. The truth is that if you look at WA’s performance ... they’re leading the country. Barnaby Joyce was forced to quickly correct himself during a radio interview with ABC RN after stating that “people aren’t dying” from Covid-19 in Australia. He was asked if the government can “really say that we are the envy of the world?”, given the European Council has now identified Australia as a Covid-19 danger zone, and the US is now warning against travel down under, Barnaby Joyce: Well, people aren’t dying. Host Patricia Karvelas: People are dying. People are dying every day. Joyce: Sorry, sorry sorry. Yes, you are correct, I shouldn’t have said that. But the number in which – the fatality rate is very low. Obviously, that is a tragic thing for anybody ... [to die] for any reason – for catching the flu. But the fatality rate of Omicron is remarkably low and Australia has done a remarkable job. Speaking of ABC Radio National, the opposition leader Anthony Albanese is speaking now. He has a fairly pessimistic outlook of how the first day of free RATs for concession card holders will go. For so many pensioners it will confirm [the problems with the RAT roll out] because they will rock up to their local chemist and there won’t be a rapid antigen test available. It’s quite extraordinary that on the day on which pensioners are eligible to receive a RAT ... what we heard from Barnaby Joyce then was blaming the Australian people for the unavailability of rapid antigen tests here in Australia. We all knew that once we opened up the increased number of infections, elimination tests would be an important part of the response to keep people safe, and the government simply didn’t do anything about it. While speaking to ABC Radio National, deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce has placed a significant portion of the blame for the RAT shortage across Australia on individuals hoarding tests. When questioned about this by host Patricia Karvelas, Joyce stated that he needed to be realistic and this was the reality. I’m blaming the fact that we have a virus out there, that people have been buying not what they require but more than they need. I’ll try to bring you the exact quotes as soon as I can, but in the meantime here is some more of what the deputy prime minister has been saying. We have 16mn [tests] turning up by the end of the month ... We have 70m on order. It is not as if the tests aren’t there. The problems that Australia is experiencing is being experienced around the world. We don’t manufacture RATs like other countries do. That’s an issue that you can’t, years ago, predict RATs are going to be the things you need. But what we are doing is making sure we deal with issues as they come along. That is what a competent government does. Good morning everyone and welcome to the new week! It’s Matilda Boseley here with you and why don’t we start the day with some rapid antigen test news? From today, more than six million Australians will notionally have access to free RATs at pharmacies. But I say “notionally” because pharmacists say that the widespread supply shortages mean that it could be borderline impossible to meet demand. Basically, earlier this month, when everyone was begging the federal government to make rapid antigen tests free for all Australians, Scott Morrison met them halfway (a quarter way?) and announced concession card holders would be able to access up to 10 free tests from their local pharmacies. The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, has been out and about this morning, including on ABC News Breakfast, attempting to quell fears about the RAT supply chain strain, reminding people that they are (notionally) available at state testing clinics as well. The people who need them right now, who are either symptomatic or are a designated close contact, can go to a state clinic. With respect to those who want to purchase them through the pharmacy, some pharmacies will be making them available as part of this initial program, which then gets expanded. As you know, there’s great demand for these rapid antigen tests right around the country and here in Australia we’ve got more than 200m on offer. The federal government has provided more than 6m through the aged care sector. We’re providing more than 10m through the states to be used in their clinics. In Victoria, just over 7m have arrived in the last two weeks alone. There’s more supply coming online. I guess we will have to wait and see today if that explanation really cut the mustard with the Australian public. So, without further ado, why don’t we jump into the day.Early in January, China’s state news agency Xinhua posted a video reminding young Chinese men born in the year 2000 that they were eligible to get married. “Post 00s have reached legal marriage age,” it declared. The hashtag swiftly popped up in the top-searched list of Weibo hot topics, but many read it as the government’s attempt to put pressure on them. “Who dares to get married these days? Don’t we need to make money?” one questioned. “Stop nagging me!” said another. Under Chinese law, men can marry from 22 and women from 20. Young Chinese people’s mixed response to state media’s message came as the country faces what some analysts described as a “demographic timebomb”. Last week, China’s government reported its population growth rate had fallen to a 61-year low, with births barely outnumbering deaths in 2021, despite efforts to encourage Chinese couples to have babies in the last few years. “Young Chinese’s attitude towards marriage poses a big threat to Beijing’s effort to alter the looming demographic crisis,” said Dr Ye Liu, a senior lecturer at King’s College London’s Lau China Institute. “Coupled with a higher level of education and economic betterment, this will become a bigger headache in the years to come.” A growing number of young people across east Asian societies are delaying getting married as the region becomes more prosperous. Yet in urban China, this change has been especially swift, said Wang Feng, a sociology professor at the University of California, Irvine. Comparing Chinese census data in 1990 and 2015, Wang said that the share of never-married Chinese women in their late 20s had shot up by eight times in the span of 25 years. Census data from the years 2000 and 2010 show that college-educated young Chinese between the ages of 25 and 29 are most likely to be single. And women in developed Chinese cities, in particular, have fewer ambitions to get married. On social media and in daily life, the resistance to early marriage is strongly on display. In 2017, for example, a Shanghai-based chamber choir performance struck a chord with millions of young Chinese people facing the same dilemma across the country. The viral song Spring Festival Survival Guide – or What I Do Is For Your Own Good in English – told insisting Chinese parents: “My dear family, please just let me live my own life.” Vicky Liu, who is from northern Tianjin and was born in 1997, is one of those young Chinese. She said as soon as she graduated with a master’s in England last year, her parents began to arrange blind dates for her. “But I am an adult woman. I want a career and a good circle of friends. I just don’t want to be tied into a family life too soon.” The attitude has alarmed the authorities further as the decline in population growth has become more evident in recent years. To reverse the trend, Beijing scrapped the decades-long one child policy in 2015, and last May it introduced a three-child policy. One economist, Ren Zeping, even suggested the government should print more money to fund a baby boom. Ren has been banned from posting on social media following this comment. But Ye Liu, of Kings College London, said that these policies are “masculine” and they are “disconnected” from the reality facing China’s generation Z today. “What they want is a better career future, an opportunity to have it all – career and family as well as self-fulfilment. Without these, it’s hard to convince them to have babies first,” she said. This is particularly the case with young Chinese women, she added. “Gen Z Chinese women have more education than previous generations. They are more likely to prioritise their career rather than get married after a university education.” Wang agreed and said that in reality, Chinese women were “severely under represented” in political and economic power. “China has a long way to go to create a more gender equitable society. But the difficulty here is that it is not achievable simply via the state issuing policy documents.” Yi Fuxian, of the University of Wisconsin-Madison, also the author of Big Country with an Empty Nest, said there were tangible measures the government could take to assuage the situation. “For example, job opportunities for young Chinese and help with the cost of living – in particular, the cost of property. The government should also make it easier for young couples to raise children.” For Vicky Liu, there is more to it. “[My parents’] logic is that as a woman I don’t have too long to find an ideal husband. For them, I have to get married, be pregnant and become a mother as soon as possible. Chinese parents simply won’t accept their daughters remaining single for too long.” With assistance from Xiaoqian ZhuBoris Johnson has ordered a formal inquiry into allegations by the Conservative MP Nusrat Ghani that she was sacked as a minister after being told her “Muslimness” was “making colleagues uncomfortable”. In a brief statement early on Monday, a Downing Street spokesperson said: “The prime minister has asked the Cabinet Office to conduct an inquiry into the allegations made by Nusrat Ghani MP. “At the time these allegations were first made, the prime minister recommended to her that she make a formal complain to CCHQ [Conservative campaign headquarters]. She did not take up this offer. “The prime minister has now asked officials to establish the facts about what happened. As he said at the time, the prime minister takes these claims very seriously.” In a tweeted response, Ghani said that the terms of reference for any inquiry “must include all that was said in Downing Street and by the whip”. She wrote: “As I said to the prime minister last night, all I want is for this to be taken seriously and for him to investigate. I welcome his decision to do that now.” Ghani, an MP since 2015 who lost her job as a junior transport minister during a reshuffle in early 2020, said Tory whips told her that her “Muslim woman minister status was making colleagues feel uncomfortable”. She told the Sunday Times: “It was like being punched in the stomach. I felt humiliated and powerless.” She received public support from the ministers Nadhim Zahawi and Sajid Javid. Downing Street accepted on Sunday that Ghani had raised her concerns personally with Johnson at a meeting in 2020, and said he had responded by encouraging her to make a formal complaint with the Conservative party. In a subsequent statement on Sunday, Ghani said she had made clear at the time that she did not think the party complaints process was the right way to tackle her allegations. “He [Johnson] wrote to me that he could not get involved, and suggested I use the internal Conservative party complaint process. This, as I had already pointed out, was very clearly not appropriate for something that happened on government business,” she said. “All I have ever wanted was for his government to take this seriously, investigate properly and ensure no other colleague has to endure this.” Zahawi, the education secretary, defended Johnson’s initial approach, saying Ghani had not initially told No 10 that it was possible those who raised concerns about her faith might not even have been Tory members. “This is a new piece of information that we learned from Nus’s statement,” Zahawi told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “When parliamentarians deal with the whips office, this is very much a political party matter.” Zahawi called for the investigation to happen swiftly: “This is very serious. It takes a lot of bravery for someone to stand up and say, my religion was taken into consideration when I was being assessed for what I do as a job. That should never happen.” Anneliese Dodds, the Labour chair and shadow minister for equalities, said: “This inquiry is welcome, but doesn’t replace the need for an immediate investigation into whether the chief whip broke the ministerial code.” Dodds said one immediate step that could be taken would be to remove the Tory whip from MP Michael Fabricant, who said in an interview on Sunday that he doubted Ghani would have faced prejudice as it was “not apparent” she was Muslim. The Conservative chief whip, Mark Spencer, has identified himself as the person accused of making the remarks. “These accusations are completely false and I consider them to be defamatory. I have never used those words attributed to me,” he tweeted. An independent inquiry into the Conservative party’s handling of complaints of discrimination said in May last year that there was “clear evidence of a party complaints system in need of overhaul”. The Muslim Council of Britain said on Sunday that the Equality and Human Rights Commission should carry out a full inquiry into the party to determine if any breaches of the law had taken place. A Cabinet Office spokesperson said: “At the request of the Prime Minister, the Cabinet Office will investigate the facts of this case. The Independent Adviser will be available to provide advice as required.”The film and photographic images that emerged from the Holocaust, often in a blurrily dark monochrome, instantly became the visual definition of evil in the 20th century. So to set this brutal iconography against the cheerily crisp colours of modern English suburban homes in springtime – complete with armchairs, French doors on to patios, bright tulips in pots – might risk accusations of superficiality, or worse. But when the people in these apparently mundane locations are themselves survivors of the Holocaust, the sheer joyful fact of their existence becomes a triumphant rejoinder to the unimaginable cruelty and depravity of three-quarters of a century ago. The new images are collected together in Generations: Portraits of Holocaust Survivors, which opens later this week to coincide with world Holocaust day, at the Royal Photographic Society (RPS) gallery in Bristol after a showing at the Imperial War Museum in London. The exhibition was initially intended to run in 2020, to mark the 75th anniversary of the liberation of the concentration camps in 1945, and plans were made to photograph the 70 or so Holocaust survivors living in the UK. “Of course lockdown ensured that didn’t happen,” says the RPS project curator, Tracy Marshall-Grant. “Then in spring of last year, when things were looking a little more open, we tried again and it came together remarkably smoothly.” Marshall-Grant has invited fellows of the RPS – as well as its patron the Duchess of Cambridge, who, in an unexpected juxtaposition, shares wall space with the Sun’s longtime royal photographer Arthur Edwards – to capture the survivors at their homes, often surrounded by their families. “There was no uniform brief,” says Marshall-Grant. “All the photographers know what they are doing so I just asked them to treat it as one of their own projects. The result is fascinatingly diverse. There are some very traditional portraits but also things that look like they are out of glossy magazines. And the photographers often became close to their subjects and kept in touch. Sian Bonnell’s picture of Tomi Komoly – someone simply in their garden wearing their good clothes – has such a warm and personal feel that you wouldn’t be surprised if it was a family picture.” This family aspect cuts to the heart of the project. The survivors were young during the Holocaust and down the years have become parents, grandparents and great-grandparents. “Along with their families there have also been businesses and charity work and all the other elements of productive and useful lives,” says Marshall-Grant. “Here they are, products of the lives they have built. Of course the horrors of what they and so many others endured is always there, sometimes directly in these photographs in terms of personal effects from the time and so on. But ultimately it has been such a privilege to work with these people and with this material because what actually comes out of it is not only a sense of revulsion at what happened, but huge admiration and gratitude for the positive legacies that have been allowed to be passed on down the generations.” Family snapshots: pictures and stories from the Generations exhibition Sir Ben Helfgott (main picture, above) photographed by Frederic Aranda with his grandson Sam at his home in London, was born in Poland in 1929 and incarcerated in the Buchenwald and Theresienstadt concentration camps. After the war he came to the UK and became a weightlifter, representing Great Britain at the 1956 and 1960 Olympics. He was knighted in 2018 for his contribution to Holocaust education. “My experience may have hardened me, made me more realistic about human nature,” Helfgott has said, “but I was repelled by the evil I witnessed. I despaired but I did not let cruelty and injustice break my spirit.” Dorothy Bohm (above) was living in Lithuania in 1939 when she was sent to the UK to escape the Nazis. She didn’t see her family again for 20 years. Bohm went on to become a leading photographer, was a co-founder of the Photographers’ Gallery and worked into her 90s. This was taken in her home in Hampstead where she talked to photographer Jillian Edelstein about her father. “Their separation during the war had been particularly painful,” says Edelstein. “We decided to use this photograph of him to commemorate that time and to have in the image, almost as a symbol of their survival.” Tomi Komoly (above) lost many family members in the Holocaust. He came to the UK in 1956 as a refugee and had a long career in the chemical industry. Photographer Sian Bonnell wanted the image to share the “wisdom of his experience and his incredible strength”. In 2020 Komoly was awarded the British Empire Medal for his work telling the story of the Holocaust in schools, and his contribution to the fight against hate crime. Eve Kanner-Kugler (above) left Germany with her mother after the anti-Jewish attacks of Kristallnacht in 1938. She arrived in New York in 1941 and moved to the UK in 1990. Jane Hilton’s triptych includes the lanyard Eve wore for the two-month journey by train and sea and the original manuscript of the book Eve wrote about her mother’s life, Shattered Crystals. The centre panel (above) shows Eve with her second cousin’s grandchildren. Generations: Portraits of Holocaust Survivors is at the Royal Photographic Society Gallery, Bristol, from 27 January to 27 March.All of the joy I associate with bubble and squeak, but with an Italian accent. Serves 4 potatoes 150g, peeled savoy cabbage 200g plain flour 90g polenta flour 60g bicarbonate of soda a pinch buttermilk 300g eggs 2 olive oil salt and pepper eggs 4, for frying strong, hard cheese to taste dried chilli 1, crushed Boil and roughly mash the potatoes. Shred the cabbage and then boil it for 5 minutes. Drain it thoroughly. Mix the flours and bicarb together. Beat the buttermilk and the 2 eggs together with 1 tablespoon of olive oil. Mix in the flour, 2 good pinches of salt, a grind of pepper and finally the vegetables. Set aside to rest a moment. When you are ready to eat, fry a ladle of batter in a heavy-bottomed pan in 1 tablespoon of olive oil over a medium heat. Do this a ladleful at a time. Then, fry 4 eggs in more olive oil over a medium heat, seasoned and topped with shards of strong cheese and a pinch of chilli. Serve the pancakes, warmed in the oven if necessary, with the eggs on the top. Joe Trivelli is co-head chef at the River Café, London W61) Conte and Spurs have plenty to do in little time Antonio Conte forcing his available players into a rigid 4-4-2 formation was his way of making a point to the the Tottenham hierarchy. The Italian has not been particularly enamoured with what he found at the club when he arrived, spending plenty of time tinkering with his selections in the hope of finding the right mix. Tanguy Ndombele and Dele Alli have been given chances but failed to provide evidence they can be relied upon in the long term. There were issues all over the pitch at Stamford Bridge, implying that Spurs face a difficult final week of the window. A new right-back, central midfielder and a striker are necessities for a side devoid of ideas against the top sides in the division. Whether the club can move quickly enough to do everything Conte wants is another problem for the Italian and, as Internazionale found out last summer, if he is unhappy he is willing to go. Will Unwin Match report: Chelsea 2-0 Tottenham 2) Shelvey shines next to tireless Longstaff Eddie Howe swiftly identified Jonjo Shelvey as the playmaker he wants at the heart of his Newcastle rebuild. In scoring the winner with a clever free-kick and producing a fine second-half performance, Shelvey played a pivotal role in the team’s second victory this season. He improved dramatically after Sean Longstaff replaced the injured Joelinton shortly before the break. Longstaff’s form has disappointed lately but he looked reborn against Leeds. If Saturday’s result is not to prove a one-off, he must maintain this standard – or Howe needs to sign a midfield anchor capable of offering a protective framework within which Shelvey can utilise his passing range. As Newcastle headed to a Red Sea training camp near Jeddah, a dominant but blunt Leeds reflected on yet another reminder of how much they miss the injured Patrick Bamford. Louise Taylor Match report: Leeds 0-1 Newcastle 3) Rangnick preaches caution in race for top four After Marcus Rashford’s late showstopper of a winner lifted Manchester United above West Ham into fourth, Ralf Rangnick made sure to keep his feet on the ground regarding the race for a top-four finish. “We have to see the table realistically,” said the interim manager. “Spurs have played three [now two] games less than us. And there are other teams involved in that race, it’s not only Spurs or Arsenal. Even Wolves are pushing from behind so it will probably be a race until the last couple of fixtures. But for us now it’s important to know that we can win games – even if it’s in the last second of the game, that we can control a team like West Ham. We had 16 shots on goal, they had six or seven. So that was a big difference and this is important – that we are able to compete with those teams.” United’s next league game is a trip to Burnley on 8 February. Jamie Jackson Match report: Manchester United 1-0 West Ham 4) Gerrard adds more pain to Everton’s downward spiral Steven Gerrard said it was important Aston Villa “showed the crowd and Everton that, if they wanted a war, we were prepared to do the same”. Everton are at war but, ominously for a team that has taken six points from 42 and whose next league game is away at Newcastle, it is of the civil kind. The second caretaker coming of Duncan Ferguson ended in defeat and with a possible FA investigation into the disgraceful scenes when Villa players were pelted with objects thrown from the crowd. There was a sit-in protest after the final whistle that lasted over an hour and called for the departures of Bill Kenwright and Farhad Moshiri’s board. Kenwright, flanked by police officers, spoke to angry fans on Goodison Road afterwards and rejected claims that Everton’s decline predates Moshiri. There have been good times too, the chairman said. Everton are currently enduring the longest trophy drought in the club’s 144-year history. Andy Hunter Match report: Everton 0-1 Aston Villa 5) Rashica and Sargent give Canaries glimmer of hope “Maybe we can drag some other teams into the relegation scrap, that’s all we can do,” said Dean Smith. Norwich’s win at Watford on Friday probably hastened Claudio Ranieri’s departure but do Norwich have enough quality to survive? They need to keep scoring goals; they have still scored just 13 all season. In Smith, they have a manager with recent experience of escaping relegation – with Aston Villa two seasons ago. Teemu Pukki’s better days seem behind him but he ably assisted Josh Sargent’s “scorpion kick”. Adam Idah is even less adept in goalscoring than his Finnish partner but significantly quicker. From midfield, Milot Rashica buzzed around dangerously at Vicarage Road and it is hoped that Sargent’s goals can inspire him to live up to advance notices from Germany and America. Such players give Smith something to work with but the relegation situation still looks dependent on how successful Newcastle can be in the January window. John Brewin • Match report: Watford 0-3 Norwich 6) Grealish fades away amid City’s galaxy of stars Six months on from Jack Grealish’s £100m move to Manchester City, it feels as though we are still waiting for him to assume centre stage and take a game by the scruff of the neck. Grealish was largely ineffective as a false nine at Southampton, where he was flanked by Phil Foden and Raheem Sterling – both of whom were also in muted form – but Pep Guardiola staunchly defended the forward’s performance. “The best game he [Grealish] has played since he has been with us, by far,” the City manager said. “An exceptional performance. He played really, really well. I think he’s the perfect player to play between the lines. He’s so aggressive, he makes incredible runs, he dropped the Southampton team to the byline, his decision-making is excellent.” Perhaps Guardiola knows better but it was hard to concur with his glittering verdict. Ben Fisher Match report: Southampton 1-1 Manchester City 7) Olise the new jewel in Palace’s crown Patrick Vieira’s renovation job at Crystal Palace has been swift and effective, his side totting up more possession, more chances and more goals than last season. And all while staying on course to finish higher, too. But with half an hour gone at Selhurst Park, the new-look team’s weaknesses had been badly exposed. Virgil van Dijk had scored the easiest goal of his career and Palace’s insistence on playing it out from the back had kept them pinned in their own half. Yet by the final whistle Palace’s best qualities had come to the fore, with only the idiocy of VAR and the excellence of Alisson denying them a well-earned point. On the sharp end of all their best moves was the electric Michael Olise, while Eberechi Eze was sent on to continue his comeback from serious injury. It wasn’t long ago that Wilfried Zaha was by a mile the best attacker in the Palace team. These days, he might not be an automatic choice. Alex Hess Match report: Crystal Palace 1-3 Liverpool 8) Swaggering Maddison recovers his finest form How good is James Maddison? It is not so long ago that he and Jack Grealish were in hot competition for an England place. Maddison has been returning to something approaching his best form over Leicester’s difficult winter however and on his 200th league appearance he pulled the strings when his team were on top. He looks better than Grealish right now. Thirteen of his 15 goal involvements – scoring or directly assisting – have come in his last 12 games and that is not including his role in the 1-1 draw with Brighton where he ran at the defence, played a one-two off Ademola Lookman andtook the shot that led to Patson Daka scoring. The 25-year-old is playing with a swagger and, with Gareth Southgate a frequent visitor to the King Power Stadium, it would be no surprise to see him return to the England squad in March. Peter Lansley • Match report: Leicester 1-1 Brighton 9) Gunners need to start firing ‘So, are Arsenal good now?’ The answer is laced with nuance. In Bukayo Saka and Emile Smith Rowe they have a homegrown pair on which to build an empire. Martin Ødegaard is flourishing, while Gabriel Martinelli might just prove the best of the bunch. Mikel Arteta’s side have limped out of one cup at the first, fallen at the penultimate hurdle of the other and, in drawing a blank against Burnley, squandered a chance to occupy the top four. Against Liverpool last Thursday, they resembled schoolboys throwing punches while being held at arm’s length by the playground bully. Understandable given recent history. But Sunday was a chance to prove their worth. After a slow start, came a period of pressure. But following Alexandre Lacazette’s glaring miss, they fell away. And so, once again in an improved yet still inconsistent season, Arsenal find themselves with questions to answer. Surely, they have come too far to start limping? Sam Dalling Match report: Arsenal 0-0 Burnley 10) Was this Traoré’s Wolves farewell? With Tottenham expected to return with an improved offer for Adama Traoré this week after having their opening bid of £15m turned down, the Spaniard’s cameo off the bench against Brentford could end up being his last Wolves appearance. Traoré scored his first Premier League goal of the season against Southampton in midweek but was denied a second on Saturday late on by VAR as Wolves made it four wins from their last five matches. Bruno Lage refused to comment on the 25-year-old’s future. “The most important thing is the way he plays for us,” said Lage. “He played again with energy and scored the third goal again. He scored last week and the way he celebrated with his teammates and also with me. He’s a team player, a big professional and a lovely guy. I’m very happy with him.” Ed Aarons Match report: Brentford 1-2 WolvesFregola is a bobbly Sardinian pasta that I really like, partly due to my deep love of the texture of sago and tapioca. Cooking it with peas makes for a pleasingly spherical supper. This is a sort of soupy dish, a bit like risi e bisi. Serves 2 fregola 150g frozen peas 100g light olive oil 1½ tbsp smoked streaky bacon 60g banana shallot 1, finely sliced white wine 100ml chicken or vegetable stock 400ml butter 30g (2 tbsp) parmesan 30g, freshly grated mint 3 sprigs, leaves picked and finely chopped Bring a large pan of salted water to the boil and cook the fregola for half its cooking time, about 8 minutes, adding the peas for the last 2 minutes. Drain and rinse under cold running water, then set aside. Heat the oil in a heavy-based saucepan over a medium heat. If your bacon has the rind still on, remove and reserve. Using scissors, snip the bacon into 1cm pieces directly into the hot oil – adding any reserved rind for extra flavour – then let it sizzle and give off its fat. Once the bacon is cooked and a bit crispy, lift out with a slotted spoon and set aside; discard the rinds or give them to the birds. Add the shallot to the residual fat in the pan and cook over a low heat for about 5 minutes, or until soft, stirring so it doesn’t catch too much colour. Stir in the fregola and peas, then pour in the white wine. Once the wine has evaporated, add the stock. Bring to a simmer and cook until the fregola is just cooked, about another 6 minutes. Return the bacon to the pan, then add the butter and all but a tablespoon of both the parmesan and the mint. Stir over a low heat for a couple of minutes, then cover and remove from the heat. Let it sit for another minute before spooning into bowls. Scatter over the remaining parmesan and mint, then inhale – this is super-delicious. From The Sunday Night Book by Rosie Sykes (Quadrille, £12.99)Ebrima Darboe is reflecting on the sharper edges Gambia have brought to this Africa Cup of Nations and lands upon the influence of his club manager. “He’s helped me a lot with my character,” says the young Roma player of José Mourinho, who has kept him close to the first-team squad this season. “I was such a good person and he taught me that in football you don’t have to be too nice, you have to be nasty.” The point is relevant to Gambia’s eye-catching Cup of Nations campaign. They are debutants and nobody would, on the face of things, have expected much from a side representing the continent’s smallest mainland country. But the Scorpions had an excellent group stage, beating Tunisia and drawing with a fancied Mali, and face Guinea on Monday in an extremely winnable last-16 tie. They have done it by boxing clever: once maligned, Gambian players are making their way in Europe’s bigger leagues and discovering the streetwise edge of winners. “We used to play tiki taka, just trying pretty football, and in the end we’d lose 2-0 or 3-0,” reflects the Sampdoria defender Omar Colley, who joins Darboe among six Italy-based players in Tom Saintfiet’s well-travelled squad. Colley was in the Gambia team that won the African Under-17 Championship in 2009 but never expected them to make the next step. For scouts and agents, the country was a blind spot engulfed by its glamorous neighbour Senegal; a two-year ban from continental competitions in 2014, handed down for fielding overage players at under-20 level, did not help – but the new generation are in demand. “If you look at our previous youth teams, most of the guys eventually stopped because of limited opportunities to turn professional,” Colley says. “After three or four years trying to go abroad you need to find solutions to help your family and yourself. But now people are coming to Gambia to find players: things are changing.” The electric Bologna forward Musa Barrow is another of Gambia’s Serie A contingent and Colley believes that, in tandem with Sainfiet’s rigour, Italian habits are making a difference. “We know that in Italy you have to be tactically disciplined, and that defending is one of the features of the game there,” he says. “Maybe it helps in our games if the coach wants to defend and counterattack; with his experience it’s the perfect match. We don’t have possession a lot but our tactics are always coherent.” Seeing their compatriots operating at the top level tells younger players that, one day, they may do too. Such role models have been rare for Gambia since the era of Biri Biri, who thrived at Sevilla in the 1970s, and things have not come easily to the present-day success stories. Darboe undertook a perilous, deeply traumatic unaccompanied journey to Italy aged 15, spending three months travelling by bus to Libya and then boarding an inflatable craft to cross the Mediterranean. A lifeboat helped him complete the voyage, which is a topic that does not lend itself readily to words. Darboe weighed just 50kg by the time he arrived in Sicily. “When I took the journey I did it to go and chase my dream, to have a better life, to continue learning and playing football,” Darboe says. “I had no other choice. It was hard and I don’t like to talk about it much, but believe me it was not easy. I thank god that today I am here.” Thousands of people have not been so lucky. Darboe began to make his way in football: after playing for a club in Rieti he attracted offers from lower-division clubs but could not believe his ears when his agent said Roma would like to take him on trial. “I asked: ‘You mean a local team in Rome or the Roma I know in Serie A?” he remembers. A 15-minute glimpse was enough to earn him a deal and, although he could not play for the youth teams for the following 18 months while his refugee status was registered, his blossoming has been worth the wait. The same can be said of Gambia’s performance in Cameroon. “We aren’t surprised by it, we know our value,” Darboe says. “Everyone is talking about ‘underdogs, underdogs, underdogs’ but we believe it is our time to shine,” Colley agrees. Saintfiet has moulded a team from locations as diverse as Forest Green Rovers and Ifo Bromolla in Sweden; Darboe and Colley both speak glowingly of his motivational qualities, evident when he stops for an affectionate exchange with them during the conversation. “He wants to change the mentality and make sure we believe in ourselves,” Colley says. “We believe we can do what Senegal are doing.” Now they would like to be treated with the same respect as Africa’s more feted names. Their hotel for the three days before they face Guinea, nestled among idyllic foothills in Cameroon’s north-west, is easy on the eye but not on the basics needed for match preparation. Players have been sleeping four or six to a room, which risks being a particular issue during the Covid-19 pandemic, and they were initially required to share lodgings at their group stage accommodation in Buea. Tales of slapdash team hotels at the Cup of Nations are a reliable trope but arrangements of this kind seem beyond the pale. “If my club saw this they would think it was a joke,” Colley says. “It’s not what we are expecting. It’s our first time and you want a memorable experience, we thought everything would be perfect. We are underdogs from a small country but we are a good team and deserve to be treated better: you wouldn’t treat the bigger sides in the same way.” Against a moderate Guinea side that will be missing the suspended Naby Keïta, though, Gambia will use it as further proof they have developed the thick skin worn by potential title contenders. “Even if they put us 10 to a room we will go out there and show them we are extra-motivated and better than this,” Colley adds. “Every day is a party in Gambia at the moment and we want it to continue.”In 2018, Fern Brady’s comedy career was taking off. Fresh from supporting Frankie Boyle on tour, she filmed Live at the Apollo in London, then took a last-minute gig in Manchester the following day. On the way back to the capital, she was offered a last-minute audition for Have I Got News for You. Her brain screamed no, but she said yes. When she got to the audition, she couldn’t function, freezing into silence. Now, she knows this was an autistic shutdown. Brady was diagnosed early last year. When lockdown brought live comedy to a crashing halt, disrupting her routine, she’d been plunged into frequent “crippling” crises. These can manifest as destructive outbursts (meltdowns) or silent withdrawal (shutdowns) and she discovered they can be exacerbated by “masking” – changing your instinctive behaviours to appear “normal”. It’s taken her all year to “start to unlearn these bad habits”, she says as we sit at either end of a velvet sofa in a cafe in Catford, London. On stage, Brady is cool, cutting and delightfully deadpan, delivering scathing critiques of social norms. Her performances often escalate from classic standup into surreal finales – at the 2019 Edinburgh fringe she lost her voice after daily shows ended in her screaming about existential dread while a video of a hamster played behind her. It earned her four-star reviews and a BBC standup special. While she’s now a regular on panel shows and podcasts, she says: “I’ll always feel most relaxed doing standup. When I’m doing standup, I’m being the most myself.” Brady’s been in comedy for 11 years now, after first trying standup for a reportage piece as a student journalist. She attended university in Edinburgh – not far from her home town Bathgate, where she grew up in a working-class, Catholic household. “There’s still hardly any working-class women doing standup, there’s still massive gender disparity,” she says. “Being autistic helped me go against the fairly overwhelming message that you shouldn’t speak up if you’re a working-class woman.” Her diagnosis came nearly 20 years after she’d first read a description of autism and felt a jolt of recognition. A year on, it’s helped make sense of a lot: her bafflement with social etiquette and exhaustion with socialising, sensory overload in noisy and bright spaces, difficulty identifying her own emotions, and a need for routine. She’s now working on her first book, Strong Female Character, a memoir and in-depth exploration of what it means to be an autistic woman. But if you’re anticipating jokes about neurodivergence in her new show, think again. Yes, it is called Autistic Bikini Queen, but that’s only because Brady, who loves weightlifting, was doing bodybuilding at the time she named it. While she did write some autism jokes, she’s wary of stripping the topic of nuance. “But I am autistic, so the whole show’s from that perspective,” she says. “I realised every standup show I had done beforehand might as well have been called, ‘Hey Fern, do you know you’re autistic?’” Her 2016 show Male Comedienne centred on being excluded from a female comedians’ brunch and her difficulty communicating with other women, while 2019’s Power and Chaos examined how women are socialised to be polite. She’s mocked earnest, emotional standup in the past; one show climaxed with her cutting onions to make herself cry. “I’m never going to do an Edinburgh show that has a poignant ending,” she says. “I couldn’t live with myself.” Her favourite routines are “when you’re observing how stupid your own thought processes are”. She worries some of her jokes aren’t relatable, but went viral with a segment on intrusive thoughts (“I love my boyfriend, but some nights I’ll be stroking his sleeping face and think ‘What if your thumbs just slipped into his eyeballs now?’”). In Autistic Bikini Queen, Brady will explore “my fear of being attacked when I leave the house. It’s the closest I’ve felt to being able to do relatable stuff, weirdly.” She develops topics from previous shows – such as monogamy and marriage – observing how traditions like wedding vows and stag dos dissolve into farce when examined too closely. There’s material on the royals and kink-shaming too, with characteristic sprinklings of class, Catholicism and death. “No matter how hard I try to be mainstream, it always comes back to this really goth sensibility,” Brady says. “Inevitably, everything ends up being about death and shagging.” During the pandemic, she began BBC podcast Wheel of Misfortune, where listeners send in embarrassing stories. She co-hosted with friend and fellow comedian Alison Spittle. Turns out, people love talking about shame (and bowel movements) – superfans have accosted the pair for selfies and fuelled demand for three series. This, plus fronting TV travelogue British as Folk with Darren Harriott and Ivo Graham, showed Brady there are areas of mainstream comedy where you can be yourself. On panel shows, in contrast, she has felt pressure to look and act hyper-feminine. “It’s nice dressing up for telly, but sometimes you’re like, ‘God, this is so overwhelmingly shallow,’” she says. “That’s also why I’m writing the book – I want to have some value beyond what I look like.” As she continues writing Strong Female Character, she’s finding the positives of autism. “It’s what helped me go into comedy,” she says. “Autistics tend to thrive when they can make a career out of their special interests. You just have to hope that they overlap.” Fern Brady’s Autistic Bikini Queen tour starts on 25 January at the Lowry, Salford.As Boris Johnson and the Conservative party anxiously tread political water while repeatedly being pulled under by strife and disgrace, two plotlines are unfolding. One is about the immediate moment, and will reach another key juncture with the imminent report by the senior civil servant Sue Gray, which may finally focus wavering Tory minds on the impossibility of the prime minister’s position. Meanwhile, amid new allegations of blackmail, rumours of yet more illicit gatherings and Dominic Raab’s characteristically clever insistence that his boss is “like a seasoned prizefighter” who has “taken some knocks”, another story is in danger of being lost: the dire implications of Johnson’s antics for people’s trust in politics, and a gap between Westminster and the country that may now be bigger than ever. All those Downing Street and Whitehall parties – along with the prime minister’s evasions, half-apologies and desperate attempts to shore himself up – have been reported in terms of shock-horror revelation. But for many voters, they will confirm longstanding ideas about the kind of people who run the country, or aspire to. In 1944, about a third of Britons endorsed the idea that MPs and ministers were merely “out for themselves”, but late last year that figure was put at 63%. According to pollsters and academics, the first phase of the pandemic saw political distrust briefly fall before it reverted to pre-pandemic levels. They may have dutifully followed the government’s rules and restrictions, but millions of people evidently have much the same view of politics and power as ever: either indifference or a tendency to outrage and a readiness – fair or not – to assume the worst of politicians, whichever party they represent. The real tragedy of Johnson’s fall is that it will send that alienation soaring: when Sajid Javid recently conceded that the accounts of all the parties have “damaged our democracy”, this is presumably what he meant. In 12 years of political reporting, I have never felt that the reasons for such disaffection are all that complicated. Any meaningful sense of a social contract has long gone; many people’s lives are so precarious and chaotic that politics sounds like white noise, and its practitioners inevitably seem cosseted and privileged. Episodes such as the Iraq war, the crash of 2008 and the MPs’ expenses scandal only accelerated that estrangement. To cap it all, Facebook, Twitter and the rest have fostered a bitterly angry and divisive public discourse, and created a spectrum of disengagement that runs from an extreme outer edge to the heart of public opinion. At one end are people who think the world is run by a secret order of vampiric lizard people or worse; beyond this hardcore lie various shades of the belief that politicians are a strange and hypocritical clique, and most of what governments get up to confirms this. Some politicians have said they want to prove all this stuff wrong and restore the reputation of both their profession and the state. Johnson, by contrast, is one of those figures who surveyed the ferment and saw mouthwatering possibilities. Notwithstanding his first, aborted run for the Tory leadership, he soon made it to the top of his party, thanks to the EU referendum of 2016 and the success of a leave campaign that tapped into millions of people’s feelings of distance from power, raising their hopes with promises that everyone involved must have known would quickly turn to dust. His thumping election victory in 2019 was at least partly based on the selling to the public of a politician who supposedly wasn’t a politician, with a contempt for convention that held the key to Brexit’s impossible puzzles. Since then, most of his behaviour in office has apparently been based on the belief that if people’s faith in leaders and institutions was so low, old-fashioned “delivery” would hardly matter, and he would have the moral latitude to get away with just about anything. As proved by the panicky rag-bag of policies he recently floated – attacking the BBC, sending the armed forces into the English channel, somehow tackling NHS waiting lists – to look for coherence, or to imagine many of his ideas being implemented, is to miss the point: his political approach is as chaotic and volatile as the public mood that gave rise to it, and really about nothing but him. As many have long known, what we have basically been dealing with is a political-psychological cousin of Trumpism, rooted on the playing fields of Eton rather than suburban New York – and it is all about defying the demands of traditional politics by using turmoil, misinformation and endless performance. But this is not America – yet – and Johnson has discovered that even if the public are jaded and cynical, some things remain beyond the pale. Perhaps, like an initial crack on a car windscreen, the disgrace of partygate will shatter just about every aspect of his record. But here we hit one of the most glaring consequences of his misrule: the fact that even if he is forced out, the ramifications of his time in office will spread far further than him and his inner circle. Some of his Conservative colleagues evidently think that after he has gone, a new leader will be able to announce a completely fresh start. On that score, I would direct them to the opinion of a first-time Tory voter in the newly Conservative constituency of Bolton North East, whose opinions were recently recorded by the former Downing Street pollster James Johnson: “They’re all up there backing him, most of them. That’s my worry now, with the [Conservative] party: ‘Oh, he’s apologised, let’s just get on with the job.’ No – you’ve lied about doing the job.” Even if they have kept their distance, whoever succeeds Johnson will be faced by lingering anger about his rule-breaking and deceit, and how much he was indulged by his colleagues – not to mention the consequences of Brexit, the fallout from his largely disastrous handling of Covid, and the cost-of-living crisis, which by raising National Insurance and scrapping the £20-a-week rise in universal credit his government has managed only to deepen. There is a rather naive view that as Johnson’s popularity tumbles, Labour’s will carry on rising, and – by some as yet unexplained miracle – Keir Starmer and his party will eventually win enough seats to take power. But like all Labour leaders, he will depend on the public being open to his ideas, and prepared to believe that government can make a difference to their lives. His current leads in the polls aren’t bad, but you can find similar numbers in the history of plenty of Labour leaders who went on to lose – which perhaps suggests that the disaffection and anger spread by Johnson’s misconduct and broken promises may partly bypass Labour and feed into something much more insidious and grim. This is the prospect that should worry people on all sides of politics. Long before partygate, years of public disengagement gave us Nigel Farage, Tommy Robinson and millions of people concluding that the system was broken and simply switching off. In those circumstances, the first duty of anyone in high office should have been to try to heal the breach. But, having become prime minister in the midst of a crisis of trust, Johnson then made it even worse, sometimes as a matter of deliberate design, with consequences that will long outlast his time at the top. Whenever he goes, this will be his most lasting legacy – which is surely the greatest disgrace of all. John Harris is a Guardian columnistThink of this salad as a sort of north African take on a caesar salad. What makes it extra special is the punchy herb-laced tahini dressing and the chicken fat and harissa flatbread croutons – it’s worth cooking it just for those. Serves 4 chicken breasts or thighs 800g, bone-in, skin-on olive oil 6 tbsp harissa 1 heaped tsp flatbreads 3, roughly torn into 2cm pieces cos lettuce 2 heads, torn into large pieces parsley leaves a handful coriander leaves a handful preserved lemons 2 small, rind only, finely chopped feta cheese 100g pitted black olives 100g For the dressing parsley a small handful, roughly chopped coriander a handful, roughly chopped garlic 1 clove, finely grated lemon juice of 1, or to taste tahini 40g extra virgin olive oil 40ml Greek yoghurt 2 tbsp Heat the oven to 170C fan/gas mark 5. Season the chicken generously with salt and pepper. Heat 1 tablespoon of the olive oil in a large ovenproof cast-iron frying pan over medium heat. Add the chicken, skin side down, and cook without moving for 8 minutes or until golden brown and crisp. Turn the chicken and cook for another 8 minutes until it is browned on the other side. Remove the chicken with tongs and put on a plate. Add the harissa to the chicken fat and juices in the pan, along with another 2 tablespoons of the olive oil, and swirl around so the harissa amalgamates with the oil. Toss the flatbread into the pan, tossing it through the juices. Put the chicken back in the pan and roast in the oven for 15 minutes until it is cooked through and the flatbread croutons are golden brown and crisp. Meanwhile, make the dressing. Place the parsley and coriander in a blender, along with the garlic, lemon juice and tahini, and whiz to a smooth paste. With the blender running, drizzle in the extra virgin olive oil. Transfer to a bowl and then fold in the yoghurt. Season to taste with salt and pepper. Place the lettuce, herbs and preserved lemon on a platter and dress with some of the green tahini dressing. Crumble over the feta and scatter with the olives. Drizzle over the remaining 3 tablespoons of olive oil. Remove the chicken from the oven and let it rest for a few minutes, then slice it off the bone and place on top of the salad, along with the croutons. Serve with more dressing on the side. From Jikoni by Ravinder Bhogal (Bloomsbury, £26)Everyday dishes you will return to again and again. Asma Khan’s masala omelette, Emily Scott’s kedgeree, Claudia Roden’s pan-grilled fish. All of them are easy, every one delicious. Yasmin Khan’s lentils with preserved lemon, Yotam Ottolenghi’s cheesy spinach jacket potatoes, Mandy Yin’s anchovy rice, Nigel Slater’s citrus salad. Food for the work day, the weekend, for you, for friends and family. Store this issue safely. It is a keeper. Chetna Makan’s dahi murg – yoghurt chicken curry (pictured above) A foolproof curry that works every single time and one of the most delicious ways to cook chicken Roast chicken salad with croutons and green tahini dressing by Ravinder Bhogal A sort of north African take on a caesar salad with herb-laced tahini dressing and flatbread croutons Asma Khan’s masala omelette A dish that requires minimum preparation and can be served with toast – it couldn’t get any easier José Pizarro’s clams with chorizo Add crispy chorizo for texture and fino sherry for deep flavour to sweet clams for a special yet simple supper Cumin butter tomato sauce for noodles by Anja Dunk A rich buttery sauce that takes minutes to prepare, after which the oven does all the work Savoy pancakes by Joe Trivelli Potatoes, cabbage. eggs, cheese – store-cupboard essentials combined to make a British classic with an Italian twist Nigel Slater’s pumpkin, ricotta and rosemary tart The parmesan filling works brilliantly with the sweetness of the squash – a light main or lunchbox dish Fregola with bacon and peas by Rosie Sykes A soupy dish made with the Sardinian pasta, plus peas and bacon makes this a comforting midweek supper Chilli paneer by Tarunima Sinha A spicy Indian dish with borrowed flavours from Chinese cuisine, and minimal cooking time Amy Chung and Emily Chung’s hsi jet khauk swe – garlic oil noodles You can use any leftover roast meat instead of the pork belly for this perfect midweek meal Nigella Lawson’s spaghetti with Marmite Salty, savoury and simplicity itself, this pasta dish will be a hit with Marmite lovers Nigel Slater’s citrus and cashew nut salad A crisp refreshing salad that contrasts perfectly with all the warming, carbs-n-cheese suppers of winter Claudia Roden’s pan-grilled fish with garlic, vinegar and chilli This simple fish dish is fabulous, and for a quick store-cupboard side serve with white cannellini beans Kedgeree with leeks, spinach, herbs and creme fraiche by Emily Scott A creamy fish dish that works equally well as moreish hangover cure or weekend brunch Quick chicken, leek and chorizo pie by Rukmini Iyer A tasty pie that can be put together in no time, this will impress guests for a low-key midweek dinner Mandy Yin’s anchovy fried rice A variation of the perennial favourite, fried rice, this is a take on nasi goreng kampung, or village fried rice Selin Kiazim’s butter beans, paprika and piquillo peppers Simple, quick and bursting with flavour, you’ll find most of this dish’s ingredients in your store cupboard Yotam Ottolenghi’s spinach and gorgonzola-stuffed jacket potatoes A hearty meal in itself, or a tasty side dish alongside a simple steak and fresh green salad Meera Sodha’s moong dal with a garlic and cumin tarka An unassuming but gorgeous dal, this is nourishing, cheap and comforting home cooking Lentils with preserved lemons and zhoug by Yasmin Khan Inspired by a conversation with a Yemeni refugee in Lesbos, this flavoursome dish is satisfying and comfortingMoments after Josh Allen’s 19-yard strike to Gabriel Davis deep in the fourth quarter, television crews cut to the quarterback’s family celebrating in a box at Arrowhead. The Bills led 36-33 and the champagne was about to be popped. Tears of joy streamed down Joel Allen’s face as he watched his son, who was having a perfect postseason, punch his ticket to the AFC Championship. Or so we thought. Then the Allen family had to sit through the most excruciating 13 seconds of their lives. CBS’s Tony Romo actually joked about the improbability of what was to come, “What can Patrick Mahomes do with 13 seconds left? Probably nothing. [Pause] But maybe something …” Maybe something was right because thanks to his immense skill and Buffalo’s inexplicably bad prevent defense, Mahomes had two quick completions, the first a 19-yard pass to Tyreek Hill, followed by a 25-yard dart to Travis Kelce. In marched Chiefs kicker Harrison Butker to knock through a 49-yard field goal with no time in regulation remaining. 36-36. Buffalo were stunned. Arrowhead was deafening. Kelce later explained how he and his quarterback freestyled on the completion: “I told [Mahomes] I’m probably not going to run the route that’s called and I was going to run to the open area. And in his cadence he was yelling to me, ‘Do it! Do it!” Again, the Bills coaching staff are going to have a lot of regrets when they evaluate film of those final 13 seconds. And Bills fans will wonder why the team didn’t try a squib kick after scoring their final touchdown, something that would have taken vital seconds off the clock (instead, Tyler Bass’s touchback saved the Chiefs valuable time). Butker’s field goal was the culmination of perhaps the most exhilarating two minutes the NFL has ever produced. Yes, there were bad defensive calls from both teams. But above all, it was Allen and Mahomes showing every inch of their talent and heart, the best v the best. In the two-minute span, there were three lead changes and a tie. Twenty-five points scored. The quarterbacks combined for 221 passing yards and three touchdowns in the same period. Bills wideout Gabriel Davis, until Sunday barely known outside Buffalo, became a household name – he finished the game with 201 receiving yards and four touchdowns, an NFL postseason record. Mahomes made magical throws from every angle. Allen did the same and picked up a litany of first downs using his legs. Mahomes v Allen is now the most compelling quarterback rivalry in football and will be for years to come. Allen finished the day with 329 passing yards and four touchdowns, Mahomes with 378 passing yards and three touchdowns. Neither quarterback threw an interception. But it will be those final moments that will define this epic duel. To recap a two-minute span like no other: 1:54 remaining. Allen to Davis on a 27-yard touchdown (two-point conversion is good): Bills 29-26 Chiefs 1:02 remaining. Mahomes to Tyreek Hill on a 64-yard touchdown (extra point good): Bills 29-33 Chiefs 13 seconds remaining. Allen to Davis on a 19-yard touchdown (extra point good): Bills 36-33 Chiefs 0:00 remaining. Butker’s 49-yard field goal is good. Bills 36-36 Chiefs Then there was overtime. If we learned anything from the final two minutes of regulation it was that the winner of the coin toss was marching down the field and winning the game. Kansas City got the ball and lo and behold, Mahomes led his teammates against an exhausted Bills defense, found Kelce in the end zone and voila, the Chiefs will host the AFC Championship for the fourth consecutive year. The NFL overtime rules, under which the team that receive the ball can win with a touchdown, will be under much scrutiny this offseason. It was a travesty to deprive Allen the opportunity to match Mahomes point for point just because a coin landed on the wrong side for the Bills. But that’s a debate for another day. For now we should sit back and thank the football gods for a phenomenal divisional weekend topped off by a Bills-Chiefs classic. How much longer do we have to wait for these two powerhouses – and these two brilliant quarterbacks – to meet in the playoffs again? MVP of the week Matthew Stafford, quarterback, Los Angeles Rams. OK, this should be a joint one for Mahomes and Allen but it would be a shame not to discuss Sunday’s earlier game. Sean McVay wasn’t going down without a fight. The tide had taken a drastic turn for the Rams, who had let a 27-3 lead evaporate in the second half against Tom Brady and the Buccaneers. McVay’s playcalling was timid. There were fumbles and a high snap that went awry. Meanwhile, Brady was doing what he’s done so often. He was laser-focused on destroying the soul of his opponent. But with 35 seconds remaining, McVay wasn’t messing around. He dialled up consecutive Stafford passes to Cooper Kupp, first a 20-yarder followed by the nail-in-the-coffin, a perfectly placed 44-yard strike to Cupp who had blown by safety Antoine Winfield. Gay knocked through the 30-yarder to send Los Angeles back home to host the NFC Championship. Stafford, who was almost flawless in the first half, threw for 366 yards, knocked off the Super Bowl champs, and is headed back to LA where his team will host the NFC Championship against the 49ers. Quote of the week “Lots of decisions to be made. I don’t want to be part of a rebuild if I’m going to keep playing” – Aaron Rodgers following Green Bay’s 13-10 loss to San Francisco. Rodgers’ season may have abruptly ended but that doesn’t mean we’ll get a break from nonstop chatter about where he goes from here. Rodgers has his ticket out of Green Bay in the form of a restructured deal last summer that saves the team $20m if he’s traded before June 2022. The Packers are about to be $44m over the salary cap, leaving the future of many key players – including Davante Adams who will be a free agent and command a massive paycheck – in doubt. Despite the off-the-field distractions this season, Rodgers is still an elite quarterback whose departure would command high draft picks at the very least, and put the Packers in a strong position to rebuild. (Not to mention a notable reduction in stress.) But there’s also a disparity in success between the regular and postseason versions of Rodgers. That the 38-year-old Rodgers has only played in one Super Bowl at this point in his career is underachieving at its finest, from both the player and his team. Perhaps he’ll have better luck in Pittsburgh, Denver or New Orleans. Video of the week What an authentic moment of joy between Robbie Gould and Jimmy Garoppolo following the 49ers’ dramatic win at a snow-covered Lambeau Field. In the video, captured by NFL Network reporter Stacey Dales, Garoppolo called Gould “a fucking legend”. Hard to argue with the quarterback’s assessment given that Gould is now 20-for-20 on field goals in the postseason, including Saturday’s game-winner. Garoppolo also let out an audible curse directed at the Packers. The emotions were perhaps not surprising from a quarterback raised in Illinois and a kicker who played 11 seasons in Chicago. Bonus video More ice from Gould: Stat of the week 9. The Tennessee Titans pass rush was ready for its close-up, sacking Joe Burrow nine times. Defensive end Jeffery Simmons was unstoppable, collecting three sacks. Yet the Titans still lost 19-16. Racking up nine sacks in a playoff game and still losing is not an easy feat; in fact, the Titans are the first team since the 1970 merger to earn the honor. But when Ryan Tannehill throws an interception on his first pass of the game, his first of the second half, and his last of the season, it’s a scenario that starts making more sense. The Bengals weren’t exactly offensive juggernauts but the final 32 seconds was a masterclass in clutch. A Logan Wilson interception. A 19-yard pass from Burrow to Ja’Marr Chase that set up the game-winning field goal. Evan McPherson nailing the 52-yarder. It’s on to the AFC Championship for Cincinnati. Elsewhere around the league • Tom Brady’s future will now take centerstage after an ESPN report suggested the 44-year-old is mulling his future. Brady was non-committal when asked about his future following the Bucs’ loss to the Rams on Sunday: “I haven’t put a lot of thought into it. I’ll just take it day by day. And we’ll see.” • Bengals defensive tackle DJ Reader had a spectacular performance shutting down Derrick Henry and the Titans rushing game all day. When he wasn’t creating space for the linebackers, he was making tackles of his own. After the game, Reader spoke about a recurring theme for his team whose motto has been Why Not Us. “We’ve been getting slept on the whole year. It’s something we take pride for in this locker room. We take it as disrespect every time.” • When San Francisco beat the Rams in a Week 18 thriller, SoFi Stadium looked and sounded like a 49ers home game. The Rams are trying to prevent a repeat in the NFC Championship game by restricting ticket sales. I’m sure no one will figure out a workaround.“The peoples of the Earth,” Henry Morgenthau said, “are inseparably linked by a deep underlying community of purpose.” In July 1944, Morgenthau, the US Treasury secretary, was closing the Bretton Woods conference with a reflection on extreme nationalism and the failures of cooperation that had led to war. Cautioning against the pursuit of national interest through “the plan-less, senseless rivalry that divided us”, he outlined an accord for new institutions grounded in an appeal to shared humanity. Reading Morgenthau’s speech today is a jolting reminder of how a generation of political leaders sought to remake the world. The institutional architecture – the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank and what became the World Trade Organization – that emerged from Bretton Woods may have been deeply flawed. But this was an attempt to underpin through practical financial and monetary cooperation the human rights and freedoms envisaged in the UN charter. Today we need institutions equipped to rise to the great challenges posed by Covid-19, poverty and the climate crisis. Yet political leaders gripped by vaccine nationalism, climate nationalism and economic nationalism are manifestly lacking the “community of purpose” their citizens and the world need in this moment of crisis. Nowhere are the failures more starkly evident than in the financial response to the pandemic. When Covid-19 struck, governments in rich countries acted decisively to contain the social and economic impacts. Fiscal rulebooks were torn up and monetary orthodoxies abandoned. Even the most conservative finance ministers responded to the crisis like Keynesians on public finance steroids. According to the IMF, economic stimulus measures equivalent to about one-quarter of GDP were implemented. Contrasts with lower-income countries could not be more striking. Most were unable to muster more than 1-2% of GDP in increased public spending, leaving vulnerable populations unprotected and economies trapped in a downward spiral. Recession magnified pre-pandemic debt problems, leaving more than half of low-income countries either in, or at risk of, debt distress. Amid the public health crisis triggered by the pandemic, 43 lower-income countries were left spending more on debt than public health. The financing disparities have fuelled what some commentators have described as a Great Divergence. While rich countries have all but recovered the economic ground lost during the pandemic, average incomes in the poorest countries will remain below pre-pandemic levels until mid-decade. Meanwhile, budget austerity is reinforcing inequalities within countries as vital public services are cut. The human consequences have been devastating. Progress towards the 2030 sustainable development goals (SDGs) has been thrown into reverse. The number of people in poverty has increased by more than 90 million. Two decades of progress towards universal health coverage have ground to a halt, raising the spectre of setbacks in child survival and maternal health. Malnutrition is rising. Disruption to education systems could leave 70% of children in the poorest countries in “learning poverty”, lacking the skills they need to escape their circumstances. It would be folly for citizens in rich countries to imagine they will be immune to the instability and insecurity that will accompany these reversals. Yet their governments have responded with a trickle of increased aid, which gives new meaning to the phrase “too little, too late”, and a conservative approach to the governance of the Bretton Woods institutions. To be fair, the World Bank and IMF have demonstrated leadership. Commitments for the poorest countries under the bank’s International Development Association (IDA) rose by a fifth in 2021, to $36bn (£27bn). The IMF has scaled up its programmes, underwriting a surge in emergency financing, and providing $14bn in zero-interest loans to poor countries. The fund’s managing director, Kristalina Georgieva, navigated a new $650bn allocation of special drawing rights (SDRs) – a central bank reserve asset – through the G20. None of which is enough. Financing from the World Bank and regional development banks will provide limited protection against the fiscal retrenchment now in prospect. IMF loans are short-term and must be repaid. Under current allocation rules, two-thirds of the new SDRs will be allocated to rich countries that don’t need them. In effect, we are fighting an SDG forest fire with financial water pistols. The IMF estimates that low-income countries alone will need an additional $550bn to get back on an accelerated recovery pathway. Meanwhile, recession and human development reversals have increased the SDG financing gap by 70% to about $4.2tn, according to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development – and that’s without the additional $1tn needed to finance a green energy transition in developing countries. The time has come to reimagine a development financing system. More could – and should – be done on aid. The UK’s retreat on that front, most recently in slashing support for the IDA, has been profoundly harmful. But aid cannot substitute an international public finance system aligned to the SDG ambition. The World Bank and other multilateral development banks (MDBs) should be deployed far more aggressively. Less risk-averse approaches to capital adequacy and modest increases in finance would enable MDBs to triple their lending portfolios to more than $1.3tn, helping to unlock the private finance for a green recovery and deliver investment in global public goods, such as pandemic preparedness. In a period of low interest rates, this is a no-brainer. So why is the G20 endlessly reviewing options instead of acting? The new allocation of SDRs has opened up opportunities now at risk of being squandered. Rich countries do not need the $433bn in additional reserves bestowed on their central bank balance sheets through the IMF. Recycling the SDRs through multilateral banks or other mechanisms could provide developing countries with the liquidity and finance they need to support an SDG recovery and a green transition. Debt relief is critical. If there is one lesson from the 1980s, it is that delayed action on debt is the route to a lost decade of development. With IDA countries scheduled to pay $35bn in debt servicing this year, much of it to private creditors, there is an urgent need to convert unpayable debts into investments in health, education and safety nets. The IMF and World Bank should now be equipped to buy back unsustainable commercial debts at a hefty discount. John Maynard Keynes, one of the architects of the Bretton Woods system, once dismissed the argument that Britain had reached the limits of affordable social provision with a simple rejoinder: “Anything we can actually do, we can afford.” As an international community we can afford to deliver on the SDGs and prevent climate catastrophe. What we can’t afford is the alternative. Kevin Watkins is visiting professor of development practice at the Firoz Lalji Institute for Africa at the London School of Economics and was until recently chief executive of Save the ChildrenLarge-scale Covid-19 outbreaks among students are unlikely to lead to school closures when classes resume in New South Wales, with the state government determined to shut down schools only in the case of key staff shortages. However a group of concerned parents and teachers says it will take legal action against the NSW Department of Education, claiming it has prevented schools from granting families leave to keep their children at home if they are worried about Covid infection. The group, called Covid Safe Schools, said a senior executive of the department confirmed the pandemic was not a valid reason for keeping kids home. The group said refusing to grant such leave was a breach of schools’ duty of care. Peter Vogel, the lawyer representing the group, told Guardian Australia negotiations with schools and the department had been ongoing since the beginning of term four last year, but the department had refused to change its policy. A spokesperson for the group, Elizabeth Rosewall, said in a statement that granting pandemic leave would be a “win-win”. “Parents can do without the extra fear of breaking the law. It would also reduce the number of children in the classroom which reduces the risk for kids who have no choice but to be there and makes it a bit safer for teachers too,” she said. The NSW and Victorian governments have released near identical plans for schools ahead of the resumption of classes next week. Both states intend to use rapid antigen tests for twice-weekly “surveillance” testing during the first four weeks of term one, the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, saying on Monday that 5m tests had already been distributed to schools across the state. But with just a week to go before classes resume, some school staff were “anxious” as supplies of rapid tests had yet to arrive, Craig Petersen, the head of the NSW Secondary Principals’ Council, said. While the NSW education department says in most cases tests will be delivered in the next two days, it will be left to the individual schools to distribute those to parents. “It’s going to be really important for parents to keep an eye out for communications from their school principal because we get the high-level statewide information but it’s going to be very different from school to school,” Petersen said. Perrottet has repeatedly said closures would only occur as a “last resort” in 2022, as the government looked to end the Covid-enforced disruptions which saw 289 public schools made “temporarily non-operational” in a little over a month between October and November last year. A key plank of that plan for both states is an end to contact tracing if a student tests positive for the virus. Instead it will then be up to individual schools to contact other parents to let them know there has been a positive case in the school community and that they should monitor their child for symptoms. That, according to the NSW Teachers Federation president, Angelo Gavrielatos, has both teachers and parents concerned about the possibility of large-scale outbreaks inside schools, particularly with schools only provided with enough tests for the first few weeks of term. “What we’ve certainly said, because we’ve argued for the most robust settings in the implementation of these risk mitigation strategies, is that we think there should be a system surveillance, plus also the option of what’s called test and stay in cases where outbreaks occur,” he said. But while both governments want to limit school closures, multiple sources told Guardian Australia it was likely shutdowns would occur in cases where disruptions to staffing made it impossible for classes to continue. Education department officials have told administrators it was possible as many as 20% of staff could be off sick once classes resume, and last week the Guardian revealed more than 70 public schools across NSW already had staff vacancy rates of 20% or higher. “Clearly none of us want schools to be closing and infection rates to be affecting our schools but the reality is this will be a very disruptive school year,” Gavrielatos said. “Regrettably there will be absences because of infection rates which will lead to some schools being non-operational. It could be as a result of there being no cleaning staff available, or because of inadequate staffing available to properly supervise students.” Petersen said education officials had suggested closures would only occur as the result of “so many staff being away that we can’t provide minimal supervision for the students who are at school”. “The line we’re hearing is that as long as staff are available we’ll keep schools open,” he said. “That may be more likely to affect the primary school sector where teachers are in a particular class, as opposed to high school where you have teachers in multiple year groups.” On Monday the secretary of the NSW education department, Georgina Harrisson, said that in cases where schools were forced to close, the government would seek to limit the length of the disruptions. “If we need to move to learning from home, we will do it for the fewer students as possible for a shorter time as possible and we ask parents to follow the advice of your school if that occurs in those communities,” she said. Amid reports some parents plan to keep their students home from school once classes resume, Perrottet on Monday sought to reassure parents the plan was “the right approach for the circumstances that we are in today”. “As a parent as well I know that many parents across the state are anxious about sending their children back to school, many teachers are anxious; I was speaking to a teacher on the weekend … anxious about the return of school,” he said. “That is understandable in a pandemic, but it is really, really important for our kids’ educational, mental health and social outcomes that they are back in the classroom. I accept it will not be perfect, there will be issues moving through this, but this is the right approach.”Boris Johnson is facing growing demands from his own party to make a dramatic U-turn on planned national insurance tax increases in response to Britain’s worsening cost of living crisis. On a day of renewed pressure for the prime minister, the former Conservative cabinet minister David Davis threw his weight behind calls for the tax increase due to come in from April to be scrapped. Business leaders and opposition parties also warned urgent action is required to help households with the highest rates of inflation for 30 years. Davis, who last week called in parliament for Johnson to resign, said the national insurance plan announced by the prime minister last year as a way of funding health and social care should be dropped because of the severe financial pressures already facing households. “It was a judgment made on, frankly, quite a lot of wrong data,” Davis said, speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “They didn’t know at the time that by April we would have the highest inflation rate in 30 years, they didn’t know that interest rates would be going up, council tax would be going up, the fuel price is about to jump by £700 a year for the average family. Therefore, they didn’t know quite what pressure there would be on ordinary people.” Davis last week told Johnson that he should “in the name of God, go” because of his response to the allegations about his attendance at parties – a reference to words said to Neville Chamberlain after a series of failures at the start of the second world war. The MP’s latest intervention comes as business leaders warned on Monday that the planned tax increase would add to pressures on the British economy from high inflation. National insurance contributions, which are paid by employers and workers, are scheduled to rise by 1.25 percentage points at the start of the new tax year in April, in a manifesto-breaking move to raise £12bn to increase NHS funding by Rishi Sunak and Johnson. However, the Institute of Directors lobby group said 38% out of a poll of 500 of its members would offset the tax rise by raising their prices. Kitty Ussher, the chief economist at the IoD, said: “Our data shows that the tax rise is itself inflationary at a time when prices are already rising fast. “Faced with the forthcoming increase in the cost of employing their teams, many businesses are planning to raise prices to offset the cost and/or rein in on their hiring plans.” With pressure growing on the prime minister on several fronts, Johnson resisted calls to scrap the planned rise. While speaking on a visit to a hospital in Milton Keynes on Monday, he told the media it would provide vital funding for health and social care. “What I’m telling people is, if you want to fund our fantastic NHS, we have to pay for it – and this government is determined to do so,” he said. It came as the government faced demands during an opposition day debate in the Commons led by the SNP to launch a package of support measures to help people with soaring living costs. Official figures last week showed the rate of inflation – which measures the annual increase in average consumer prices – jumped to 5.4% in December, the highest level since March 1992. David Linden, the SNP spokesperson for work and pensions, said that instead of responding to the emergency, the Conservatives were in a state of “civil war and besieged by paralysis”. He said: “They’re indulging in navel-gazing while our constituents are stuck in the middle of an economic tornado.” Simon Clarke, the chief secretary to the Treasury, said the government had provided £400bn of direct economic support during the pandemic to help with living costs and was “constantly considering what more we can do”. He warned that a national insurance U-turn would fail to deal with challenges for funding healthcare and repairing the public finances after the UK’s national debt rose to more than £2.3tn during the pandemic.The movement of troops round the Ukrainian border now clearly heralds a crisis. Russia’s level of provocation is grotesque, but nothing on the ground poses any strategic threat to Britain or any other western government, or even to Europe’s security as a whole. Ukraine’s relations with Russia have been fraught since the toppling of the pro-Russian president Viktor Yanukovych in a coup in 2014. The country is split. When Russian-speaking eastern Ukraine rebelled, it was aided by Russia. Moscow seized Crimea. The longstanding ties with Russia were one reason why Nato left Ukraine out of its reckless post-Soviet rush to advance its security boundary as near as it could to the Russian border during the 1990s. All evidence suggests that Vladimir Putin wants a regime in Kyiv favourable to Russian interests, much as Soviet leaders wanted in Hungary in 1956 and in Czechoslovakia in 1968. The west wisely did not argue or intervene on either of those occasions. Russia’s motives today seem much the same. Putin is determined to oppose the emergence of possible liberal, western-oriented societies in Belarus and Ukraine. He watched the other states in eastern Europe crumble and defect from the Warsaw Pact in 1990. He does not want to be the Russian leader who lost these two great territories to his immediate west. The concept of spheres of interest, regions where the interests of one nation are more important than the interests of another, has always been controversial in diplomacy. There is no UN doctrine of such spheres, but they are potent and all too real. They are relics of ancient empires and modern paranoias. The US regarded Moscow’s placing of missiles in Cuba in 1962, and support for Central American states as an intolerable threat. Likewise, Moscow is not prepared to tolerate US missiles in Ukraine or US troops rolling in to support an anti-Russian regime in Kyiv. Strategists of spheres of influence are left with the facts of geography and of crude balances of power. China has clearly been extending its reach into south-east Asia and the South China Sea. The US can object, but it is hard to see what gains are achieved by the current buildup of military machismo in the western Pacific, including Britain’s ludicrous decision to deploy an aircraft carrier in the South China Sea. The reality is that the west took a calculated gamble in expanding Nato in the 1990s. There was no suggestion of imitating Finland’s careful and pragmatic neutrality towards its Baltic neighbours that lie in Russia’s sphere of influence. Nato had post-Soviet Russia on the floor and simply could not resist the opportunity of kicking the country when it was already down. The way Nato treated Russia almost guaranteed there would be a chauvinist reflex. Moscow’s initial feelers from Boris Yeltsin that it might associate with Nato were rebuffed. Mooted associations with the EU were ridiculed. Everything was done to rub Russia’s nose in its shame. Putin and his present antics were the predictable result. The Russian president has now indicated that he wants the 2015 Minsk II settlement implemented. That settlement is sound. It requires autonomy for Russian-speaking Donbas, an end to Nato expansionism, Russian withdrawal and a reinstatement of Ukraine’s border. Samantha Power, US ambassador to the United Nations at the time of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, remarked that Minsk was the “only viable way out of this deadly conflict”. Subsequent US administrations have supported that position. Yet no one has applied sufficient diplomatic effort to put it in place. Any reasonable observer would see Minsk as a practical and fair way out of this crisis. It has largely been blocked by a Kyiv regime that has long feared Donbas’s pro-Russian sentiment and resisted its “home rule”. Recognise the autonomy of the Donbas region, Putin says, and he will withdraw. He cannot want to keep 100,000 troops mobilised on the Donbas border indefinitely, any more than he can seriously fear a western army storming east across Ukraine. At that point, the realpolitik of power comes on stage. It is inconceivable that Nato, in the shape of the US and Britain, would confront Russian battle lines in Donbas. Germany and France would have no part in it. Nor do the US and Britain have the necessary troops. They have the threat of missile barrages, but without logistical support these merely sow destruction. Moreover, Britain has no obligation to defend Ukraine. Nor does it have an obligation to deter or confront what appears to be an imminent Russian attack. The country has no alliance with Ukraine. Ukraine is not a member of Nato. And Britain has no significant means of influencing the outcome of a battle on the ground. For these reasons, it should stay well out of the situation. Putin’s current show of strength is that of a thin-skinned dictator flexing before his people and the world such muscle as he can still muster. If he goes ahead and invades Donbas, the world will descend on his head with massive damnation, as well as savage but pointless economic sanctions. We saw that over Crimea. The root of peace in these crises lies in strength, strength to keep everything in proportion and to see a way through. The risk is always that curse of history: when hostilities turn to crisis, war can seem the simplest, most glorious way forward. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistA groundbreaking scheme overseen by UNHCR to process women’s asylum claims in the community rather than by locking up the applicants in detention has led to only one being granted leave to remain in the UK, according to a report. The aim of the pilot scheme was not to boost granted rates of asylum claims but to demonstrate that the asylum process could be successfully managed in the community without the need to lock women up, something the United Nations refugee agency said it had succeeded in doing in the report published on Monday. However, participants hoped that the support and access to legal advice the project offered would help them secure the right to remain in the UK. The sample size of the pilot was small, with initial plans to recruit 50 women reduced to just 20 taking part in the two-year experiment, due to the pandemic. The women involved had all had initial asylum claims refused and had it not been for the pilot scheme would have found themselves detained in Home Office detention centres. They received accommodation, £38 a week, access to legal advice and support from Action Foundation, a refugee charity that worked with the Home Office to administer the pilot scheme. UNHCR was involved in discussions about the design of the scheme and oversaw its monitoring and evaluation. At the end of the scheme four women agreed to return voluntarily to their home countries, eight were told there were no options for them to remain in the UK, five left the pilot before their asylum claims were resolved and two left the pilot without informing Action Foundation. Just weeks before the publication of the evaluation of the pilot scheme into alternatives to detaining women the Home Office started to detain women at a new women-only immigration detention centre – Derwentside in County Durham. It is the first new women’s detention centre since Yarl’s Wood in Bedfordshire was opened two decades ago. The Guardian has received reports that so far only a handful of women have been detained there. The numbers of men and women detained has declined sharply in recent years but human rights campaigners fear the Home Office is going to start increasing the numbers locked up. In the evaluation report Home Office officials said that, along with the newly opened Derwentside, the department will continue to maintain spaces at three other detention centres, including Yarl’s Wood, to hold female detainees, ensuring that the Home Office has “the geographical footprint and resilience to meet future need”. Women for Refugee Women, which advocates for women in immigration detention, has started legal action against the Home Office over Derwentside about its compliance with equality laws. Gemma Lousley, policy and research coordinator at Women for Refugee Women, said: “We urge the Home Office to build on the alternative to detention scheme evaluated by this report by ending the use of detention for women immediately and resolving their cases in the community instead.” The evaluation report, which UNHCR commissioned from NatCen, found that the women involved experienced more stability and better health and wellbeing outcomes as a result of being in the community rather than in detention centres and that there was no decrease in compliance with the immigration system. However, there was a misapprehension among the women that joining the pilot scheme would boost their chances of getting a positive decision on their asylum claim. UNHCR urged the Home Office to only use detention as a measure of last resort and to strengthen alternatives to detention. A Home Office spokesperson said: “The public rightly expects us to remove those who have abused our hospitality and do not have the right to be here. Immigration detention is essential to enable this. Derwentside IRC will accommodate those who have been to found to have no right to remain in the UK and foreign national offenders while we prepare to remove them.”A writer does not need to smile – on the page, words can do the smiling. This is something you are aware of throughout American playwright Sarah Ruhl’s extraordinary tale of being struck with Bell’s palsy a day after giving birth to twins. The first sign something is awry is when a lactation consultant casually observes that one of her eyes looks droopy. And when she gets up to look at herself in the bathroom mirror, she finds that the left side of her face has “fallen down. Eyebrow, fallen; eyelid, fallen; lip, fallen, frozen, immovable.” The smile she has, all her life, taken for granted is gone. She explains that, before seeing her reflection in the mirror, she was one person. Now she is another. But she is not self-pitying. Her prose is smart, quipping, pacy. It has the quicksilver mobility her face lacks. She was unlucky: for many people, Bell’s palsy passes quickly. Hers proved depressingly tenacious. Ruhl describes a decade of paralysis but begins with her pregnancy (her second – she has a daughter at pre-school). Her account brought back memories (having had twins myself) of an in-body experience that at times seems almost an out-of-body experience, a physical overachievement that doubles as a hitch, a risk, an extravagant burden. She writes vividly about the marathon of early days after birth: “The sleep deprivation when breastfeeding twins can feel like a form of psychosis”, yet she does not neglect to celebrate her children, their joyous existence. Charmingly named after the intersection where she and her husband Tony (a child psychiatrist) met in Providence, Rhode Island - “Williams Street and Hope Street” - their twins are called William and Hope. But it is the Bell’s palsy that fascinates most. Ruhl’s face fell just at the point her career was doing the opposite: she had a play transferring to Broadway and had been nominated for a Tony. Disconcerting, you might concede, not to be able to smile on the red carpet. And yet you might also feel (Ruhl tries to tell herself this) that her paralysis is, after all, not life-threatening – a small affliction in the general scheme of things. That misgiving does not last: Ruhl’s achievement is in making one see how many questions her condition raises about how we – women in particular – interact with the world and try to appease it with a smile. “Women have been told by men to smile from time immemorial,” she writes. She is oppressed by the smile’s place in American (and worldwide) culture, resisting “horrid gleaming white teeth, gloating symmetries”. Above all, she shows how the absence of a smile meddles with the sense of self. Fortunately, she has always been more comfortable observing than being observed (as befits a playwright) and remarks that by maintaining a demure stillness, she has been partly able to disguise her problem. But there is a terrible (and obvious) downside to acting in a withdrawn manner: it makes her withdrawn. Ruhl uses the Bell’s palsy narrative as a cradle within which to rock other subjects, from her postpartum depression to “bed rest” as a historically male-imposed and often undesirable prescription for women, to a moving portrait of her courageous Australian mother-in-law, Elizabeth, who died of cancer a year after the babies were born. And she recounts her meetings with varied medics (some helpful, some shockingly out of order) in search of a cure. At no point does this seem a vanity project. It is, more often, a practical investigation that explores how, when half your face goes on strike, new ways have to be found to do a smile’s work. As the book progresses, Ruhl’s chin-up narrative becomes more distressing as one understands more of what has been involved in staying upbeat. Sometimes, she opts to explain the palsy to people she has not met before. At other times, she relies more on positive sound effects: offering approving murmurs to the students she teaches at Yale’s drama school. And throughout, she is driven by a contradictory purpose: to make peace with her face and to fight on to the point where the left side is able to embark on its uncertain upwards trajectory into a smile. • Smile: The Story of a Face by Sarah Ruhl is published by Vintage in UK (£16.99) and Bodley Head in Australia ($35). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyWith just over a week’s worth of unedifying wrangling left to go in the current transfer window, the coming days promise to be punctuated with no end of rumours and counter-rumours as the last-ditch horse-trading ramps up. Now in Saudi Arabia for warm weather training, team bonding and other quite specific football reasons, Newcastle’s already long shopping list got a little longer during Saturday’s hard-fought win over Leeds, as first Joelinton, then Jamaal Lascelles and finally Paul Dummett limped off with various injuries that could keep them sidelined for the coming weeks. Unwanted by Tottenham, where his decline over the past two seasons has been little short of remarkable, Dele Alli’s “people” are reported to have opened talks with Newcastle on the subject of a loan or permanent move to St James‘ Park. The Magpies remain confident of securing central defender Diego Carlos from Sevilla, who are all too aware of the Premier League club’s desperation for new recruits and are holding out for far more than the £30m currently being offered presumably in the hope of getting far more when the inevitable panic sets in. Having already bought Chris Wood from Burnley, Newcastle are now giving James Tarkowski the glad eye and also hope to measure up Brighton midfielder Yves Bissouma for a club blazer in the coming days. Unsettled Arsenal reserve goalkeeper Bernd Leno remains on their radar but may prefer a move to Inter, who are also interested in securing his services. And in the last of today’s news pertaining to Newcastle, the names of Bayer Leverkusen left-back Mitchel Bakker and Atalanta striker Duvan Zapata continue to be mentioned in conjunction with potential moves to the north east. West Ham are rumoured to be lining up a “shock” £60m bid for England striker Dominic Calvert-Lewin, in a prospective deal that seems unlikely considering it would further enrage already extremely disgruntled Everton fans and almost certainly lead to scenes of outright mutiny in the stands of Goodison Park. The Hammers had been keen on signing Adama Traoré from Wolves but have cooled their interest now he looks certain to sign for Spurs. Meanwhile at the Emirates, Arsenal have upped their bid for Dusan Vlahovic to just shy of £60m but the Fiorentina striker is reported to be holding out for a move to Manchester City, even though Juventus are also interested in getting him on board. Chelsea’s ongoing search for a left-back to fill in for the injured Ben Chilwell continues and Stuttgart’s Borna Sosa is the latest to be linked with a move to Stamford Bridge. No relation to Kaiser from The Usual Suspects, the 24-year-old Croatian would cost them £25m. Currently deputising for Chilwell, Marcos Alonso is wanted by Atlético Madrid and may fancy playing out his twilight years in the Spanish capital – where he grew up – in the unlikely event that Chelsea are willing to let him go. Connor Goldson looks set to leave Ibrox when he becomes a free agent next summer, with Nottingham Forest and West Brom both interested in taking him south of the border. The Rangers defender is free to discuss his future with interested parties outside Scotland this month and has shown no inclination to sign a new deal with his current employers. And finally, Everton have interviewed Vítor Pereira for their vacant manager’s job, with the Portuguese a free agent following his dismissal from Fenerbahce last month. A winner of league titles in Portugal, Greece and China, the 53-year-old is reported to have previously rejected overtures from the Goodison Park hierarchy back in 2019 while managing Shanghai.National disability insurance scheme participants will be able to dip into their core funding to purchase rapid antigen tests for themselves and their support workers, but critics have warned the change is still inadequate. The policy shift, confirmed by the Morrison government on Monday, is aimed at addressing an inequity in the system that meant some NDIS participants who lived in their own home, rather than in a group home, were being forced to spend hundreds of dollars on rapid antigen tests for their support workers, as revealed by Guardian Australia last week. In one particularly shocking case, Carolyn Campbell-McLean, who has muscular dystrophy, and as a result limited lung capacity, had spent $1,300 on tests for her carers, just so they could continue to enter her home and help her with tasks like getting out of bed, showering and dressing herself. However, the new policy still falls short of demands from disability advocacy groups, who say the tests should be free, and was criticised by the federal Labor opposition on Monday. The new scheme means NDIS participants will use their existing “core” budget funding funds to buy the tests. This pool of money is allocated for use on core services, such as support workers, transport and other everyday items related to a person’s disability. The government said NDIS participants would be able to use these existing core funds to buy tests for themselves or their carers. About 18% of all NDIS participants, including Campbell-McLean, are not eligible for the 10 free tests over three months that are being provided to concession card holders, a measure that came into force on Monday. The NDIS minister, Linda Reynolds, said the change to allow participants to buy RATs with their funding was “another example of how we are supporting participants to use their funding flexibly during the Covid-19 pandemic”. “We know that rapid antigen tests are an important tool for ensuring that participants continue to access their disability-related supports,” she said. “NDIS participants can claim rapid antigen tests to ensure their continuity of services.” Campbell-McLean welcomed the change as a “fantastic outcome”, though the Physical Disability Council of NSW, which also raised the issue last week, noted a need to increase plan budgets “when funds are used prematurely to cover this substantial additional cost”. An NDIS spokesperson said participants can “use their existing funds flexibly to purchase rapid antigen tests”. “Plans will not be automatically adjusted – if a participant thinks their plan funds are too low to claim the RAT support, they can contact the NDIA by phone [on]1800 800 110,” the spokesperson said. Max Burt is an advocate who is immunocompromised and has multiple disabilities following a head injury sustained in car crash in London 22 years ago. He now requires daily care and told Guardian Australia he had spent about $1,000 on rapid antigen tests for his team of several support workers. Burt said allowing NDIS participants to use their allocated funds to purchase RATs prompted the question of whether the government would be increasing funding packages to cover the extra costs. “And priority is an issue,” he said. “If the government is not prioritising concession card holders access to RATs via their pharmacist, and is now prioritising teachers and school children with free and available RATs directly supplied to schools, then where does that leave NDIS participants? In the queue with the general public? “Buying them via normal retail channels – left behind at the back of the queue again?” Burt said the free tests for concession card holders, which he was able to access, were insufficient and also not particularly helpful, due to the limited supply. “If you’re in my position as well, in a wheelchair, [going out] to shop at a chemist is just not that easy,” he said. Labor’s NDIS spokesman, Bill Shorten, said rapid antigen tests should be free for all NDIS participants. “It is not the job of NDIS participants to do the Morrison government’s job of continuing services. Providers and carers should be able to access rapid tests easily and at no cost.” Unlike the aged care sector, NDIS providers do not have access to the federal government’s national stockpile of rapid tests, meaning they have been forced to compete with other businesses to source them in the free market. One provider told Guardian Australia this month it had only been able to source seven rapid antigen tests for its entire workforce in Tasmania.Everton are due to hold talks with the former Fenerbahce and Porto manager Vítor Pereira on Monday as they continue their search for a permanent successor to Rafael Benítez. Pereira is out of work and was under consideration by Everton in 2013 and then after Marco Silva’s departure in 2019. He said on the second occasion that he was committed to staying with Shanghai SIPG, whom he had led to the 2018 Chinese Super League title. Pereira has twice won the Portuguese league with Porto and secured the Greek title with Olympiakos. His most recent job, a second stint at Fenerbahce, ended in the sack last December after less than six months, with the club trailing the league leaders Trabzonspor by 14 points. In December 2017 Pereira was hired by 1860 Munich to try to avoid relegation from Germany’s second tier but the club went down in a play-off. Everton are effectively in a relegation battle after losing at home to Aston Villa on Saturday under Duncan Ferguson’s caretaker management. Four points separate them from third-bottom Newcastle, although Everton have a game in hand. Pereira is one of a number of candidates being assessed by Everton. Roberto Martínez was their first choice but the Royal Belgian Football Association rejected a proposal for the Spaniard to combine his role with managing the Premier League club. Wayne Rooney and the former Monaco coach Niko Kovac are also of interest, and Frank Lampard has been interviewed for the vacancy.Some British staff and dependants are being withdrawn from the embassy in Ukraine in response to a growing military threat from Russia, the Foreign Office has said. Officials said there were no specific threats to British diplomats, with about half of the staff in Kyiv reportedly scheduled to come home to the UK. The move follows US officials ordering relatives of embassy staff to leave Ukraine as a Russian invasion could come “at any time”. Russia has repeatedly denied having any plans for military action in Ukraine. The Foreign Office said: “Some embassy staff and dependants are being withdrawn from Kyiv in response to the growing threat from Russia. The British embassy remains open and will continue to carry out essential work.” Britain came under criticism over its failure to withdraw some staff from Afghanistan before the Taliban seizure of Kabul in August. It is likely that British diplomats in Ukraine would be exposed since the UK has taken one of the most prominent roles in sending military equipment including anti-tank missiles to Ukraine. But officials in Kyiv believe the move is too circumspect. A spokesman for the Ukrainian foreign ministry said: “We have taken note of the state department’s decision re departure of family members of US embassy staff. While we respect the right of foreign nations to ensure the safety and security of their diplomatic missions, we believe such a step to be a premature one and an instance of excessive caution.” The EU foreign policy chief, Josep Borrell, said he did not know of plans for EU states to withdraw staff from their embassies, adding there was no need to dramatise the situation. “We are not going to do the same thing because we don’t know any specific reasons. But [the US] secretary [of state, Antony] Blinken will inform us,” Borrell told reporters as he arrived for a meeting with his EU counterparts. Blinken is expected to join the meeting by video link in the afternoon to continue his consultations with his European partners, and report back on the meeting he had with the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, in Geneva on Friday. The German foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, said it was important not to “contribute to further uncertainty in the situation, but it is important to continue to support the Ukrainian government and, above all, to maintain the stability of the country”. But Germany later reversed its position, saying it was allowing diplomats’ family members in Ukraine to leave if they so wished on a voluntary basis. The Kremlin has repeatedly denied planning to invade, but former UK national security adviser Mark Lyall Grant, speaking on BBC radio, said he feared an invasion was imminent because of the build-up of Russian troops in Belarus making an attack on Kyiv more likely. Explaining his belief that diplomatic staff could remain in place in Ukraine, Borrell said: “Negotiations are going on,” adding he thought staff should not leave “unless secretary Blinken gives us an information that justifies a move”. The EU’s foreign ministers are expected to issue a warning to Russia over its troop buildup at Ukraine’s border. They will also discuss the formal written proposals to be sent by Nato to Russia on its proposed agenda for talks. The Foreign Office took the unusual step on Saturday night of naming former Ukrainian MP Yevhen Murayev as a potential Kremlin candidate to take over in Kyiv – a claim dismissed as provocative “nonsense” by Moscow. Dominic Raab, the UK deputy prime minister, said on Sunday there was a very significant risk of a Russian invasion of Ukraine. The UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, is due to travel to Moscow to hold talks with his Russian counterpart. No 10 also issued a warning at the weekend that without a successful combination of deterrence and diplomacy thousands of lives could be lost in a war that would not be confined to conventional arms, but also cyber-attacks. The US embassy in Ukraine is one of the larger American missions in Europe. It has about 900 employees the vast majority of them Ukrainians, some of whom have been with the mission since it opened three decades ago.Only the “findings” of Sue Gray’s report into alleged lockdown-breaking parties at Downing Street will be published, Nadhim Zahawi has said, in another apparent step by the government away from promising full transparency with what she uncovers. The education secretary’s comments come after Dominic Raab, the justice secretary and deputy prime minister, said on Sunday that it would be up to Boris Johnson to decide how much information was released. The keenly awaited report by Gray, a senior civil servant tasked with looking into claims about a series of parties in No 10 and around government during Covid restrictions, is expected to be completed later this week. Asked if it would be published in full, Zahawi told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “So the terms of reference for Sue Gray’s report is that the findings of her report will be made public, and the prime minister has pledged he will come to parliament to then make a statement and be scrutinised by colleagues on the findings of that report.” Asked if that meant it would not be fully released, Zahawi said: “The findings of Sue Gray’s report will be made public – that is the terms of reference. I think that will ensure public confidence. She can follow the evidence wherever it takes her, and she’s doing exactly that.” Asked the same question on Sunday, Raab told the BBC: “Quite the way, the process for it, will be for the prime minister to decide. But … there will be full transparency. He has said he will come back to the Commons and make a statement, so there will be full scrutiny.” When Johnson initially announced an internal investigation into the claims, led by cabinet secretary Simon Case, he told MPs that a copy of Case’s full report would be put in the library of the House of Commons, guaranteeing full access. However, the formal terms of reference say only: “The findings of the investigations will be made public.” Gray took over the process from Case after claims his office also held a social gathering. While it would be expected that personal details of some staff would be removed from any published report, releasing just the findings is likely to exclude evidence such as emails, text messages or transcripts of interviews, or precise details about what happened at any of the alleged gatherings. Government sources have pointed to the outcomes of the investigations into Priti Patel, the home secretary, and Damian Green, the former deputy prime minister, as examples of how such findings tend to be set out. Both ran to less than two pages.Film There are plenty of brilliant political movies – but almost all are satirical and ironic. Frank Capra’s Mr Smith Goes to Washington is different. It inspires you to think well of the political process. And incredibly, it makes that most boring of political manoeuvres – the filibuster – seem heroic. James Stewart’s Mr Smith, the “Mr Smith” of the title, is homely and innocent, but he is a politician, a junior senator. And when he comes to Washington and is tricked and made to look guilty by corrupt veterans of the system, Mr Smith works with that system. By speaking nonstop for 25 hours about American ideals on the floor of the Senate, Mr Smith can impede their crooked plans and prove his own innocence – an almost Christ-like ordeal that results in his vindication. Peter Bradshaw Music Political pop is hard to get right. Some artists, such as Beyoncé and Kendrick Lamar, are adept; other efforts like Katy Perry’s “purposeful pop” and Justin Timberlake’s woodsy wokeness fall flat. But the LA trio Muna’s queer call to arms, I Know a Place, is a good one: this 2016 song was a response to the tragic shooting at Pulse, an LGBTQ+ nightclub in Orlando. It was also a rallying cry: a reminder for queer people to celebrate survival, community and resilience. At a time when hostility towards LGBTQ+ people, notably trans people, remains a pressing concern, this song’s sense of solidarity is as resonant as ever. Alim Kheraj Book Naomi Klein became a star in 1999 with No Logo, her stylish manifesto against globalised consumerism, but her fierce 2007 follow-up remains just as relevant. The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism demonstrates with forensic fury how catastrophes both natural and manmade have provided the excuse for financial predators to remake societies in their wake, from the economic “shock therapy” visited on Latin America during the 1970s to the mass privatisation of Iraqi institutions following the 2003 invasion. Readers may be inspired to apply a similar diagnosis to, for example, the imposition of “austerity” following the financial crisis – and whatever is smuggled in post-Covid. Steven Poole Art The art of environmental protest was born 50 years ago when the great Josef Beuys led his art college students to bless, purify and preserve a woodland outside Düsseldorf. The Grafenberger Wald was under threat to make way for a tennis court. Whatever symbolic power marching through the trees with birch sticks may have had, it certainly created enough publicity to save the wald. Beuys also started the land artwork 7000 Oak Trees, planting trees as a political and artistic act long before the current crisis. Jonathan Jones Stage The knife-edge tips of the wings look like they could carve shapes into your skin. Her injured tail drags behind her. Dressed as a grungy, angelic revolutionary, Emma Frankland (above) stalks the stage in Hearty, a full-bodied cry for the protection of trans women. This solo show paints a broken-down world where activism is branded, bodies are policed and being trans is a visceral danger. With a recent hideous surge in transphobic hate crimes, reality doesn’t feel that far away. At once fierce and vulnerable, Hearty makes you want to fight alongside Frankland, to brave the fireballs, and join the revolution. Kate WyverPlease Do Not Touch the Walrus or Sit on the Iceberg Horniman Museum, Summer 2019 So, I clamber up, on top of the fibreglass plinth, rise from the chevrons of the parquet floor as though it melted into thick-cold waves and I emerge, triumphant and substantial, hear my epic belly boom on the fake ice, hands slapping flatly on the hollow berg, relaunch my fingers as weighty webbed fins before I tackle his avuncular mass, high-five his suedey and ample rump. Together on our tiny island, I offer my new form to brisk expanses, the gritty battlegrounds of arctic beaches. My chest proud and lifted as a dormant volcano. Then my incisors extend, telescopic – tusks prodding at my clavicle bones. Whiskers, these exhilarating bristles of whisker, tickle out from the prow of my titanic mass. We are in tandem, a double-breasted catamaran. We are Rose and Jack on our own luxury boat. And when staff approach with their lanyard spears, their hunters’ walkie-talkies, to stare up at the hull of our little world, our Oscar-nominated forever, I’ll look down through blubbering eyes and briny breathlessness, then whisper in impeccable walrus: I’m flying. Caleb Parkin’s impressive first collection, This Fruiting Body, is described on the jacket as “a playful invitation to a queer ecopoetics that permeates our bodies and speech, our gardens, homes and city suburbs”. Parkin’s playfulness of style is aligned with, but not weighed down by, a serious concern with crossing boundaries and challenging received pieties. Interviewed about his role as Bristol City Poet he remarks on the importance of acknowledging that ecology includes “all the icky stuff” – and the menagerie in This Fruiting Body faithfully investigates spiders, black mould and even a fatberg. This week’s poem focuses on a more conventional species, the walrus, but illustrates Parkin’s balance of wit, passion and humour. Since I remember the walrus in question from long-ago childhood visits to the Horniman Museum, I was delighted to meet him again and witness his apotheosis. For the poem’s narrator, the rules about the exhibit set out in the title are calls to transgression. At first, we might imagine that narrator to be the walrus himself. But the third stanza makes it clear that it’s the human who has climbed the fake iceberg plinth and begun his own metamorphosis to walrus. Now he must “relaunch” his fingers as “weighty webbed fins” before going on to “tackle” the museum walrus, and “high-five his suedey and ample rump”. The pair are soon united on their “tiny island” and the speaker, still concerned with adding more intensely realised physical detail to his animal-self, extends his imagination now to include his surroundings, “the gritty battlegrounds / of arctic beaches”. As if inspired by the iceberg, and launched by the phrases “epic belly” and “titanic mass”, the poem, as it evolves into a love story, finds an unexpected analogy with the encounter in the movie Titanic, where Rose and Jack harmonise ecstatically “in tandem” at the rail of the speeding ship. “I’m flying” are Rose’s words as she stands spread-armed on the ship’s railing. Parkin’s method combines comedy and dignity. The film reference isn’t used to ridicule the creatures in the poem. Instead, the walrus romance seems to work satirically against the melodramatic movie romance: perhaps it also gently targets the overweening human ambition for making epic movies and building unsinkable ships. The poem’s fantasy, also movie-like, lets love triumph over rules and boundaries, but not without likely retribution, as the museum staff approach with their “lanyard spears” and “hunters’ walkie-talkies”. While the narrator has the last words, the “blubbering eyes” might suggest there is only a seized moment of glory and no happy “forever” for this Rose and Jack. We could read the poem as a lightly carried warning about environmentalism as “epic” utopian fantasy. What matters most, though, is the way it brings us so close to the walrus we begin to inhabit its body and feel its sensations. At the poem’s heart there is a real live animal (or two) with fins, tusks and whiskers, celebrated but not romanticised, not (unlike the iceberg) fake.Conservative groups across the US, often linked to deep-pocketed rightwing donors, are carrying out a campaign to ban books from school libraries, often focused on works that address race, LGBTQ issues or marginalized communities. Literature has already been removed from schools in Texas, Pennsylvania, Utah, Virginia and Wyoming. Librarians and teachers warn the trend is on the increase, as groups backed by wealthy Republican donors use centrally drawn up tactics and messaging to harangue school districts into removing certain texts. In October, the Texas state representative Matt Krause sent a list of 850 books to school districts, asking that they report how many copies they have of each title and how much had been spent on those books. The Texas Tribune reported that the books included two by Ta-Nehisi Coates; LGBT Families by Leanne K Currie-McGhee; and ‘Pink is a Girl Color’ … and Other Silly Things People Say, a children’s book by Stacy and Erik Drageset. Krause’s list sparked panic in schools, and by December a district in San Antonio said it was reviewing 414 titles in its libraries. In Pennsylvania, the Central York school board banned a long list of books, almost entirely titles by, or about, people of color, including books by Jacqueline Woodson, Ijeoma Oluo and Ibram X Kendi, and children’s titles about Rosa Parks and Martin Luther King Jr. “Let’s just call it what it is – every author on that list is a Black voice,” one teacher told the York Dispatch. Four high schools in Utah’s Canyons school district removed copies of at least nine books, the Deseret News reported, including Gender Queer by Maia Kobabe; the Bluest Eye, a book by the Pulitzer winner Toni Morrison that addresses racial and gender oppression; and Out of Darkness by Ashley Hope Perez, a story about romance in a racially divided 1930s Texas. Groups purporting to be “grassroots” efforts have frequently led the charge, petitioning school boards or elected officials to remove certain books. Though some of these organizations present themselves as a local effort that sprang up around groups of parents united behind a cause, many of the groups involved in banning books are in fact linked, and backed by influential conservative donors. Most of the books relate to race or gender equality, at a time when some Republicans are mounting an effort to prevent teaching on race in schools by launching a loud campaign against critical race theory, an academic discipline that examines the ways in which racism operates in US laws and society. Deborah Caldwell-Stone, director of the American Library Association’s Office for Intellectual Freedom, said the number of attempts to ban books had soared through 2021. “What’s unique is it appears to be an organized effort by a number of advocacy groups to activate members in local chapters to challenge books in school libraries and public libraries in the United States,” she said. “We’ve noted that there are a number of groups like Moms for Liberty, Parents Defending Education, No Left Turn in Education that have particular views on what is appropriate for young people, and they’re trying to implement their agenda – particularly in schools, but also taking their concerns to public libraries as well.” Caldwell-Stone said ALA received 156 book challenges – an attempt to remove or restrict one or more books – in 2020. In the last three months of 2021 alone, the organization saw 330 book challenges. In most incidents there is a common format. According to the conservative groups, one parent of a child at school has spotted an allegedly unsuitable book, and has raised the alarm. But the movement is far from organic. The name Moms for Liberty might suggest a homely, kitchen-table effort. In reality, Moms for Liberty is associated with other supposed grassroots groups backed by conservative donors, who appear to be driving the book-banning effort. Moms for Liberty groups are promoted on the website of Parents Defending Education (PDE), another conservative group, and in May Moms for Liberty joined with PDE to write a letter to Miguel Cardona, the US education secretary, expressing concerns over federal efforts to include teaching about the consequences of slavery and the contributions of Black Americans in US society. Moms for Liberty did not respond to a request for comment. Asra Nomani, PDE’s vice-president for strategy and investigations, has appeared on Fox News to rail against some books, including Woke Baby and Gender Queer, being in Virginia libraries, and PDE carries a list of books it deems problematic on its website. PDE, which launched in spring of 2021, has emerged as one of the key organizations in the conservative fight for influence in public schools. The group describes itself as a “grassroots organization”, but has ties to deep-pocket conservative money and influence. PDE’s president, Nicole Neilly, was previously the executive director of the Independent Women’s Forum and worked at the Cato Institute, a rightwing thinktank co-founded by Republican mega-donor Charles Koch. The Intercept reported that the IWF has received large donations from Republican donor Leonard Leo, a former vice-president of the Koch-funded Federalist Society who advised Donald Trump on judicial appointments. PDE’s website offers templates as to how aggrieved people can get involved. The group is behind an effort to create a web of coordinated Instagram pages that highlight perceived liberal bias at specific schools, and offers a step-by-step guide to doing the same, from how to create a specific gmail address to match the mission to how to describe the instagram account. The guide advises: “For the ‘full name’ field, use ‘Woke at [school name].’ For the ‘username’ field, use ‘wokeat[school name].’” PDE, which has also railed against critical race theory, even tells parents they should spy on teachers’ online activity to seek incriminating material. “Look at the social media pages of teachers and administrators at your school. They are often quite proud of what they’re doing and sometimes post incriminating statements or materials,” PDE’s website says. Another aim, beyond banning books, is exposed in PDE’s efforts to encourage conservative parents to run for school boards – an often ignored position that wields a considerable amount of power. PDE offers a guide on how parents can run, and while also describing how to gain influence on Parent Teacher Student Associations. It even offers specific questions disgruntled parents can pose to their school boards. PDE did not respond to a request for comment. No Left Turn in Education, whose chapters are promoted on PDE’s website, is another of the groups leading the charge. No Left Turn’s website contains a list of more than 60 books it deems inappropriate. Again, the group has links to deep-pocketed conservatives. The Milwaukee Journal reported that Elana Fishbein, No Left Turn in Education’s founder, has provided free legal representation for parents wishing to challenge school districts. According to Journal, most of those lawyers are affiliated with the Liberty Justice Center and Pacific Legal Foundation, which receive funding from the prominent GOP donor Dick Uihlein, a Wisconsin-based billionaire. No Left Turn in Education did not respond to requests for comment. The banning of books about race or LGBTQ issues does not just affect those communities, said Kim Anderson, executive director of the National Education Association. It also withholds the opportunity for all students to learn “an honest and accurate truth of our history”. “Censoring the full history of America impacts all of us as a country,” Anderson said. “If we’re not willing to embrace the beauty of America, which is that our diversity is our strength, then we weaken the core idea of America. So it’s offensive, certainly, to people of color and other Americans who have traditionally been marginalized, but ultimately we’re short-changing every single student if we don’t tell the truth.” In Texas, Krause, who was running for state attorney general when he released his list of 850 books – he has since dropped out of the race – did not respond to the Guardian’s questions about how he came up with his list of books. Krause told Education Week he chose to act after school boards began reviewing books of “an inappropriate nature”. “None of us wants grossly inappropriately material in our schools,” he said. As the conservative effort has grown, there has been pushback in many states, from authors, teachers, librarians and students. Carolyn Foote, a library advocate who co-founded the group FReadom Fighters to push back against banning efforts, said the conservative efforts represent a “danger to democracy”. “The supreme court protects young people’s right to choose library materials to read as a first amendment right. It also is growing to include more and more titles, which is concerning, and a minority of parents are impacting all students,” Foote said. The Pennsylvania ban was overturned in September 2021 after students protested outside their York County high school and outside school board meetings. In Virginia, high school students managed to overturn the Spotsylvania book ban in similar fashion, while Caldwell-Stone said the ALA will continue to highlight the book-banning efforts. “We don’t oppose the ability of parents to guide their children’s reading,” she said. “What we have deep concerns about is one parent, or one small group of parents, making decisions for an entire community about what is appropriate reading, based on their own moral and religious values.”In 1998, a computer science PhD student called Larry Page submitted a patent for internet search based on an obscure piece of mathematics. The method, known today as PageRank, allowed the most relevant webpages to be found much more rapidly and accurately than ever before. The patent, initially owned by Stanford, was sold in 2005 for shares that are today worth more than $1bn. Page’s company, Google, has a net worth of well over $1tr. It wasn’t Page, or Google’s cofounder Sergey Brin, who created the mathematics described in the patent. The equation they used is at least 100 years old, building on properties of matrices (mathematical structures akin to a spreadsheet of numbers). Similar methods were used by Chinese mathematicians more than two millennia ago. Page and Brin’s insight was to realise that by calculating what is known as the stationary distribution of a matrix describing connections on the world wide web, they could find the most popular sites more rapidly. Applying the correct equation can suddenly solve an important practical problem, and completely change the world we live in. The PageRank story is neither the first nor the most recent example of a little-known piece of mathematics transforming tech. In 2015, three engineers used the idea of gradient descent, dating back to the French mathematician Augustin-Louis Cauchy in the mid-19th century, to increase the time viewers spent watching YouTube by 2,000%. Their equation transformed the service from a place we went to for a few funny clips to a major consumer of our viewing time. From the 1990s onwards, the financial industry has been built on variations of the diffusion equation, attributed to a variety of mathematicians including Einstein. Professional gamblers make use of logistic regression, developed by the Oxford statistician Sir David Cox in the 50s, to ensure they win at the expense of those punters who are less maths-savvy. There is good reason to expect that there are more billion-dollar equations out there: generations-old mathematical theorems with the potential for new applications. The question is where to look for the next one. A few candidates can be found in mathematical work in the latter part of the 20th century. One comes in the form of fractals, patterns that are self-similar, repeating on many different levels, like the branches of a tree or the shape of a broccoli head. Mathematicians developed a comprehensive theory of fractals in the 80s, and there was some excitement about applications that could store data more efficiently. Interest died out until recently, when a small community of computer scientists started showing how mathematical fractals can produce the most amazing, weird and wonderful patterns. Another field of mathematics still looking for a money-making application is chaos theory, the best-known example of which is the butterfly effect: if a butterfly flaps its wings in the Amazon, we need to know about it in order to predict a storm in the North Atlantic. More generally, the theory tells us that, in order to accurately predict storms (or political events), we need to know about every tiny air disturbance on the entire planet. An impossible task. But chaos theory also points towards repeatable patterns. The Lorenz attractor is a model of the weather that, despite being chaotic, does produce somewhat regular and recognisable patterns. Given the uncertainty of the times we live in, it may be time to revive these ideas. Some of my own research has focused on self-propelled particle models, which describe movements similar to those of bird flocks and fish schools. I now apply these models to better coordinate tactical formations in football and to scout players who move in ways that create more space for themselves and their teammates. Another related model is current reinforced random walks, which capture how ants build trails, and the structure of slime mould transportation networks. This model could take us from today’s computers – which have central processing units (CPUs) that make computations and separate memory chips to store information – to new forms of computation in which computation and memory are part of the same process. Like ant trails and slime mould, these new computers would benefit from being decentralised. Difficult computational problems, in particular in AI and computer vision, could be broken down in to smaller sub-problems and solved more rapidly. Whenever there is a breakthrough application of an equation, we see a whole range of copycat imitations. The current boom in artificial intelligence is primarily driven by just two equations – gradient descent and logistic regression – put together to create what is known as a neural network. But history shows that the next big leap forward doesn’t come from repeatedly using the same mathematical trick. It comes instead from a completely new idea, read from the more obscure pages of the book of mathematics. The challenge of finding the next billion-dollar equation is not simply one of knowing every page of that book. Page spotted the right problem to solve at the right time, and he persuaded the more theoretically inclined Brin to help him find the maths to help them. You don’t need to be a mathematical genius yourself in order to put the subject to good use. You just need to have a feeling for what equations are, and what they can and can’t do. Mathematics still holds many hidden intellectual and financial riches. It is up to all of us to try to find them. The search for the next billion-dollar equation is on. David Sumpter is professor of applied mathematics at the University of Uppsala, Sweden, and author of The Ten Equations that Rule the World: And How You Can Use Them TooConsistency often gets overlooked. We can be as oblivious to the employee who comes to work on time and performs tasks without complaint as we are to a member of a theater’s backstage crew. Yet Tuesday night, when he takes the ice in Elmont, New York against the New York Islanders, Philadelphia Flyers defenseman Keith Yandle will get his moment in the spotlight. Yandle will break a 36-year-old record by playing in his 965th consecutive NHL game. Yandle will pass Doug Jarvis, whose streak included all 964 games of a 13-year career with three teams. “That’s an amazing accomplishment,” Flyers interim coach Mike Yeo said. “For a record like this, a lot goes into it: the commitment to play through injuries, through pain, through sickness, and to make sure that you bring the consistency night after night.” Yandle offered a more subdued response. “Obviously, anytime you can have a record, as I would imagine, it’s pretty cool,” he said. “But for me, it’s just about being available and being ready to go and play every night.” Yandle’s response reflects his upbringing. His father, Bud, drove delivery trucks for FedEx for 30 years, making round trips in the middle of the night. His mother, Patti, worked as a FedEx dispatcher despite suffering from rheumatoid arthritis. “Definitely my parents had a huge, huge influence on me,” said Yandle, 35. “You know, just seeing hard work, seeing my parents going to work every day. My brother and sister are the same way. You don’t have to look too far for some great influences.” Yandle displayed that diligence early. As a teenager in suburban Boston, he found motivation in trying to surpass another defenseman his age, Dan McGoff, a local star who attracted attention from scouts. “He was probably the best defenseman at the ‘86 year level,” Yandle said, referring to his age group’s birth year. “He was the kind of a guy that I wanted to be as good as or better than, and he set the bar high.” But the turning point in Yandle’s young career came at Cushing Academy, a college prep school about 65 miles northwest of Boston. While there, he met Hall of Famer Ray Bourque, who spent most of his career with the Boston Bruins. Bourque – the NHL’s all-time leader in points by a defenseman – was one of Cushing’s assistant coaches. Yandle, a defenseman also known for offense, found the perfect mentor. “The most important person was definitely Ray Bourque,” Yandle said. “Having a guy that is arguably the best defenseman ever to be able to help you out in high school when you’re learning the game and falling in love with it was pretty cool.” Bourque’s lessons reaped dividends. As a junior in 2003-04, Yandle had 14 goals and 48 assists in 37 games. The next season, he made the All-New England first team after accumulating 14 goals and 40 assists in 34 games. In June 2005, the then-Phoenix Coyotes chose Yandle in the fourth round of that year’s draft. “I was aware of his playmaking ability, his ability to create offense with his vision and the way he moves on the power play,” said Yeo, who coached against Yandle before joining the Flyers. “He’s got a real unique ability to see the ice and to put people in a position to create offense.” Yandle used those skills to dominate his lone season in the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League, one of three in the Canadian Hockey League, the highest level of Canadian amateur hockey. In 66 games with New Brunswick’s Moncton Wildcats in 2005-06, Yandle led CHL defensemen with 25 goals and 59 assists, both team records. With Yandle’s help, Moncton amassed 52 wins and 107 points, two more team records, won the QMJHL championship and reached the finals of the Memorial Cup, the CHL championship. Yandle not only received awards as the QMJHL’s best defenseman and its defensive player of the year. The CHL also made him its defensive player of the year and a member of its First All-Star Team. Yandle began the 2006-07 season with the Coyotes before being sent to the minor leagues but returned to stay in December 2007. On 26 March 2009, Yandle began his streak by playing in a 3-2 win against the Edmonton Oilers. Before being traded to the New York Rangers in March 2015, Yandle twice led the Coyotes in points, played in two All-Star Games and helped them reach the 2012 Western Conference finals. Nearly seven years after the trade, Yandle still ranks second in franchise records for consecutive games played, 448. But in June 2016, the Rangers sent the impending free agent to the Florida Panthers, who signed him to a seven-year contract worth $44.5m. Nearly eight weeks into his first season with his new club, an injury threatened Yandle’s streak. Yandle suffered an unspecified lower-body injury on 5 December against Boston and left the game in the first period. Tom Lowe, the Panthers’ coach and general manager at the time, said Yandle would be out “for a while.” Eric Hornick, a statistician on the Islanders’ broadcasts, tweeted more definitively: “Yandle streak ends tomorrow.” Yet on 6 December, Yandle played nearly 24 minutes during a 3-2 overtime loss in Philadelphia. That total represented the second-largest amount of ice time for any player on either team, not counting goaltenders. Then on 23 November 2019, Yandle lost nine teeth after a puck hit him in the mouth during the first period of a game against the Carolina Hurricanes. But Yandle not only returned for the third period. He underwent emergency dental surgery the following morning and played against the Buffalo Sabres that night, compiling a game-high 23 minutes, 38 seconds on the ice. “He has never missed a game, and I have never played with a player that has never missed a game, or at least hasn’t for this long,” Panthers defenseman Aaron Ekblad said. Not only has Yandle’s durability made an impression. “Every day he comes to the rink, and every day is a good day,” Yeo said. “Obviously, our games are filled with stress, pressure, lots of emotion. So to be able to come to the rink and for things to be fun, to be able to look ahead, as opposed to not looking in the past if you had a bad day the day before, I think that’s beneficial to everybody.” Yandle’s former teammates in Florida noticed. “He is one of the funniest guys I have played with,” forward Jonathan Huberdeau added. “He always made us laugh in the locker room. He’s good to be around, loves everyone and it is great to have him as a teammate and as a friend. He will do anything for you.” Yet beyond the humor lies the secret to Yandle’s streak. “I think he is such a pro, the way he approaches games,” Huberdeau said. “He was a great leader with us, always prepared to work. He keeps that locker room ready before games.” With Yandle, leadership involved teaching. “In all situations, you can go to him and learn something new,” Ekblad said. “The impact of knowledge and his wisdom on and off the ice is endless.” Yandle played in his third All-Star Game in 2019 but with the pandemic limiting revenue and forcing a tighter salary cap, the Panthers bought out the final two years of his contract in July, making him a free agent. The defenseman then signed a one-year contract for $900,000 with Philadelphia. Once Yandle breaks the record, he might not have it for long if he misses any action. The Coyotes’ Phil Kessel trails Yandle by 23 games. But regardless of how long Yandle owns the record, Yeo believes his legacy extends beyond numbers. “You’ll never find anybody that didn’t say he’s one of the best teammates ever,” Yeo said. “He is a very, very highly respected person around the league, within our group. In a game where you have to battle, you have to compete, there’s competition within your group, there’s competition against you, that’s not an easy thing to bring day after day, but he’s able to do that. “Obviously, that’s something to be very proud of.”This hypnotic meditation on modern warfare from Éléonore Weber is an experimental cine-essay that feels closer to a gallery installation than a documentary. Watching it is a bit of a test of concentration: 75 minutes of helicopter airstrike footage from American and French missions in Iraq and Afghanistan. Clip after clip of pilots following what’s on the ground hundreds of metres below. Who is that in their crosshairs: a Taliban fighter holding a Kalashnikov or a farmer with a rake? Farmers know that they get mistaken for fighters, so run and hide their tools when they hear helicopters. Which of course makes them look suspicious. In the cockpit, we hear American voices: “Request permission to engage.” “We got a guy with an RPG.” This is the notorious video WikiLeaks dubbed Collateral Murder, a US airstrike filmed from an Apache helicopter in 2007. The rocket-propelled grenade launcher turned out to be a camera tripod belonging to a Reuters photographer, who was one of a dozen civilians killed in the attack. It’s impossible to watch and not think of computer games. “Kill! Kill! Kill” we hear in another video – you can almost feel the itch to shoot everything that moves. Most of the footage here shows night-time missions. Like the pilots, you want to make sense of what’s happening below – but there’s no sound. And seen through a thermal camera, people are just glowing, blurry figures in the dark. Then comes the strike and they drop like sacks on the ground, shapeless. Soon all their human warmth will soon be gone, and they will become invisible to the camera. This is an interesting film, though it might work better projected on to the white wall of a gallery. And maybe it’s the translation from French, but Weber’s morally weary voiceover (read by actor Nathalie Richard) is a bit clunky in places. • There Will Be No More Night is available on 25 January on Mubi.Historically, Britain has been timid about table condiments. Salt and pepper are the standard duo in the UK, while an exhilarating array of flavourings is deployed globally to tweak cooked foods: traditional spices, evolving spice mixes, clever powders created by imaginative chefs. In deep midwinter, what could be better than sprinkling a dash of vibrant colour across your meals? Here are 22 ways to spice up your food in 2022. Dehydrated chicken skin “It will transform chips, fish, boring salads, anything,” enthuses Sam Grainger, the chef-owner at Belzan in Liverpool. On a greaseproof tray, flatten chicken skin, salt it and scatter with garlic and thyme. Place baking paper on top and a tray to weigh it down. Oven roast at 170C (150C fan)/335F/gas 3½ for 40 minutes, until the skin is crisp. Remove the top tray and paper, and continue to dry the skin in the oven at about 75C fan for a further eight hours. Let it cool on kitchen towels to absorb any oil. Pat dry. Using a blender, blitz the skin and a little coarse salt to a fine powder. Portion out your batch of powder – you could use an ice-cube tray or clingfilm “twists” – and freeze in an airtight container. Sumac “On Iranian tables, you’ll find salt, pepper and a shaker of lemony sumac to add floral acidity to dishes,” says Marwa Alkhalaf, the chef at Nutshell in London. Alkhalaf namechecks the sumac – a powder ground from the dried fruit of the sumac shrub – from Anjoman and Persia Food. “I like its sweet-sour flavour on ice-cream and fruit.” Furikake “It’s very popular in Japan,” says Masaki Sugisaki, the chef-owner at Dinings SW3 in London. Furikake is normally used to transform steamed rice, but this crunchy, umami blend of sesame seeds and seaweed, seasoned with slow-roasted fish or egg, is a potential pick-me-up for drab salads or tuna-topped baked potatoes, too. Sugisaki rates the Noritama brand. Dukkah This Egyptian creation pivots around nutty flavours (sesame, almond, hazelnut, pumpkin, chickpea), toasted with herbs and spices (mint, cumin, coriander), which are pounded into a powder or a crunchier, chunky consistency. “Every family has their ratios and spice preferences,” says Mitshel Ibrahim, the chef-owner at Ombra in London. Dukkah was traditionally used as hummus dressing or to top dipping oils for breads and meze vegetables. But its “fragrant, gentle spice” is a versatile addition to breakfast eggs, soups, couscous and fried fish. Ibrahim recommends the stockist Persepolis, “a little shop of Middle Eastern wonders” in Peckham, south-east London, that ships nationwide. The tagline for its dukkah is: “So good you’ll want it on everything.” Gremolata This chiffonade of finely chopped garlic, lemon zest and flat-leaf parsley brings a fresh, savoury sheen to a number of dishes, says Esther Miglio, a co-owner of OWT in Leeds: “It works brilliantly on stews, fried chicken, roast vegetables, through salads.” Adjust ratios to taste, but two-thirds garlic cloves to one-third fresh parsley and the zest of one lemon will make gremolata for four to six people. Refrigerate for up to three days. Achar masala Primarily a pickling mix, this crunchy combo of salt, chilli, asafoetida, mustard and fenugreek seeds, bound with a little oil, doubles as a dry Gujarati condiment. “It’s used on rice and dal,” says Mayur Patel, a co-owner of the Bundobust restaurants in northern England. “When I was a kid, my mum would smash up Seabrook’s ready salted crisps – their crinkles hold the masala better – and sprinkle achar and lemon juice into the packet. We’d have that on white-bread sandwiches.” In south India, “gunpowder”, or milagai podi, is considered similarly useful. A seasoned mix of roasted, ground coconut and lentils, it is best known for flavouring potatoes, but Avinash Shashidhara, the head chef at Pahli Hill in London says: “We use it on everything, even on ghee-buttered toast.” Powdered seaweed A fantastic salt alternative, saysGrainger: “It gives another layer, umami and flavour impact, without tasting like pure salt.” In a blender, with a little salt to help the grind, blitz sheets of seaweed (“nori or dulse work best”) into fine dust. “It’s great on fish or vegetable dishes.” Dunn’s River all-purpose seasoning From the US seafood seasoning Old Bay (a favourite of Ravinder Bhogal, the chef-owner at Jikoni in London) to lapsang souchong salt, there are numerous ways to titivate chips. A moreish mix of paprika, mustard and onion powder (among other spices), Dunn’s River’s all-purpose seasoning is recommended by Michelle Miah, a co-owner of the London restaurant Rudie’s Jerk Shack: “Some seasonings can be salty or overly flavoursome. Dunn’s has balance.” Phrik pon Roast, ground chillies complete khruang phrung, a quartet of Thai table condiments (including sugar, fish sauce and vinegar-pickled chillies) that enable endless customisation. Andrew Chongsathien, the owner of Brother Thai in Cardiff, uses phrik pon’s “exciting” smoky spice instead of orthodox chilli flakes. In a wok, roast long red dried chillies (shorter ones will be hotter) on a medium-high heat for three minutes, ensuring they do not blacken (open a window first). “When you start coughing, they’re done,” says Chongsathien. “When cool, grind the chillies in a pestle and mortar. I prefer coarse flakes.” In an airtight container, “they keep for ever”. Shichimi tōgarashi With its chilli heat, citrus peel, sansho pepper and roasted sesame savouriness, this aromatic, seven-ingredient topping is essential in Japan. “In good versions, you taste all the flavours in one,” says Kaori Simpson, the chef-owner at Harajuku Kitchen in Edinburgh. Use tōgarashi on noodles, soups, tempura and fried chicken, but not ramen: “It’s a no-no on Japanese versions of Chinese foods; instead, you have white pepper and chilli oil.” Espelette “Black pepper is too aggressive,” says Josh Overington, the chef at Le Cochon Aveugle in York. He uses the “bittersweet, elegant heat” of this Basque chilli pepper. Traditionally used to cure jamón, espelette is great on eggs, asparagus, grilled chicken and bland foods, where its subtlety can shine. Gochugaru This sun-dried, ground Korean chilli, which gives kimchi its red colour, comes in a variety of consistencies and heats, but its “bright, fruity, slightly smoky flavour” makes it a versatile ingredient and table condiment, says Judy Joo, the chef-owner of the Seoul Bird restaurants in London. “I sprinkle it on everything from pizza to veggies,” says Joo. “Store it in your freezer to keep it zesty.” Cumin Used to season everything from boiled eggs to roast lamb, ground cumin and salt are the staple Moroccan table condiments, says Nargisse Benkabbou, a chef and the author of the cookbook Casablanca. Cayenne pepper is also offered – “to add heat without too much flavour”. Paprika “Agridulce [a Spanish sweet-and-hot paprika mix] is used on every fried egg of ours,” says Ben Wright, the owner of Porta in Chester. It also gives a smoky kick to fried potatoes or octopus. Paprika is big in Romanian cooking, too. Irina Georgescu, the author of the cookbook Carpathia, uses the smoked version alongside salt and pepper: “Sprinkle on potato salads, omelettes, fried fish and roast vegetables, especially carrots or parsnips, where spice – not salt – complements their flavour.” Chinese five-spice salt “I’m a big fan of Cantonese-Vietnamese ‘spicy salt’ – classic five-spice with salt – used as a dip for fried and grilled poultry,” says Lap-Fai Lee, a Birmingham-based restaurant consultant and food tutor. “A good cook will make this fresh, doing enough for that meal.” In a hot pan, toast salt for 30 seconds with whole Sichuan peppercorns, cinnamon or cassia, star anise, cloves and fennel seeds. The ratio is 2:1 salt to five-spice (the spices combined in equal amounts). For extra oomph, add MSG powder in equal quantity to one of the spices. “It’s not the same without it,” says Lee. Grind the mix into a fine salt and dip your meat delicately as you eat. Sal de gusano A Mexican salt made by roasting so-called “worms” (caterpillar larvae) found on the agave plant, then mixing them with salt and sometimes chillies. “I add it where I want smoky depth,” says Shaun Hurrell, the chef-owner at Barrio Comida in Durham. That might be sweetcorn, a steak or popcorn. Sal de gusano is available from Cool Chile Co. Burnt onion powder “A versatile workhorse,” says Alex Rushmer, the chef at Vanderlyle, a plant-focused restaurant in Cambridge. Peel red or white onions, separate the “petals” on a roasting tray and bake them in a process of “dehydration, caramelisation and controlled burning” at 160-190C (140C-170C fan)/325-375F/gas 3-5 for approximately one hour, until dried and dark brown. Keep an eye on their progress: “They should turn to powder when you squeeze them in your hand.” Blitz to a fine powder in a blender, store in a dark, airtight container for two weeks, then “sprinkle on anything you want to taste oniony. It’s an awesome seasoning for roasted nuts and would be great over white pizza, or sprinkled on a cheese crouton on french onion soup.” Za’atar This fusion of sumac, dried thyme, toasted sesame and salt (“characteristically bright and fresh, earthy and zesty,” says Calvin von Niebel, the executive chef at the Ottolenghi restaurants in London) is terrific when used to finish seafood, dusted over labneh or on pitta pieces or chips. Tajín This zingy combo of chillies, salt and dehydrated lime (it is hard to find here but available online) is ubiquitous in Mexico. “It’s found in fine restaurants, at home on popcorn, on street stalls mixed with fruit or veggies. I love it on a grated carrot, beetroot and jicama yam slaw,” says Adriana Cavita, who will launch her eponymous London restaurant in spring. Yaji Commonly retailed as “suya spice”, after the west African grilled meat skewers it regularly dresses, yaji comes in several varieties. It has core ingredients – chilli and onion powders, ginger, paprika and cloves – but there have been additions as its fame has spread from northern Nigeria. Garlic, explains Adejoké Bakare, the chef-owner at Chishuru in London, “was not common in the old days”. There is a specific yaji for cooking sauces (this includes dawadawa, fermented locust bean), while peanut-boosted yaji-kuli is used on those suya kebabs, hot off the grill. “It adds texture to the meat,” says Bakare, who grew up using basic yaji to season salads or, in combination with mai shanu butter, rice pancakes and couscous. Nut parmesan “A super-savoury seasoning with a cheesy nutritional-yeast flavour, and I add chilli for a kick,” says Bettina Campolucci Bordi, the author of the vegan cookbook Happy Food. To make a 75g sample, blitz 30g each of hazelnuts and almond flour with half a teaspoon each of salt and nutritional yeast, adding chilli flakes to taste. Refrigerate in an airtight container for up to two weeks. “I keep it handy to season soups, pastas and roast veg, or as a toast-topping.” Chaat masala This tangy, spice mix (key ingredients: dried mango and black salt) is, of course, used in the potato, chickpea and gram-salad-cum-snack chaat, but it also seasons “everything fried”, says Gouranga Bera, the chef at Curry Leaf Café in Brighton. “Add chaat to pakoras and bhajis when they’re crisp, so the spices stick. Its sweet, sour, spicy taste is also delicious on grilled meats with lime or lemon juice.” Chaat masala’s addition of a “savoury note” to fruit salads has been a “revelation” for Curry Leaf’s co-owner Euan Sey, who suggests trying MDH’s chunky chaat masala as a premixed version: “I’m something of a fruit dodger, but I love fruit chaat.”The banknote printer De La Rue has issued a profit warning after suffering from higher Covid-19 costs, including staff absences and computer chip shortages. The company’s adjusted operating profit for the year to 26 March will be between £36m and £40m rather than the £45m to £47m expected by investment bank analysts, it said in trading update. It added that the pandemic would probably cause “incremental headwinds” for the next financial year. Shares in the company, which is listed on the London Stock Exchange, plummeted by 28% in the first hour of trading to hit their lowest since May 2020, during the early months of pandemic-induced market turmoil. De La Rue said profits were hit by “substantially increased employee absences in our manufacturing facilities globally” caused by the Delta and then Omicron coronavirus variants. More recently it has suffered from the chip shortages that have hit industries ranging from mobile phone manufacturers to carmakers, as well as shortages of chemicals and solvents used to produce its plastic polymer banknotes. The company buys the chemicals at spot prices, which are four times higher than they were in early 2020. De La Rue is a City stalwart, with roots in printing stretching back to 1813 in a newspaper in Guernsey and a London stock market listing since 1947. However, it was struggling with a series of setbacks even before the pandemic, including warning in 2019 it could go out of business after losing out to a Franco-German rival on a contract to print the UK’s post-Brexit blue passports. Clive Vacher, a former aerospace executive brought in as De La Rue’s boss in October 2019, insisted on Monday that the company’s turnaround plan – which has already included shutting a factory at Gateshead and selling its passports business – was still working but that it had been delayed by a year. Vacher said: “Despite the macro challenges that are delaying aspects of the turnaround plan, De La Rue continues to increase adjusted operating profit in both divisions year on year, and the plan anticipates this to continue going forward. “While this trading update is disappointing, it should be seen as a delay to reaching our turnaround plan objectives, rather than indicating that a change of direction is required.” He pointed to cost cuts, understood to total £36m in the almost two years since February 2020, and argued that there is still underlying growth in demand. “The markets in which we operate, and our position in them, remain strong, and we continue to execute substantial investment for the future,” Vacher said.Alizé Cornet has played in the main draw at 60 consecutive grand slams. She could yet break Ai Sugiyama’s record of 62 before the year is out. And that would be the definition of perfect timing, because the French world No 61 has indicated 2022 will probably be her last on tour. The other thing about Cornet is that through those previous 59 appearances she had never made it to a single quarter-final. The closest she came was at the 2009 Australian Open – on this very court – when she led Dinara Safina 5-2 in the third set but squandered two match points and lost it 7-5. She was 19 then; it is difficult to believe she is only 32 now. On Monday, back on Rod Laver Arena, she did what she had never done before. After a marathon slugfest under the searing sun, Cornet beat Simona Halep 6-4, 3-6, 6-4, booked her spot in the last eight against American Danielle Collins, then allowed herself to cry. “Thirteen years later … it feels amazing,” said Cornet, whose longevity stretches back to 2006 when she made her grand slam debut at Roland Garros aged 15. “The battle I had with Simona today with this heat. After 30 minutes we were both dying on the court. We kept going for two and a half hours with all our hearts. “Congrats to Simona because I know she struggled a lot, and I admire this player so much. She is such a fighter, an example for me. To be here today and go to my first quarter-final is just a dream come true. It’s never too late to try again.” By 4pm the mercury had climbed to 33 degrees celsius and the heat was clearly a problem for both players. During a change of ends Cornet sat with a bag of ice on her head, held out her hand and watched it quiver. “My brain was already overloaded, my vision was not clear anymore,” she said. “My hands were shaking and I was like: ‘Oh my god, how am I going to do this?’ after only 30 minutes. But I thought on the other side of the court she was not feeling much better than me.” It was true. Between many points during the first set Halep was bent over, leaning on her racket for physical support. “I felt sick, felt a little bit dizzy,” she said afterwards. The rallies were long – the highest being 28 shots – and Halep was doing the lion’s share of the running. She repeatedly hit the ball straight to Cornet, who returned it with more variety, including some deft down-the-line winners at full stretch. Before this match, Cornet had not won an opening set in the fourth round of a major in five attempts. With that psychological hurdle overcome she appeared on her way. Until, with little warning, her form dropped off a cliff. She smacked the ball wildly, served four double-faults, lost two service games to love. Halep, now the aggressor and taking the ball on the rise, won five successive games and 16 straight points to triumph in the second set and send this punishing, all-consuming opus to a decider. “I was close to just giving up because I was exhausted, how I looked actually,” Halep said. “But I felt like she’s starting to [go] missing and I just stayed there. I fought for every ball but with not much confidence … it was a little turnaround but then in the end was not enough. “It’s been a tough battle, and actually she was a little bit stronger than me in the end. All the credit to her for this victory.” That third stanza stayed on serve aside from a single break, something of an anomaly in a match featuring a total of 12 breaks at six apiece. That last one belonged to Cornet to put her up 4-3 and, although Halep saved two match points thereafter, the narrative had just about reached its conclusion. For the 14th seed it was a comeback within a career comeback that ultimately fell short. Halep’s revival has been a refreshing storyline this southern hemisphere summer. The Romanian former world No 1’s seven-year streak inside the top 10 ended in an injury-ruined 2021, during which she sat out the French Open and was unable to defend her Wimbledon title. She started this year ranked 20th and unsure of her future, then won her first eight matches to rise to 15th. “I’m super happy with the way I have been here in Australia,” she said. “I struggled a lot last year, and the way I got up it’s looking really good. I’m happy about that, and I will take only the positives.” As if one feelgood story wasn’t enough, late into the Melbourne evening at just past midnight local time, there was another upset in the women’s singles that almost mirrored the earlier fairytale, the second seed Aryna Sabalenka falling 5-7, 6-2, 7-6 (7) to 36-year-old Estonian Kaia Kanepi. Sabalenka, who served 15 double faults, saved four match points in the 10th game of the deciding set but Kanepi, who is ranked a lowly 115th, prevailed in the tie-break to reach the quarter-finals in Melbourne for the first time. In the last eight, she will take on another first-time Melbourne quarter-finalist in seventh seed Iga Swiatek, who came through her first big test of the tournament, beating Sorana Cirstea 5-7, 6-3, 6-3.There is, we are told in the Daily Mail, “fury” over changes to the Highway Code. There is “confusion” among road users. Cyclists and pedestrians will, the more breathless news coverage intimates, have carte blanche to weave across the highways, with drivers held culpable for every mishap. This is, of course, nonsense. After a weekend of yet more misleading coverage, and with the new rules due to come into effect later this week, here’s a brief, potted guide to what will change – and what will not. Cyclists won’t be “in the middle of the road” One of the sillier weekend headlines, from the Sunday Times, suggested just this. And as I’m sure the headline writer knew well, the Highway Code simply says cyclists should use the centre of the lane, and even then only at certain times, for example approaching junctions or on narrow sections of roads, where a car overtaking would cause danger. This is a change to the code, but it’s not new, or even new guidance. Cyclists have been formally advised for years to take what is known as the “primary position” at such moments. There is no new rule on riding two abreast The new text just makes it clearer. The old version says people should “never ride more than two abreast, and ride in single file on narrow or busy roads”, which was slightly vague and a bit sweeping. The code will now say: “You can ride two abreast and it can be safer to do so, particularly in larger groups or when accompanying children or less experienced riders.” Hopefully over time more drivers will understand why it can be safer. Note to the Sunday Times: the rules do not “encourage” riding two abreast. There is no new rule on not having to use cycle lanes Another slightly excitable paragraph from the Sunday Times story said that the new Highway Code would mean cyclists are no longer obliged to use bike lanes when one is provided. But this was the case anyway. The language has simply been made clearer, saying cyclists “may exercise their judgment and are not obliged to use them”. There is a tweak to priority for pedestrians at crossings One of the most debated changes is that drivers about to turn into a junction should now give way to pedestrians “crossing or waiting to cross” that road. That’s what good drivers do anyway, but it is a change to the previous version, which said pedestrians had priority only “if they have started to cross”. As anyone will know if, say, they have walked through a city with a small child, or a frail older person, it can be daunting to have to step out into the road just to claim a place to cross. Many changes just formalise basic courtesy One fairly long new section describes actions you would hope were everyday behaviour for any driver, for example to not turn at a junction “if to do so would cause [a] cyclist, horse rider or horse-drawn vehicle going straight ahead to stop or swerve”. Similarly, it sets out minimum space requirements for overtaking cyclists, and also for pedestrians and horse riders. Another new element says that in slow-moving traffic, drivers should allow pedestrians and cyclists to cross in front of them. It’s not just drivers who are asked to be considerate For example, a new instruction notes that cyclists should give way to pedestrians on shared pathways, and to horse riders on bridleways – again, something that should be happening anyway. More widely, the updated Highway Code sets out the “hierarchy of road users”, making the uncontroversial point that quicker and/or heavier modes of travel should be especially careful for those who are more vulnerable. While this, as the code says, “most strongly applies” to those in charge of a motorised vehicle, cyclists should be careful for horses, and everyone should be careful for pedestrians, especially children, older people, or people with disabilities. Finally: it’s not the fault of cyclists if drivers don’t know this Much of the negative coverage of the new Highway Code has focused on supposed confusion and ignorance. And I’m sure a good publicity campaign would do something. But to reiterate the earlier point, much of this is standard good sense and courtesy anyway, while other elements, such as the primary position and riding two abreast, have been in the rules for many years but are still routinely unknown to drivers. Maybe the changes to the code aren’t the problem?My brother-in-law Nicholas Donnelly, who has died aged 83, was an actor best known for the role of Mr MacKenzie in the BBC television series Grange Hill. From 1985 to 1993, he played the Scottish woodwork teacher in the fictional north London comprehensive, a popular character for a generation of children. His other roles included 16 years as Sgt Johnny Wills in the BBC television police series Dixon of Dock Green, from 1960 to 1976. This began as a walk-on part but he persuaded the director to let him develop the role. Nick was a Londoner, born in Kensington to Irish parents. He enjoyed telling stories of how at the start of his career he waylaid directors for parts. If they had said casually they would see him, he held them to it. His contemporaries and friends included Tommy Steele and Lionel Bart, young men enjoying the jazz clubs. A lifelong supporter of Queens Park Rangers, Nick was amused one day, taking his sons to a match, when the fans started whistling the Dixon theme tune: An Ordinary Copper. He was also in The Saint, the 1960s television thriller series starring Roger Moore, and his film roles ranged from the horror thriller Venom (1981) to the comedy Carry on Sergeant (1958). Nick was the second of four children born to Margaret (nee Barry) and James Donnelly, who had left Waterford and Carlow respectively for west London, where they met. James had a window cleaning business in Bayswater, Maida Vale and Little Venice, and Margaret was catering manager at a girls’ prep school. The family was bombed out twice in the blitz. Nick aged two was dug out of the rubble. His mother steeled herself as she told a rescuer: “If he is dead, you can tell me.” When someone said a toddler had asked for “Kinkie”, Nick’s name for his sister Peggy, she knew he was alive. He went to what was then Cardinal Vaughan grammar school in Holland Park. Surprisingly for those of us who knew Nick as a gentle soul, he is still on the disciplinary ledger. He threw something in a lesson at a bully who had made fun of a pupil who did not know the answer to a question. Nick got the cane. But later the headmaster gave him an apple because he had immediately owned up to the crime. While stationed in Germany for national service in the late 1950s, Nick met his wife, Alrun Sauré, a Berliner. They married in 1959 and settled in Twickenham, where they had two sons and twin daughters. They were married for over 62 years. In 1993, he and Alrun retired to Hastings, where he became a special minister of his Catholic church, St Mary Star of the Sea. He was a member of the Knights of St Columba and the Catenians. Nick died suddenly. He had not been ill. He went to sleep on a Saturday night, and did not wake up. A happy man, he was a gracious host and great raconteur. Nick is survived by Alrun, his sons, James and Barry, his daughter Abigail, five grandchildren, his sister, Peggy, and brothers, John and Martin. His daughter Alexandra died in 2016.Polish senators plan to draft a law that would regulate the use of surveillance technology in the country, after hearing testimony of how the invasive Pegasus spyware has been used against a number of government critics. Poland is the latest country where Pegasus, a surveillance tool developed by Israeli company NSO, appears to have been used for political purposes. Pegasus allows the operator to take control of a target’s mobile device, to access all data even from encrypted messaging apps, and to turn on audio or video recording. Gabriela Morawska-Stanecka, deputy speaker of the senate and a member of a commission set up to investigate the allegations, described Pegasus as a “cyberweapon” and said the way it had allegedly been used in Poland was completely inappropriate. “It should only be used for the most serious crimes such as terrorism,” she said, in an interview in her senate office. “It shouldn’t be the case that you can’t feel safe in your own home, your own bathroom or your own bedroom.” The Polish Pegasus scandal was first reported last month by the Associated Press, after an investigation by the University of Toronto’s Citizen Lab, which found Pegasus had been used against at least three people, including opposition senator Krzysztof Brejza. Forensic analysis of his device showed it had been compromised numerous times in 2019 while he was running the electoral campaign of the opposition Civil Platform party. Brejza told the commission last week that the dates of the attacks “coincided 100% with the election calendar” and stopped a few days after the vote. Law and Justice, the lead party in the current ruling coalition, has boycotted the commission in the opposition-led senate. Citizen Lab also confirmed that the devices of lawyer Roman Giertych and prosecutor Ewa Wrzosek had been targeted. Wrzosek is a member of Lex Super Omnia, an association of prosecutors fighting for the independence of the prosecutors office. “In my opinion, there was no legal or factual basis to authorise the surveillance of me with the Pegasus, and the secret service officers who did so committed a crime,” said Wrzosek. Wrzosek said she infuriated the government by attempting to launch an investigation into the circumstances of holding a presidential election during the early stages of the Covid pandemic in 2020. “The investigation was taken away from me and discontinued after three hours, and because of this I was facing harassment,” she said. In January last year, she was transferred to a prosecutor’s office several hours’ drive away from her home. Poland has been embroiled in a long-running battle with Brussels over changes which have undermined the independence of the judiciary. “Wrzosek is one of only a few independent prosecutors, and she had a media profile. Probably she simply became a personal enemy,” said Adam Bodnar, dean of the law faculty at SWPS University in Warsaw and Poland’s former human rights ombudsman. Poland’s Central Anti-Corruption Bureau, the CBA, bought Pegasus in 2017 using funds from the Ministry of Justice, according to documents presented to the hearing by the former head of the supreme audit office. The CBA, in a statement, declined to confirm whether the agency had acquired Pegasus, or whether it was used against Wrzosek and others. However, it said any use of surveillance would have “obtain[ed] the legally required consents, including the court’s consent”. An NSO spokesperson declined to say if the company had sold Pegasus to Poland, citing a company policy of not confirming or denying its clients. It claimed the company had “zero tolerance” for the use of its spyware against political targets. Jarosław Kaczyński, the chairman of Law and Justice, admitted in a recent interview with Sieci magazine that Poland had acquired the tool, but dismissed allegations that it had been used for political purposes as “nonsense”. Some have argued that all use of Pegasus is illegal according to current Polish law, but rights advocates say the real issue is broader, and fits into a pattern of Poland’s government trampling on democratic norms. “Judges have no tools to realistically check whether the services are abusing their powers, and there is no one who could verify it later,” said Wojciech Klicki of the Panoptykon Foundation, a Polish NGO focusing on technology and surveillance. Poland’s government is one of many now faced with calls to regulate the use of Pegasus and similar tools. Dozens of rights organisations have called on the European Union to impose sanctions on NSO Group. In November, the Biden administration announced it was putting the Israeli company on an export blacklist, saying its tools had been used for “transnational repression”. Last year, a group of media organisations, including the Guardian, reported on the use of Pegasus against journalists, activists and politicians in numerous countries across the world. Forensic analysis of telephones showed that in Hungary, journalists, activists and lawyers had been targeted with Pegasus. In Poland, Klicki said he hoped the senate commission would draft “a comprehensive reform of control over secret services”. There is little chance of such a law passing through the government-led lower chamber of parliament, but the opposition-controlled senate could draft a law that would allow a future government to adopt it. Morawska-Stanecka said the commission planned to work on this new draft law, and would also hear from legal experts about whether the use of Pegasus against Brejza, while he was running the opposition campaign, meant the 2019 election result could be deemed to have influenced the fairness of the vote. “We knew the 2019 elections weren’t a fair fight, because of the abuse of public media in favour of the ruling party, but we couldn’t have guessed that the secrecy of campaign work could be stolen using secret surveillance,” she said.Britain could grow up to eight times its current production of fruit and vegetables if all available urban and under-used green space were turned to cultivation, new research has shown. Only about 1% of urban green space is made up of allotments, but if gardens were used, along with parks, playing fields, watersides and other overlooked open spaces, the area would add up to enough to grow nearly 40% of the UK’s fresh fruit and vegetable consumption, most of which comes from overseas, according to the study. While researchers were not seriously suggesting ploughing up parks and recreation areas, the first nationwide study of urban growing potential, by Lancaster University, demonstrated how much potential lies in areas that are often undervalued and overlooked. Using just a fraction of the nation’s scraps of urban green land for communal growing could provide a useful amount of fresh fruit and vegetables that would improve people’s diets, help vulnerable people and reduce carbon dioxide emissions. Jess Davies, a professor of sustainability at Lancaster University and principal investigator of the study, said the UK had the potential for an urban agricultural revolution, by looking at ways to bring even a small amount of the available land into food production. “The UK is really bad for not eating enough fresh fruit and vegetables, and this could make a real difference,” she said. “Even if you just put a small amount of it to use, you can boost fresh fruit and vegetable availability by a meaningful amount.” This could have numerous benefits for people’s physical and mental health, from better nutrition but also from the exercise and time spent outdoors, and the satisfaction of producing healthy things to eat. Davies foresees other benefits, too, from giving people on low incomes access to cheap fresh food to learning new skills, and providing improved habitat for wildlife and pollinators. At a time when allotment waiting lists around the country are vastly oversubscribed, looking afresh at neglected sites could bring new possibilities, according to Davies. “This could be about communal activity – growing clubs, local societies, communal plots,” said Davies. “People engaged in growing have better diets, and healthier behaviours. Food growing is recreational, it counters loneliness and creates social cohesion.” More than a third of the UK’s food in total, and much more in the case of fresh fruit and vegetables, comes from overseas, and as the pandemic and Brexit have shown, the import of food can be vulnerable to shocks. But British farmland is already under pressure, from intensive agriculture, urbanisation and the need for new homes, and biodiversity on farmland has fallen sharply, prompting calls for rewilding and less intensive farming practices. “You don’t want to convert more land to agriculture, as that drives biodiversity loss and climate change,” said Davies. “But we have shown that you don’t need to: there is a lot of urban resource out there that is overlooked. We hope this research will spark conversations about the potential.” Other studies have shown the potential for urban food production at a local level: a recent two-year pilot in Brighton, for instance, showed that urban plots can be as productive as conventional farms. The new study from Lancaster – which looked specifically at England, Scotland and Wales – is the first to take a nationwide view and establish the upper limit for how much urban green space in the UK could theoretically produce if turned to fruit and vegetable cultivation. Davies said problems on some brownfield sites, of soil contamination or pollution, could be overcome by using raised beds and growing screens of trees or hedges to trap airborne pollution. The researchers used Ordnance Survey master maps to identify urban green spaces, and estimated how much food they could produce using comparisons with UK agriculture. The paper, co-authored by scientists from Teagasc Ashtown Food Research Centre in Ireland, the University of Liverpool and Cranfield University, is published in the peer-review journal Environmental Research Letters.If you asked for a caffè after lunch at Trattoria Zampagna, it would arrive a couple of minutes later on a metal tray from the bar next door. We never found out how the message was relayed, but assumed it was a knock on the wall or a secret bell. Then, when you asked for the bill, la signora Maria would come over with her pad, unclip the ballpoint from her housecoat pocket and do the sums between the oil and crumbs on a paper cloth. There was a time when we’d go to Trattoria Zampagna in San Paolo at least once a month. Occasionally it was my idea, but generally it was Vincenzo who pushed for lunch at Maria’s. He loved everything about the place. Its form, function, frank attitude and the steady food from local ingredients. And the fact that it was always full of the mechanics who work under the arches farther down Via Ostiense. There was a menu, but between the daily specials and limited quantities, it was usually better just to let Maria tell you there were three portions of lasagne, two of breadcrumbed cutlets and one of pollo dorato left. Portions were served with two courses in mind: a pasta or minestra primo and a meat or fish secondo, with vegetables on the side – cicoria, dice-sized roast potatoes or broccolo romanesco. Chartreuse-green and fantastically fractal, broccolo romanesco is more closely related to cauliflower than to tree broccoli, although sweeter and nuttier. If there was pollo dorato (golden chicken) on the menu, I had that. Like the coffee, I never found out how they got skin that was not just crisp but shattering over such tender flesh; I assume it was roasted and then finished in a pan. The broccolo was boiled, and testament to well-salted water. On the other side of Rome, in a restaurant run by Francesca Barreca and Marco Baccanelli, they also boiled broccoli. In many ways, Mazzo, with its communal table, natural wine and innovation, was a different dimension to Zampagna. In others, it was exactly the same viscerally Roman dimension, with a frank attitude and steady food from local ingredients. I remember with joy the time we got the last portion of triple-dipped and fried cotoletta di broccolo romanesco, a recipe they shared in Laura Lazzaroni’s book, La Nuova Cucina Italiana. Marco and Francesca suggest making your own breadcrumbs by putting three thick slices of good, stale bread in the oven until lightly baked, then pulsing them to rubble in a food processor. I have also used fine crumbs, and am sure panko would work, too. At Mazzo they served their broccoli cutlets with garlic and chive mayonnaise, but they are also great with salted yoghurt or a slice of lemon, and dice-sized roast potatoes are never a bad idea. It is Vincenzo who reminds me, every time we drive past, that Zampagna has changed hands, and that Mazzo has closed, although only until they find a new venue (I am holding out for somewhere on via Ostiense). But, until then, I will boil at home. Cotoletta di broccolo romanesco (broccoli cutlets) Serves 4 2 small or 1 medium broccolo romanesco Salt and black pepper 2 bay leaves 3 juniper berries 200g flour 3 eggs , beaten 200g fine breadcrumbs 60g pecorino, or parmesan, grated Oil, for frying Cut away the base of the broccoli and remove the leaves. Cut the head in half through the core, then cut into quarters. Working carefully, and again cutting though the core, cut each quarter into wedges that are 3cm thick at their widest point. Bring a large pan of water, with the bay leaves and juniper berries, in it, to a boil. Add salt, stir, then drop in the broccoli wedges and boil for five to seven minutes, or until the core is tender to the point of a knife. Drain. Prepare three bowls: one of the flour, well seasoned, one of the beaten egg and the third of the breadcrumbs mixed with cheese. Dip the broccoli wedges first in the flour, then in the egg and finally the breadcrumbs, lay the coated wedges on a plate and chill in the fridge for at least 20 minutes, or as long as overnight Bring a deep pan of oil up to 180C, or until a cube of bread sizzles. Working in batches, fry the wedges for four to six minutes, turning them once halfway, or until they are deep gold. Lift out on to a plate lined with kitchen towel, sprinkle with salt and serve at once. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoThe Covid pandemic has entered a perplexing phase, challenging our beliefs about what the best responses are and how we should behave. Is Omicron now “just like the flu”, meaning we can relax – or does that overlook the continuing crisis in hospitals, the record hospitalisation rates for children, the continuing deadly danger for elderly and clinically vulnerable people, and the lengthening shadow of long Covid? Is it time, as the government has decided in England, to throw away our masks and perhaps to abandon self-isolation rules, or is that recklessly optimistic (if not just politically expedient for the prime minister)? Our pandemic narratives are splintering. Once, aside from a handful of noisy libertarians who insisted that lockdowns and mask mandates were violations of civil liberty, most people accepted that restrictions were necessary to prevent the health system from imploding and to reduce the risks for vulnerable people. Now, even some experts who previously advised caution and criticised lax and tardy government strategy, such as the public health expert Devi Sridhar of Edinburgh University, have suggested that the virus has been largely “defanged” and that it’s time to “move forward” with our lives. Others react to such suggestions with horror, pointing out that this isn’t an option open to all. There’s much talk of the virus having become “endemic” – but that notion of a “persistent, low or moderate level of disease”, generally in a specific geographical region, is a long way from the exponential rise, and now fall, that we have just seen nationwide. It’s likely that it’s where we’ll end up eventually. But the eagerness to reach for the term now reflects an increasing sense that, one way or another, we will have to learn to live with the virus, as the health secretary, Sajid Javid, said last week. All of this shows how unwise it is to try to tell a simple story about where we are. As Mark Honigsbaum concluded from his magisterial historical survey The Pandemic Century, the way pandemics end is “never quick and never neat”. Yet, he argued, we yearn for “narrative closure”: hence the allure of “herd immunity”, floated even by the government’s chief scientific advisers as the promised land in the early days of the pandemic and subsequently advocated with misplaced confidence by the Great Barrington declaration. The fantastical nature of such narratives is now coming home to roost. That deluded dream of closure is encouraged, too, by the military narrative the government has adopted. From the outset, as the sociologist Franziska Kohlt of the University of York has written, “government and its representatives ‘declared war on coronavirus’, framed themselves as a ‘wartime government’, and described their response as a ‘battle plan’”. Boris Johnson evidently fancied himself as the pandemic’s Churchill, although his promise in July 2020 that it would all be over by Christmas recalled instead the misguided belief voiced in 1914 about the first world war. Blind to warnings of the harm that warfare metaphors can wreak in medicine – “war on Aids”, “battle against cancer” – politicians have clung to them; even last week Javid insisted that the Omicron variant is “in retreat”. All this jingoistic battlespeak, Kohlt says, is not only distinctively British – the pandemic narrative in Germany was framed more in terms of building dams, for instance – but dovetails perfectly with the exceptionalist ideology of Brexit. Among other things, it enabled the deaths of health workers on the “frontline” to be framed as a noble sacrifice by “heroes” in the line of duty, rather than the avoidable cost of negligence and neglect. As NHS doctor Roopa Farooki has said: “We’re not soldiers. We signed up to care for people.” The wartime rhetoric reached surreal proportions with the government advice to “stay alert”, as though we should be on the lookout for sneaky viruses lurking in the shadows. This war narrative also encouraged the idea that there would eventually be a victory: an armistice day when the foe was vanquished. Hence the full relaxation of restrictions on 19 July last year being dubbed Freedom Day (and how did that turn out?). Now that we are forced to accept that – as experts always knew – there will never be a triumphant declaration of “herd immunity”, much less of “surrender” from a virus perfectly capable, as far as we know, of still generating variants worse than Omicron, we are left casting around for new ways to tell the story. The favourite candidate seems to be “living with the virus”. It’s equally flawed. For Javid and others who believe “personal choice” should be society’s guiding principle, the phrase carries an implication that it’s time to get real, man up and stop hiding behind masks. “Sadly people die of flu as well,” Javid said. “In a bad flu year you can sadly lose about 20,000 lives, but we don’t shut down our entire country.” Indeed not, but this doesn’t mean we eschew other preventive measures and simply take it on the chin. Perhaps instead we might accept that routine mask-wearing to reduce any airborne infection is not just a weird thing people do in Asian countries, and that maybe mild, minimally inconveniencing measures like better ventilation and some degree of social distancing at the height of the flu season might reduce that death toll too. The idea we should just be getting on with our lives plays along with the narrative that, if victory isn’t an option, we need to be more stoical. That’s all very well if you’re not on chemotherapy, or compelled to cram on to trains every morning, and won’t lose income when you’re off work with the virus. Yet by the same token, lockdowns and other restrictions also hit disadvantaged people hardest. In short, there are no perfect solutions or tidy endings while inequality persists; pandemics are political, and we’re evidently not all in this one together. We need to reject simplistic stories about where we are with Covid. None can be universal and none capture the whole picture: they may conceal and mislead more than they illuminate. We’ve been living with the virus for two years, and we’ll keep doing so as best we can. But spare us the slogans. Philip Ball is a science writer. His books include The Water Kingdom: A Secret History of ChinaGood morning. As fears of a Russian invasion are heightening in Ukraine, the US and UK are withdrawing diplomats’ families. The US state department told the dependents of staffers at its embassy in Kyiv that they must leave the country. It also said non-essential embassy staff could leave Ukraine at government expense. The EU has said their dependents will stay put for now. US officials said the embassy would remain open and Sunday’s announcement did not constitute an evacuation. The move had been under consideration for some time and did not reflect an easing of US support for Ukraine, they said. What’s happening in Ukraine? There are rising tensions about Russia’s military buildup on the Ukraine border that have not been eased during talks between the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, in Geneva. What has the US embassy said? “Military action by Russia could come at any time,” a statement said. Officials “will not be in a position to evacuate American citizens in such a contingency, so US citizens currently present in Ukraine should plan accordingly”, it added. Stormy Daniels and lawyer to face off at trial over allegations he defrauded her Stormy Daniels, the porn actor who catapulted herself and the lawyer Michael Avenatti to fame with lawsuits against Donald Trump, will have a starring role in a court in Manhattan when prosecutors try to prove the attorney cheated her of $300,000 in book proceeds. Daniels’ testimony in the federal court will be pivotal for prosecutors trying to prove Avenatti engaged in wire fraud and aggravated identity theft to keep from giving his client money he had received from her publisher. Opening statements are to be made on Monday. Daniels is not expected to testify until Tuesday, at the earliest. Avenatti has pleaded not guilty to the charges in what will be his third criminal trial in two years. What has the once popular lawyer said? After his arrest, Avenatti stated in Twitter posts that no money related to Daniels was ever misappropriated or mishandled and that he mostly worked unpaid for Daniels with an agreement that he would receive a proportion of any book proceeds. He said he looked “forward to a jury hearing the evidence”. How Tonga’s volcano and tsunami disaster unfolded Tonga has previously been hit by several natural disasters but residents have never experienced anything like the last week. On Saturday 15 January, at 5.10pm local time, the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai undersea volcano erupted in a blast 600 times more powerful than the bomb dropped on Hiroshima. It could be felt as far as away as New Zealand and Alaska, and triggered a tsunami. “We’ve experienced tropical cyclones but this is so new and no one will ever forget this, ever,” said Marian Kupu, a journalist for BroadCom Broadcasting FM87.5 in Tonga. “We didn’t know what to do or what to expect.” There had been signs that something was wrong. All summer there was a stench of sulphur in the air across Tonga, signalling that the undersea volcano, which lies about 65km north-west of the country’s capital of Nuku’alofa, was active. There had been small eruptions, and on the Friday, the day before the eruption and tsunami, the water in Nuku’alofa’s harbor was spinning in eddies and whirlpools, something no one had seen before. How many people have died? So far, three people have been reported dead in Tonga as a result of the tsunami, while two others drowned in Peru after abnormally big waves from the blast reached the coast of South America. In other news … Conservative groups across the US, often linked to deep-pocketed rightwing donors, are waging a campaign to ban books from school libraries, often focussed on works that address race, LGBTQ issues or marginalized communities. Librarians and teachers warn the trend is on the increase. The trial of three former police officers involved in the George Floyd murder begins today. Tou Thao, J Alexander Kueng and Thomas Lane face their turn in the courtroom after the former Minneapolis officer Derek Chauvin was convicted of murdering Floyd. A senior French surgeon faces legal action after attempting to sell an X-ray of a victim shot during the Bataclan attack in Paris. The item was on sale for about $2,776 on the OpenSea website, which specializes in so-called NFT digital images. The surgeon, Emmanuel Masmejean, says the attempted sale was a mistake. The UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, is facing calls to launch an independent inquiry into Islamophobia in the Tory party after the former minister Nusrat Ghani said she was told her “Muslimness” was making colleagues uncomfortable. Stat of the day: More than 31,500 cases of Covid among nursing home residents Covid cases are rising rapidly among US nursing home residents and staff, causing shortages in admissions, exacerbating bed shortages at hospitals, and in some cases requiring the national guard to be called in. There were more than 31,500 cases among nursing home residents in the week ending 9 January, nearly as many as last winter’s peak, according to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Cases among staff are even higher – more than double last year’s highest record, with more than 57,000 confirmed cases in the week of 9 January, a tenfold increase in three weeks. Don’t miss this: Ozark’s Jason Bateman on Arrested Development, smiling villains and his lost decade Forty years after his breakthrough role in Little House on the Prairie, Jason Bateman is thrilling TV audiences as a drug cartel money launderer. But he almost threw his career away by indulging in all-night booze and drug binges in the 90s. “Having thought, ‘This is really fun’, and staying at the party a little bit too long, I’d lost my place in line in the business; it was a case of trying to claw that back towards the end of the 90s, and not getting a lot of great responses.” Climate check: the climate crisis could pose a greater threat to Nepal’s rhinos than poaching Before the 1950s, as many as 1,000 rhinos roamed the grasslands and forests of Nepal. But by 1965, rampant hunting, poaching and changes in land use brought the species close to extinction in the country. The national park was established in 1973 and thanks to concerted conservation efforts the rhino population began to bounce back. But a new threat has emerged. Last Thing: Maryland man found dead amid collection of more than 125 snakes Police officers called to a Maryland residence by a concerned neighbour found a 49-year-old man dead – and surrounded by more than 125 venomous and non-venomous snakes held in tanks on racks. The discovery by Charles county sheriff’s deputies and emergency responders at the house in Pomfret became even more bizarre when they established that none of the reptiles, including a 4.3-metre (14ft) Burmese python, had escaped or were slithering free. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comNearly a year ago, in the heat of the Australian summer, Danielle Collins was reduced to a level of pain that she would not wish on another soul. By the third set of her match against Daria Kasatkina in the Phillip Island Trophy, an event held at Melbourne Park during the second week of the Australian Open, she fell to the ground while severely cramping in her abdominal muscles and pelvis. Through her tears, Collins resorted to hitting underarm serves and throwing up desperate moonballs as she fell 6-1 in the final set. A week later, she withdrew from a tournament in Adelaide with acute back pain that MRI scans failed to identify a cause for. One year on, Collins has returned to the scene of those brutal moments and on Monday continued one of the most impressive and heartening stories in the sport by reaching the quarter-final of the Australian Open, defeating Elise Mertens 4-6, 6-4, 6-4 in just shy of three hours. When Collins was in constant discomfort, she did not know what the problem was. Consultations with doctors all yielded the same unconvincing responses – that her period pains were normal and anti-inflammatory medicine would help. They did not. Her health became progressively worse and in April 2021, Collins underwent emergency surgery to treat endometriosis. Endometriosis is an extremely painful condition in which tissue similar to that which lines the uterus grows outside of it, and affects an estimated one in 10 women. For Collins, it marked the second major health issue of her short professional career having also been diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis in 2018, an autoimmune disease that causes painful swelling in the joints. “Super-satisfying and rewarding,” Collins said of her quarter-final run a year on. “Any time you’re going to have a surgery like I had, I think any athlete would find it nerve-racking knowing how your body is going to recover after that type of surgery. It’s extremely painful and scary.” Despite all of the obstacles before her, an athlete fighting her own body, Collins continues to rise. Since returning to the court following surgery, her quality of life has improved significantly and she has played some of the best tennis of her career. Collins was an Australian Open semi-finalist in 2019 but she has never been as consistent as in recent months. She won her first two WTA titles in consecutive weeks last summer and since mid-July she has a 27-6 (82%) record. “Before my surgery and before I was on the proper medication, I was always having to adjust my training around my cycle, because of how painful my periods were,” said Collins. “And now with things being more consistent, I’m able to train more consistently and not have to have such drastic changes, especially the week of my cycle.” On Monday, Mertens and Collins duelled in a deciding set of the highest quality. Collins is armed with one of the most destructive, versatile two-handed backhands in the game and she combines her high-octane shot-making with dynamic athleticism. With the match finely balanced at 4-4, 30-30 in the final set, Collins took control. She obliterated winners off both forehand and backhand wings, punctuating them with cries of “come on” as she reached the third major quarter-final of her career. “I’m just very relieved that the surgery went well for me, and that now I’m able to perform more consistently from a physical standpoint,” she said. “I think that’s helped me a lot mentally, knowing that. It’s given me a lot more confidence on court. I just feel, as a person, more consistent on a day-to-day basis, because I’m not having such terrible fluctuations and such painful, really just awful days around those periods.” Collins is a singular character in professional tennis and her exuberance on the court has not always meshed well with everyone. But the fire she exhibits on court is the exact same toughness that has allowed her to face the many obstacles before her and keep moving on.Trainee nurses have signed up in record numbers since the pandemic began, with Ucas showing 56,000 recruits to training courses or apprenticeships in England since early 2020. That’s a 38% jump in applications since 2019 – as young people across the UK flock in unprecedented numbers to the front-line profession. We would like to hear what has motivated you to sign up for a nursing course. How did the pandemic figure in your thinking when applying for a course? If Covid has directly affected your family or friends’ health, did that help inspire you to sign up? What do you hope a career in nursing will offer you? What does it mean to you to be a key worker? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here. • This article’s main image was replaced on 2 February 2022. An earlier version depicted doctors, rather than nurses.This weekend’s March for Life rally, the large anti-choice demonstration held annually in Washington DC to mark the anniversary of the Roe v Wade decision, has the exuberant quality of a victory lap. This, the 49th anniversary of Roe, is likely to be its last. The US supreme court is poised to overturn Roe in Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health, which is set to be decided this spring. For women in Texas, Roe has already been nullified: the court went out of its way to allow what Justice Sonia Sotomayor called a “flagrantly unconstitutional” abortion ban to go into effect there, depriving abortion rights to the one in 10 American women of reproductive age who live in the nation’s second largest state. These victories have made visible a growing cohort within the anti-choice movement: the militias and explicitly white supremacist groups of the organized far right. Like last year, this year’s March for Life featured an appearance by Patriot Front, a white nationalist group that wears a uniform of balaclavas and khakis. The group, which also marched at a Chicago March for Life demonstration earlier this month, silently handed out cards to members of the press who tried to ask them questions. “America belongs to its fathers, and it is owed to its sons,” the cards read. “The restoration of American sovereignty must follow the restoration of the American Family.” Explicit white nationalism, and an emphasis on conscripting white women into reproduction, is not a fringe element of the anti-choice movement. Associations between white supremacist groups and anti-abortion forces are robust and longstanding. In addition to Patriot Front, groups like the white nationalist Aryan Nations and the neo-Nazi Traditionalist Worker party have also lent support to the anti-abortion movement. These groups see stopping abortion as part of a broader project to ensure white hegemony in addition to women’s subordination. Tim Bishop, of the Aryan Nations, noted that “Lots of our people join [anti-choice organizations] … It’s part of our Holy War for the pure Aryan race.” That the growing white nationalist movement would be focused on attacking women’s rights is maybe to be expected: research has long established that recruitment to the alt-right happens largely among men with grievances against feminism, and that misogyny is usually the first form of rightwing radicalization. But the affinity goes both ways: just as the alt-right loves the anti-choice movement, the anti-choice movement loves the alt-right. In 2019, Kristen Hatten, a vice-president at the anti-choice group New Wave Feminists, shared racist content online and publicly identified herself as an “ethnonationalist”. In addition to sharing personnel, the groups share tactics. In 1985, the KKK began circulating “Wanted” posters featuring the photos and personal information of abortion providers. The posters were picked up by the anti-choice terrorist group Operation Rescue in the early 90s. Now, sharing names, photos and addresses of abortion providers and clinic staff is standard practice in the mainline anti-choice movement, and the stalking and doxing of providers has become routine. More recently, anti-abortion activists have escalated their violence, returning to the murderous extremism that characterized the movement in the 1990s: in Knoxville, a fire that burned down a planned parenthood clinic on New Year’s Eve was ruled an arson. Maybe the anti-choice crowd is taking tips from their friends in the alt-right. It’s not that the anti-abortion movement’s embrace of white nationalism is totally uncomplicated. When the Traditionalist Worker party showed up at a Tennessee Right to Life march in 2018, the organizers shooed them off, and later issued a statement saying they condemned violence both from the right, and from leftwing groups like “antifa”. Hatten was fired from her anti-choice job after a public outcry. The anti-choice movement has even started trying to appropriate the language of social justice. They posit “equality” between embryos and women, try to brand abortion bans as “feminist”, incessantly compare abortion to the Holocaust, and claim that abortion is “an act rife with the potential for eugenic manipulation”, in the words of the supreme court justice Clarence Thomas. Anti-choice groups are eager to claim the moral authority of historical struggles against oppression, even as they work to further the oppression of women. But the link between the anti-choice movement and white supremacy is much older and more fundamental than this recent, superficial social justice branding effort. Before an influx of southern and eastern European immigrants to the United States in the latter half of the 19th century, abortion and contraception had only been partially and sporadically criminalized. This changed in the early 20th century, when an additional surge of migrants from Asia and Latin America calcified white American racial anxieties and led to white elites decrying the falling white birth rate as “race suicide”. Abortion bans were quickly introduced nationwide. As the historian Leslie Raegan put it, “White male patriotism demanded that maternity be enforced among white Protestant women.” The emerging popular eugenics movement supported this campaign of forced birth for “fit” mothers, while at the same time implementing a widespread campaign of involuntary sterilization among the poor, particularly Black women and incarcerated women. Meanwhile, white women who sought out voluntary sterilization were discouraged or outright denied the procedure, a practice that is still mainstream in the medical field today. In the current anti-choice and white supremacist alliance, the language of “race suicide” has been supplanted by a similar fear: the so-called “Great Replacement”, a racist conspiracy theory that posits that white Americans are being “replaced” by people of color. (Some antisemitic variations posit that this “replacement” is somehow being orchestrated by Jewish people.) The way to combat this, the right says, is to force childbearing among white people, to severely restrict immigration, and to punish, via criminalization and enforced poverty, women of color. These anxieties have always animated the anti-choice movement, and they have only become more fervent among the March for Life’s rank and file as conservatives become increasingly fixated on the demographic changes that will make America a minority-white country sometime in the coming decades. The white supremacist and anti-choice movements have always been closely linked. But more and more, they are becoming difficult to tell apart. Moira Donegan is a Guardian US columnistIn the sample clues below, the links take you to explainers from our beginners series. The setter’s name often links to an interview with him or her, in case you feel like getting to know these people better. The news in clues It’s hard not to read this clue from Qaos … 13a Record rise in disorder after parties (7) [ wordplay: anagram of (‘in disorder’) RISE, after synonym for ‘parties’ ] [ SIER after DOS ] [ definition: record ] … for DOSSIER and not wonder what we will be hearing about when the next news of a Downing Street bash breaks. A fondue? Twister? A pantomime horse? Meanwhile, Neo is perhaps being deliberately anti-topical with this clue … 23d Root bats, getting runs, but this one turns (5) [ wordplay: anagram (‘bats’ as adjective) of ROOT + abbrev. for ‘runs’ ] [ ROTO + R ] [ definition: item that turns ] … for ROTOR. Latter patter Here’s a clue by Anto from the quiptic, the Guardian’s puzzle “for beginners and those in a hurry”: 16a Recording material introducing video into New York libraries (5) [ wordplay: first letters of (‘introducing’) VIDEO INTO NEW YORK LIBRARIES ] [ definition: recording ] Because it once related to ethylene, VINYL shares a root with “wine”, and has accrued usages since its mid-19th-century appearance. Nowadays, it means something different to those who grew up with it (vinyl records in general) from what it does to those who have only known digital music. Now, an individual record can be “a vinyl”, creating a generation gap reminiscent of the Not the Nine O’Clock News sketch that today comes across as a curious period piece. We’ve talked before about how the guitar became an “acoustic guitar” after the appearance of its electrical cousin. Likewise the “conventional oven”, “corn on the cob”, and so on. If the usual pattern had been followed, we would now have an expression such as “circular album” or “flat song”. I can’t think of another example; no one calls, say, a conventional cigarette “a tobacco”. Can you think of one? And have you spotted any evidence in the wild of “vinyl” as a verb? Incidentally, anyone tempted to harrumph at “vinyls” should check that they have never said “three-album boxed set” or “double album”, since the original albums were, as the name suggests, very much collections of records rather than individual discs. Which leads us to our next challenge: reader, how would you clue ALBUM? Paper-free Do you fancy another three-dimensional puzzle? Do you have fond memories of Chameleon’s cluedoku? You are in luck: printable PDF / online version. Cluing competition Thanks for your clues for APP. I enjoyed the many non-app surfaces, such as Smallboat01’s “Package absent and signed for by someone else” and while I appreciated Battledore’s “Somewhat disappointed with Wordle, for instance”, should we be encouraging an acceptance of the app-based and pirated versions of Wordle? The audacity award goes to Peshwari for “Program a collection of animals to shuffle to the right”. The runners-up both make use of the newer sense of app: Lizard’s “Laptop’s malfunctioning – ____ lost?” and Newlaplandes’ “Laptop denied opening to unwanted software”. The winner, to which I’ve imperiously added a question mark, is PeterMooreFuller’s “Tap phone with this installed?”. Kludos to Peter. Please leave entries for this fortnight’s competition – as well as your non-print finds and picks from the broadsheet cryptics – below. The latest in our collaborative playlist Healing Music Recorded in 2020-22 to Accompany a Solve or Even Listen to is from Lucinda Williams, who has described the process of recovering from a stroke to Rolling Stone magazine. Clue of the Fortnight It’s always a pleasure when you presume a surface reading has nothing to do with the answer, then realise you’ve been tricked into thinking you’ve been tricked. Here’s an example, from the beginning of a Wednesday Telegraph: 1a The orator’s planned delivery may be affected by this (4,6) [ wordplay: anagram of (‘planned’) THEORATORS ] [ definition: either the whole clue or the last six words ] SORE THROAT, then, and good health. • Here is a collection of all our explainers, interviews and other helpful bits and bobs. • The Shipping Forecast Puzzle Book by Alan Connor, which is partly but not predominantly cryptic, can be ordered from the Guardian Bookshop.Enabled by Democratic senators Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, a united front of US Senate Republicans dealt American democracy a massive blow last week by blocking the Freedom to Vote: John R Lewis Act. The US Senate: a place where desperately needed federal voting rights legislation goes to die – a spectacle unworthy of what Democratic Representative Jamie Raskin called “the world’s greatest deliberative body”. Raskin was referring to the Senate’s reputation not necessarily in an affirmative, but in an aspirational way: he wanted to issue a challenge to the senators to live up to this glorious notion. Nevertheless, the mythical idea of the Senate as “the world’s greatest deliberative body” is widely held among the country’s political elite – the kind of American exceptionalism that still very much warps the perspective on US history and politics. What we really need to grapple with is the fact that the current situation is not just a disgraceful aberration from the Senate’s supposedly noble past and true character. In some fundamental ways, the Senate is working as intended. It has always been one of the most powerful undemocratic distortions in the political system – and not by accident, but because that’s what it was designed to be. So far, much of the attention has focused on the filibuster as the most blatantly undemocratic tool of obstruction. It is true that the frequency of filibuster use has increased dramatically in recent years. Still, what Republicans did last week was well in line with the longer-term historical norm. The filibuster has consistently been an instrument of white Christian domination: during the 20th century, it was used predominantly to block civil rights legislation and measures such as anti-lynching bills. Since the filibuster was not part of the Senate’s original design and only came to be by accident in the early 19th century, it is tempting to portray it as the real culprit – a stain on an otherwise admirable institution. Let’s remember, however, that just like the electoral college, the Senate was always intended to be a layer of insulation between those in power and the people – which is why senators were initially appointed by state legislatures. The senate was supposed to help stave off what many of the founders saw as the “threat” of too much democracy. So, what we see today is not just an institution hijacked by a radicalized Republican party (although it is that too) – but an institution badly in need of structural reform that should go well beyond getting rid of the filibuster. In the current political situation, reforming the Senate, just like protecting voting rights, is considered a “partisan” idea – and it is, but only because democracy itself has become a partisan issue. Of the two major parties, only the Democratic party is a democratic party. Let’s be specific about how undemocratic an institution this is – something that is best captured in numbers: in the current 50:50 Senate, Democratic senators represent 40 million more voters; by about 2040, 70% of the country will be represented by just 30 senators, while less than one-third of the electorate will get to determine 70 out of 100 members of the Senate. The issue of disproportionate representation is deeply intertwined with the problem of white Christian patriarchal rule. The Senate privileges conservative white voters who dominate in small, less populous states; it is biased towards white people, with or without the filibuster. Here are two more numbers everyone should know: out of about 2,000 US senators in the country’s history, 11 have been Black. More than 150 years since the civil war, more than half a century since the civil rights legislation of the 1960s – 11 Black senators. And to date, 58 women have served in the Senate. More than a century since Congress passed the 19th amendment, finally granting women the right to vote – 58 female senators. Whenever someone says the Senate is “the world’s greatest deliberative body”, remember that it is deliberately and inherently undemocratic – an anti-democratic distortion that stands in the way of America finally realizing the promise of multiracial, pluralistic democracy. The legislation Republicans are blocking in the Senate is the minimum needed to resist the state-level authoritarian onslaught on the system. But beyond such immediate measures, a more structural approach to democracy reform is required – and Congress’s upper chamber needs to be at the center of those debates. America can have the Senate in its present form or liberal democracy, but probably not both. The good news is that serious reform is eminently possible. There certainly is no filibuster requirement in the US constitution, and there are ways to alleviate the Senate’s anti-democratic character – by adding DC and Puerto Rico as states, for instance. The tension between white male elite rule and aspirations of true democracy has always shaped the American project – it is inherent in the nation’s founding documents and its political system. The existing institutional order is in conflict with the promise that all people deserve to participate as equals in a democratic polity – and that situation requires a decision. “The world’s greatest deliberative body”? If it were true, it would be quite the indictment of the world’s other deliberative chambers. Let’s abandon such vestiges of mythical exceptionalism that make it harder to acknowledge the anti-democratic threats and deficiencies in American politics and culture. The fact that a shrinking minority of white conservatives is consistently being enabled to hold on to power against the will of the majority of voters is destined to cause a massive legitimacy crisis. And unless the system is properly democratized, it is only going to get worse. Thomas Zimmer is a historian and DAAD visiting professor at Georgetown University, where he focuses on the history of democracy and its discontents in the United States.Even while deflated in defeat, Alex de Minaur tried to maintain his “positive vibes” mantra. It has been one oft-repeated at this tournament, and one he intends to carry with him throughout 2022. On Monday, though, he allowed himself a small amount of frustration. The 22-year-old had threatened a deep run into the Australian Open, having made the fourth round for the first time in his burgeoning career. He had dropped only one set on his way there and was confident heading into Rod Laver Arena. Unfortunately for him Jannik Sinner had other ideas, which materialised in some big hitting and, eventually, a 7-6 (7-3), 6-3, 6-4 victory for the rising Italian star. At times De Minaur was his own worst enemy, creating eight break points but only converting one. “I think second set I had break points first game of the second set, and I didn’t convert kind of again,” he said. “So I think after that point I was maybe 0-6 on break points. And look, he started to lift his level as the court kind of had shade. There was no more sun, so he was able to really hit the ball through the court a lot more. “We all know the amazing firepower he has, so I felt like I played a loose game to get broken … he got the early break and kind of was able to run away. I still had a lot of chances on his service games. It just didn’t feel like it was coming.” Sinner is unbeaten in 2022, having emerged flawlessly from the ATP Cup and dropped only one set en route to the quarter-finals at Melbourne Park. The 20-year-old world No 10 will next play either fourth seed Stefanos Tsitsipas or American Taylor Fritz with an eye to a maiden grand slam semi-final appearance. De Minaur will take his “bittersweet ending” to his tournament and take learnings into the rest of the year. That begins next month at the Rotterdam Open, meaning he will likely return to his home away from home in Alicante, Spain, before a possible return to Australia in March for the Davis Cup qualifying round against Hungary. “It’s been a good start to the season bringing in some good momentum and I came up short today but I’m happy with where my level is going,” De Minaur said. “It’s definitely a big improvement from last year and I’m excited for what’s to come. “I knew I’d put in the work to really come out here and perform, so the goals kind of stay the same. I still want to keep improving, keep striving to get the most out of myself. That’s never going to change. That’s just the person I am, and in a way it’s how I’ve gotten to where I have gotten, just by constantly pushing myself. “So we’ll reflect on what I did well, what I can still improve, and we go again until the next tournament … it’s a long year, but my hopes and goals are to keep at least my attitude and my mindset throughout the whole year, or try to. It’s easier said than done, but that’s the focus.”Two fans of No Time to Die star Ana de Armas have started legal action against the studio behind the Richard Curtis-scripted comedy Yesterday, claiming they were duped into renting it after the US trailer contained a brief glimpse of her despite her character having been cut out of the finished film. A class action lawsuit was filed on 21 January in a California court by Conor Woulfe and Peter Michael Rosza alleging that Universal Pictures, the film’s US distributors, were “false, misleading, and deceptive” for releasing the trailer for the film, on which both claimants said they subsequently each spent $3.99 to watch on Amazon. Yesterday stars Himesh Patel as a singer-songwriter who, after a mysterious global electrical blackout, is the only person who remembers the Beatles (and their songs); De Armas appears for a few seconds in the trailer while Patel sings the Beatles’ 1969 hit Something. In 2019 Curtis told CinemaBlend that her character was cut because test audiences felt that it undermined the central romance between Patel’s Jack and Lily James’s character Ellie. “‘[De Armas] was brilliant … And [that] turned out to be the problem [as] the audience did not like the fact that his eyes even strayed. Because then some people would go, ‘Oh, he really doesn’t deserve her. He really doesn’t deserve Lily.’” The lawsuit claims that Patel and James were “largely unknown” actors and that the distributors “could not rely on their fame to promote the movie to entice viewership” and instead “used Ms De Armas’s fame, radiance and brilliance to promote the film … Ms De Armas, in contrast to the actors playing Jack Malik or Ellie, is famous and is a viewership draw by herself.” De Armas, who was born in Cuba, plays CIA agent Paloma in the current James Bond release No Time to Die, and previously gained attention as the hologram Joi in Blade Runner 2049. Universal has been contacted for comment.In 1986, Toni was working as a clinical laboratory director in St Louis, Missouri. “I was single at the time and keen to meet someone,” she says. One Friday night, she and a friend were listening to the area’s flagship radio station KMOX, which hosted a show called Dateline. “The idea was that single people called in, shared a bit about themselves, and listeners could contact the radio station for their details afterwards,” says Toni. She made a bet with her friend that she would call one of the men from the show. “At the time, it wasn’t the thing to do,” she laughs. “Internet dating didn’t exist back then and a lot of strange people would call into that show. But we thought it would be a funny story to tell if I gave it a go.” She had vetoed lots of callers before Ron came on the show at the end of the night. He had recently moved from North Carolina to a nearby town to work for a medical technology company, and was keen to meet new people. “My sister suggested I try going on the radio to find a date,” he says. “Now I’m used to public speaking, but at the time I was very scared. [The station] gave you guidelines on how to introduce yourself and I was on air for about a minute.” Toni says he was the only person who sparked her interest. “He said he wanted someone family-oriented, sporty and fun-loving, which described me,” she says. “Before he came on, I thought: ‘Whoever this is, I guess I need to call them, because I’d said I would.’ Luckily he sounded nice.” Although she wasn’t expecting it to go anywhere, the pair immediately hit it off when she called. “I had about five calls after the show but Toni stood out,” says Ron. “We agreed to meet at a restaurant in St Louis.” Over the phone, he described himself as “average-looking”, so Toni was surprised to discover he was “very handsome”. During their dinner date, they found out they had lots in common. “We are both from large, Catholic families, worked in similar fields and shared a lot of the same values,” says Ron. For their next date, Toni travelled to his town, just outside St Louis. “There were no cellphones, so I looked at the back of the phonebook for a map of the city area. I couldn’t find his town at first and it took me ages to figure it out.” She eventually made it and they went on a bike ride together. “I fell off and cracked my fingers,” she says. “Then Ron took me to his place and cooked dinner.” From then on, they became a couple. “At first, I was worried it wouldn’t work because he was a few years younger than me,” says Toni. “I told a girl at work about him and she said I could introduce him to her instead if I wanted. That was when I knew I wanted to keep him for myself.” Both passionate about the outdoors, they spent their dates walking, talking and playing tennis. Ron proposed to Toni at a Billy Joel concert in 1987, and they married and moved in together the following year in St Louis. Having a family was equally important to both of them, and their children joined the family in 1991 and 1994. “We still have lots of shared interests and love going to national parks together,” says Toni. “He’s slow to anger and pretty calm, which was really important to me, as it means we never get into big fights. He’s also a very hard worker, which our family really appreciates.” Ron loves his wife’s commitment to their family. “We’ve both been dedicated to raising our children,” he says. “Toni is a great mother, and we’re constantly supporting each other in everything we do. I really value the simple things that some people forget over time, like her honesty and loyalty.” Want to share your story? Tell us a little about yourself, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form here.A nationwide day of action against HS2 – involving banner drops, solidarity protests and a “Twitter storm” – is planned for Monday as the bill to expand the line beyond Crewe is presented to parliament. Environmental activists say the bill will “sanction immense and irreversible destruction to the environment” and want to raise awareness of HS2’s “continuing ecocide, corruption and financial mismanagement”. In contrast, the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, has called the bill, which extends HS2 from Crewe to Manchester, “a landmark moment” in improving the country’s rail connections. The Department for Transport said the line would cut travel times from Manchester to London by about 55 minutes and 45 minutes between Manchester and Birmingham. Labour politicians have described the proposals as the wrong plan for the north and a missed opportunity. The day of action is expected to include events along the line with a particular focus on Manchester, in Piccadilly Gardens, and Birmingham, at the Thinktank Science Museum. Campaigners are also using social media and want to create a Twitter storm using the hashtags #HS2CostingTheEarth, #StopHS2 and #HS2Rebellion. Alan, a spokesperson for Stop HS2 North, said activists began the day with banner drops. “Now we will take part in protests and solidarity events all along the proposed route, so we can demonstrate to the government how unpopular and unnecessary this project is,” he said. “People are being faced with a choice between being able to heat or eat. Meanwhile, HS2 has a blank cheque to commit terrible and irreversible ecocide. This money ought to be used to properly fund our NHS, improve local transport links, help ordinary people with the rising cost of living, and to resolve our energy crisis.” Andy Burnham, the mayor of Greater Manchester, said he remained committed to bringing HS2 to the region. But he said it was the “wrong plan”. He added: “Building HS2 on the surface at Manchester Piccadilly means the new station will be at full capacity from day one. It means the new train services from Liverpool and Leeds having to reverse out. And it also means forever losing prime development land and the economic opportunity that goes with it. “We also again have to ask again: why is Greater Manchester the only part of the country being asked to make a substantial financial contribution to the cost of HS2? We believe there is a better plan which would do much more to level up the north of England with the south.” He called for a new underground station in Manchester to help deliver a new line between Manchester and Leeds, “which is what we were promised”. The government published its £96bn integrated rail plan for the north in November, which abandoned an eastern leg of HS2 and downgraded plans for a new line across the Pennines. Louise Haigh, the shadow transport secretary, said Monday’s HS2 bill represented “a monumental missed opportunity to drive growth and investment right across the north and the Midlands. “The rail betrayal will hit millions of people and leave swathes of the north and the Midlands in the slow lane for decades.”The murders of four young gay men in 2014 and 2015 by the serial killer Stephen Port were nothing new. Nor, sadly, was the catalogue of police failings that followed. The murder of “queers” has been going on for decades, with investigations repeatedly marred by toxic incompetence, negligence, indifference and homophobia. The mishandling of the Dennis Nilsen investigation is revealed in a damning three-part BBC documentary, which begins on Monday on BBC Two. It tells the grisly tale of mass murder and dismemberment from the point of view of the lives of the victims, and explores what their deaths tell us about society at the time. The missed opportunities to nail Nilsen are meticulously examined, including how police paid scant attention to parents concerned about their missing sons. Nilsen is believed to have murdered up to 16 vulnerable young men, many of whom were gay, in north London between 1978 and 1983. He also attempted to kill several others. It was said at the time that some were homeless, runaways, or sex workers. Others were gay or straight youths, lured to Nilsen’s house with the promise of a meal, a drink or sex. It’s possible that most of the victims died needlessly, because – in a worrying foreshadowing of criticism of the police handling of the Stephen Port investigation – the police failed to conduct a robust investigation after the alert was raised regarding two attempted killings by Nilsen. Directed by the gay filmmaker Michael Ogden, The Nilsen Files is an attempt to understand how as many as 16 young men could disappear from the nation’s capital without anyone seemingly noticing. From the outset, prejudice clouded police investigations and media reporting. The victims were often depicted in a lurid, unflattering light: as male prostitutes and drifters of no fixed abode, who inhabited an underworld on the margins of society. As one interviewee put it: “We were trash … the lowest of the low.” Some press coverage at the time insinuated that the victims were partly to blame for their own deaths. We’ll never know how many of Nilsen’s victims were sex workers, or gay – but, once described as such by Nilsen, police, media and public sympathy diminished. They were neither respectable nor seemed to matter. Nilsen’s killings might be exceptional because of their number and what he did to the bodies. But they fit a pattern. Gay men were regularly murdered during this period, and their killers were rarely exhaustively pursued by police. During this era, the Met seemed more interested in prosecuting gay men than in protecting them. After the partial decriminalisation of homosexuality in 1967, police harassment increased and gay arrests rocketed to more than 1,000 a year during the 1970s and 1980s. From 1986 to 1991, I identified in my own research, working as a human rights campaigner, 50 murders where evidence pointed to a homophobic motive. There was little media coverage or public outcry around these murders at the time they were committed. The police investigations that followed them were, in most cases, wholly inadequate: involving little liaison with the LGBTQ+ community and often only seemingly perfunctory appeals for witnesses. The LGBTQ+ community was subsequently promised new procedures were to be put in place, and that past mistakes would not be repeated. But the Stephen Port inquest verdict revealed this was not the case: failings continued, at least, at the Met. A year after his first murder in 1978, Nilsen tried to kill Andrew Ho. Ho escaped and reported the attack to police. Ho was nervous and decided to not press charges. He was an immigrant and, at 19, under the then lawful gay age of consent of 21, and could have faced two years in jail. Nilsen was questioned but officers took no action. Had they done a proper investigation and caught Nilsen, 15 victims might still be alive. Another survivor was Douglas Stewart, who fought off a strangulation attempt by Nilsen in November 1980. But police dismissed the incident as an alcohol-fuelled lovers’ quarrel. Stewart later said “as soon as the word ‘homosexual’ was mentioned, the police lost all interest”. Had police done a thorough search of Nilsen’s flat in response to Ho’s and Stewart’s reports against him, , they might have discovered bodies hidden under the floorboards, as well as traces of dissected corpses in his garden shed and on land at the rear where he burned body parts. Instead, Nilsen was left to kill many more times. In May 1982, Carl Stottor was attacked by Nilsen and also lived to tell the tale. Again, the police did nothing. At Nilsen’s trial, 19-year-old Paul Nobbs testified that, despite escaping a murder attempt, he never went to the police. Prevailing homophobia helped silence him. He was under 21 and not out as gay to his family. Although Nilsen’s crimes were first uncovered nearly 40 years ago, several of his possible victims remain unidentified. It’s time to reopen the police investigation, and allow the use of the latest DNA and forensic technology, to ensure the families of any unidentified young men killed by Nilsen can finally be given conclusive answers to the question of what happened to their loved ones. These failings by the police can, sadly, be added to those revealed at the inquest into the failings over the Stephen Port investigation. From these findings, the Met must now work to establish, in consultation with the LGBTQ+ community, new binding protocols for how homophobic murders are investigated. Because, as we have seen – time and again – LGBTQ+ people are too often let down by the police. Over to you, Cressida Dick. Peter Tatchell is a human rights campaigner. He is also director of the Peter Tatchell Foundation, a human rights organisation The Nilsen Files starts on BBC Two at 9pm on 24 JanuaryThe Liverpool bomber had an asylum claim rejected on multiple grounds six years before he attempted to detonate a homemade explosive outside a hospital, court documents show. Emad al-Swealmeen, 32, was killed when the bomb he was carrying exploded inside a taxi outside Liverpool women’s hospital on Remembrance Sunday last year. The Home Office twice rejected Swealmeen’s claims for asylum – once in 2014 and again in 2020 – and new details raise questions about why he was not pursued for deportation as long ago as 2015. Court documents obtained by BBC News show he claimed to be of Syrian heritage and in fear for his life, but was unable to give basic details about where his family lived or why they were in danger. Language analysis conducted by the Home Office concluded that there was a high likelihood that he was Iraqi and was “very unlikely” to be Syrian. Swealmeen travelled to the UK in 2014 on a genuine Jordanian passport, which gave his birthplace as Iraq and his date of birth as 11 October 1989. An immigration judge dismissed his asylum appeal in April 2015, writing in a ruling quoted by BBC News: “His account of his time in Syria gives the impression of someone quoting information that is in the public domain rather than having first-hand experience. “The appellant did not identify himself with any particular faction or indicate that he would be at risk other than in a general sense.” That ruling meant the Home Office had the green light to send Swealmeen back to Iraq or Jordan, as it had previously told him it would do. Instead, however, Swealmeen remained in the UK and is thought to have been moved to the Fazakerley area of Liverpool in late 2016. In 2017 he mounted a new asylum claim using a different name but that was rejected at the end of 2020, prompting another appeal in January 2021. Police believe that Swealmeen was plotting a terror attack by at least April 2021, when he rented a property and started buying parts needed for a bomb. Detectives believe it is most likely that he acted alone although counter-terrorism experts have said it is incredibly rare for someone to plan an atrocity for seven months without telling anyone. The case raises questions about why Swealmeen was not deported in 2015 when his first asylum appeal was rejected on several grounds, and he could have been spotted earlier as a danger to himself and others. The Home Office declined to comment on Swealmeen’s case but said: “We are fixing the broken asylum system. The ‘new plan for immigration’ will require people to raise all protection-related issues upfront to tackle the practice of making multiple and sequential claims and enable the removal of those with no right to be in our country more quickly.”Are you in the best relationship of your life in your 70s and beyond? We’d like to hear about why that might be. Have you finally met the right partner? Maybe you have worked through issues surrounding intimacy and sex, or simply have more time for a fulfilling love life now. We would like to hear your experiences to show later life sex and relationships can be better than ever. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The TV gardener Alan Titchmarsh has said he refuses to eat avocados for breakfast because of their “enormous carbon footprint” and much prefers Shreddies. Writing in Gardeners’ World magazine, Titchmarsh said he could not bear the idea of “forcing” down the “insipid” fruit first thing in the morning, before suggesting that he believed it should be boycotted on environmental grounds. “It seems there is a great movement towards smashed avocado on sourdough bread. I can’t think of anything more insipid to force down my neck at the crack of dawn,” he wrote. “And then there are the environmental considerations,” he went on. “I cannot reconcile myself to eating avocados and contributing to the enormous carbon footprint involved in shipping them across the ocean to my breakfast table, not to mention the wholesale destruction of the rainforest to create such plantations. No, avocado is a non-starter for me.” It isn’t the first time Titchmarsh has spoken on the environment. In 2019 he told the same magazine that it would be “hypocritical” for green campaigners to criticise governments and celebrities for not doing enough to fight climate change while continuing to do things such as block-paving their gardens, buying imported out-of-season fruits, and eating avocados. According to the Sustainable Food Trust, growing a single avocado requires up to 320 litres of water, with demand in the global north fuelling the export of the green fruits over long distances and their growth on expansive farms in central and South America. Rather than eating avocados for breakfast, the 72-year-old broadcaster said that, despite it not being very filling, he was a “devoted Shreddies fan”. Though he believes Weetabix is better at fuelling a busy day in the garden, he said he could only manage three, and was blown away when his youngest daughter, Camilla, ate six. “I am a devoted Shreddies fan, but their boast of keeping hunger locked up until lunchtime is optimistic if you plan to be energetic in the spade and fork department,” he wrote. “Weetabix then? Yes. But how many? When my youngest daughter was at primary school her personal best at breakfast time was six. Six! And she was a tiny little thing. Still is surprising. My own personal best is three, and that does seem to do the trick until coffee time.” Titchmarsh added that he longs to come downstairs one morning and discover a boiled kipper or some finely crafted kedgeree for his delectation and delight. “Kedgeree! Now there’s a proper breakfast.”Arsenal snatch point but referee’s touch irritates Eidevall The decision of the referee, Abigail Byrne, to allow play to continue after the ball deflected off her in the buildup to Manchester City’s goal in their 1-1 WSL draw with Arsenal was strange. Arsenal’s Jordan Nobbs looked poised to intercept a crossfield pass until it was diverted to the feet of Demi Stokes. Stokes then set Lauren Hemp away on a marauding run before delivering a cross for Khadija “Bunny” Shaw to give City the lead after 65 minutes. City had dominated but Arsenal were right to feel hard done by as the rules seem pretty clear: if the ball hits a match official, remains on the field of play and a team start a promising attack, then play must be restarted with a dropped ball. “The referees should be professional,” said the Arsenal manager, Jonas Eidevall. “They should be given all the resources that they need to prepare and practice and work on fitness and that’s where we need to focus. Let’s raise the standard around refereeing and give them the help they need.” In the end Arsenal snatched an important point in the title race through Tobin Heath’s injury-time strike. SW Brighton come back to haunt Chelsea It was Brighton who ended Chelsea’s record 33-match unbeaten run last February and 11 months later Hope Powell’s side dealt Emma Hayes and co another blow. The game had a familiar feel to the one last season. Chelsea should have scored through Erin Cuthbert early on, but her shot hit the crossbar. Chances for Fran Kirby and Bethany England were saved by the Brighton goalkeeper, Megan Walsh. The Seagulls’ defensive efforts meant that despite 26 shots at goal - five on target - Chelsea had to settle for a goalless draw. Brighton had lost their previous six games and the coach, Hope Powell, said: “What better way to end a bad run than against the reigning champions.” MN United need reinforcements to keep up title challenge Manchester United’s 3-0 win against Tottenham moved them into second place in the WSL and they stayed there as Manchester City, Arsenal and Chelsea all dropped points. The United manager, Marc Skinner, has worked wonders with the group of players at his disposal but now is the time for the board to back him during the the last days of this transfer window to keep up the challenge for a place in next season’s Champions League and, whisper it, even vie for the league title. United coped without centre-back Millie Turner against Spurs but her potential long-term absence leaves the squad light and further injuries could derail any charge. “We’re working on [adding players],” said Skinner. “Our fans want it, we want it, but it’s got to be the right circumstances and the right people and, if not, then we work towards our team being the best version of themselves – and they’re doing that.” SW Birmingham shoot themselves in the foot It felt like the moment Birmingham could get the win needed to move off the bottom of the table. They were 2-0 up against Reading and Jade Pennock was terrorising the home side down the right. Then it all went wrong. Justine Vanhaevermaet pulled a goal back for Reading just before half-time and in the second half a clumsy foul led to the equaliser before Emma Harries won it for Kelly Chambers’ side. The Birmingham manager, Darren Carter, knows that the defeat was of their own making. “I’m very frustrated,” he said. “I thought we were excellent, up until the goal we conceded. Either side of half-time, we’ve shot ourselves in the foot, conceding before and conceding after.” RO Vasseur under pressure after yet another defeat Everton will rue not taking their chances against West Ham, with two efforts hitting the woodwork in a 3-0 defeat. Hanna Bennison’s wonderful right-footed strike was palmed onto the crossbar by Anna Leat in West Ham’s goal. The second attempt, at 0-0, was even more frustrating as a header from Valérie Gauvin bounced out off the underside of the bar. West Ham have not trailed for a single minute at home this season while Everton have scored only seven goals under Jean-Luc Vasseur, who succeeded Willie Kirk at the end of October. The pressure will be on Vasseur to get his side scoring again. RO Own goals mar relegation scrap If one own goal in a game is a gaffe, then two must be a calamity. That is precisely what happened during a scrappy affair between strugglers Leicester and Aston Villa. The first came in the fourth minute from Leicester’s Jemma Purfield; no surprise given her team has one of the league’s worst defensive records away from home, with 36 conceded over the past two years. The Villa keeper Hannah Hampton then made Purfield feel better in the 76th minute with the second own goal of the match. It took a 94th-minute winner from the standout performer Alisha Lehmann to seal victory for Villa. Lydia Bedford’s Leicester face Birmingham next in a game that could decide who goes down. MNThe government has finally caught up with what most animal behavioural scientists have been saying for years by formally recognising animals as sentient beings in its animal welfare (sentience) bill. In November it was confirmed that the scope of the bill would be extended to include in the “sentient” category all decapod crustaceans (such as crabs and lobsters) and cephalopods (including octopuses, squid and cuttlefish). This ruling heeds a review led by Jonathan Birch of the London School of Economics, who points out: “Octopuses and other cephalopods have been protected in science for years, but have not received any protection outside science until now.” Although these rulings are welcome, their tardiness is sobering. People have been arguing fiercely, dogmatically and even violently about animal welfare for a very long time – yet framing the issue in terms of legally enforced rights comes with baggage about the socially constructed (and therefore exclusively human) nature of moral status and rights-based reasoning. The starting point should rather have been the nature of animal cognition: how we and other beings are situated in a broad panorama of minds. While there is still plenty to learn about that mindscape, Birch is right to imply that, given what science has already told us, it borders on the absurd that UK law took so long to formally acknowledge animal sentience. There was, however, a long historical tradition of human prejudice and exceptionalism to overcome. Aristotle distinguished humans from other animals by asserting that only we have a “rational soul”, in addition to the “sensitive soul” of animals. In the 17th century René Descartes notoriously asserted that animals are mindless mechanisms, so that we shouldn’t mistake signs of apparent pain or distress as an indication that brute beasts truly feel anything at all. His supporters were accused of the most heartless acts of vivisection (although Descartes himself was said to be devoted to his dog, Monsieur Grat). Charles Darwin’s claim that there are “no fundamental differences between man and the higher mammals in terms of mental faculties” didn’t deter the radical behaviourist psychologists of the 1950-70s, such as BF Skinner, from returning to something like the Cartesian view of animals as automata. (Skinner saw no ethical problem in training pigeons to be living guidance systems inside bombs.) Not until the modern age of neuroscience have we truly begun to recognise a continuity of neural hardware and cognitive ability between us and other animals. Still the question lingers of whether there is some fundamental difference of mind that makes humans special. Certainly, the sophistication of our language, and perhaps in consequence of our culture, seems unique. But there’s no reason to suppose that the capacity to experience pain, curiosity, empathy and other felt aspects of existence belongs to humans alone. Some biologists now argue that sentience may be a property of all living things, even bacteria and single cells. They assert that plants, despite lacking a nervous system, show signs of genuine cognition, even feeling. But if it is still disputed at what point in the living world sentience begins, the view expressed by philosopher Daniel Dennett is now common: “Sentience comes in every imaginable grade and intensity, from the simplest and most ‘robotic’, to the most exquisitely sensitive, ‘hyper-reactive’ human.” The concept of sentience liberates the debate from the more contentious matter of whether other animals are conscious: a question in which the obsolete Enlightenment view that “human reason” is like a divine spark activated within us is still discernible. A ghost of Aristotelian exceptionalism remains in the suspicion that, while other animals may be sentient, only humans have that special form of it we call consciousness. The problem is that it’s hard to assign clear, quantifiable meanings to these words – even in humans, where, for example, arguments rage over the cognitive status of people in a permanent vegetative state after brain trauma (that very term harking back to Aristotle’s view of plants as possessing a mere “vegetative soul”). Although we might not know or agree on what consciousness is, it looks increasingly peculiar to imagine it as a single and absolute cognitive attribute. The question for animal welfare is how the evident differences in “qualities of mind” between species colour our attitudes and obligations. One commonly cited criterion is whether other animals experience pain. American neuroscientist Joseph LeDoux argues that emotions such as pain are human-specific responses to physiological reactions: narratives we alone can create because of our linguistic capacity (for example, “I’m hurting”). Others counter that, since all observable indicators of and responses to “pain” in, say, dogs or chimps, look like those in us, it makes no sense to imagine some fundamental difference. At any rate, the humane position is surely to assume an equivalence unless we have clear reason not to. And it’s not just about physical pain. Experiments have shown, for example, that farmed pigs respond as if “depressed” when kept in barren conditions devoid of mental stimulation, responding to signals (about food, say) as if they have acquired a pessimistic lack of interest in things that might benefit them. Again, we don’t know what that situation feels like to a pig – but they do seem to have a response to their experience that displays a sensitivity to the richness (or not) of their surroundings. One challenge is how to avoid framing this debate in anthropomorphic terms, to assess rights on the basis of how closely an animal seems to approach human-like cognition. Cephalopods in particular have suffered from that tendency. The common ancestor we share with them probably lived about 600m years ago – far more distant than that of all vertebrates, such as fish – and their nervous systems are very different: most of an octopus’s neurons are in the arms, not the central brain. Some researchers think they might have a kind of dual or even multiple consciousness – a bizarre situation we struggle to imagine. Octopuses are “probably the closest we will come to meeting an intelligent alien”, says philosopher Peter Godfrey-Smith. For octopuses do show signs of considerable intelligence, even if their motives can be hard to deduce. For this reason, in 2019 more than 100 experts in cephalopod cognition called for a ban on octopus farming in “sterile, monotonous” environments. In the end, the notion of “rights” is hugely anthropocentric. Even the rights of, say, human embryos or people in untreatable comas (which might be argued to have less sentience than a chimp) are framed in terms of the potential for human experience. The Great Ape Project makes a compelling case for rights among our closest primate relatives: to not be killed (except in self-defence), to be allowed freedom and dignity, habitat protection and freedom from intentionally inflicted physical and psychological pain. But while the often blunt instruments of law can be needed to prevent obvious abuses, the better question is not what animals “deserve” or should be granted, but what kinds of mind they have, and what obligations we humans incur towards them as a result. • The Book of Minds by Philip Ball will be published by Pan Macmillan in June. Further reading Are We Smart Enough to Know How Smart Animals Are? by Frans de Waal (Granta, £10.99) Other Minds: The Octopus and the Evolution of Intelligent Life by Peter Godfrey-Smith (William Collins, £9.99) Sentient: What Animals Reveal About Our Senses by Jackie Higgins (Picador, £20)Newt Gingrich, a former House speaker and candidate for the Republican presidential nomination, stoked outrage on Sunday by predicting members of the House committee investigating the Capitol attack will be imprisoned if Republicans retake the chamber this year. One of two Republicans on the committee, Liz Cheney, said: “A former speaker of the House is threatening jail time for members of Congress who are investigating the violent attack on our Capitol and our constitution. This is what it looks like when the rule of law unravels.” Gingrich made his name with scorched-earth opposition to Bill Clinton in the 1990s and ran for the Republican presidential nomination in 2012. He is now a prominent Trump supporter, rightwing gadfly and adviser to House Republican leaders. He made his prediction on Fox News, for which he is a contributor. Calling the members of the 6 January committee “wolves [who] are going to find out that they’re now sheep”, he said that if Republicans take Congress in November, “this is all going to come crashing down … they’re the ones who in fact, I think, face a real risk of jail for the kinds of laws they’re breaking”. The 6 January committee has recommended criminal charges for the former White House adviser Steve Bannon and Mark Meadows, Trump’s final chief of staff. Both refused to comply with subpoenas. Bannon has pleaded not guilty to contempt of Congress, a charge that carries a year in jail, with a trial set for the summer. The Department of Justice has not acted regarding Meadows. Gingrich said: “You have, both with Attorney General [Merrick] Garland and this select committee on 6 January, people who have run amok … they’re running over people’s civil liberties. “And what they need to understand is on 4 January next year, you’re going to have a Republican majority in the House and a Republican majority in the Senate. And all these people who have been so tough, and so mean, and so nasty are going to be delivered subpoenas for every document, every conversation, every tweet, every email.” Gingrich also said the committee was “basically a lynch mob”. Another member of the committee, the Democrat Zoe Lofgren, told CNN Gingrich’s comments were “just bizarre. I think Newt has really lost it. You know, it leaves me speechless.” Alluding to Trump’s attempt to overturn his defeat in part through the Capitol putsch, Lofgren added: “I mean, unless he is assuming that the government does get overthrown and there’s no system of justice.” Most observers expect Republicans to at least retake the House in November and to turn their sights on Democrats, who impeached Trump twice, and Joe Biden. But some see a legal net closing on Trump himself. Last week it emerged that the 6 January committee has requested interviews with figures including Ivanka Trump, a move that prompted the former president to complain about “vicious people” who “go after children”. Ivanka Trump is 40. Furthermore, Donald Trump’s niece was among observers to point out that Trump himself has no problem going after other people’s children. Speaking to MSNBC, Mary Trump accused her uncle of “enormous hypocrisy”, for going after Hunter Biden, the president’s son, “who last I checked never worked for the federal government, so his double standard is grotesque on its face”. Mary Trump also had a warning for her cousin, saying Trump “will throw anybody under the bus if he believes it’s in his best interest to do so”. Also on Sunday, the chair of the House committee, the Mississippi Democrat Bennie Thompson, told CBS the panel has spoken to William Barr, Trump’s second attorney general. Barr stoked criticism by overseeing investigation of Trump’s claims of electoral fraud in his defeat by Biden but infuriated the president when he said no evidence was found. He resigned before 6 January. Cheney and Adam Kinzinger of Illinois defied Republican leadership to join the select committee. Kinzinger will retire at the midterms. Cheney faces a Trump-endorsed challenger. Other senior Republicans, including Trump allies Jim Jordan and Scott Perry and the minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, have refused requests to co-operate with the House committee.Adults in England and Wales are being encouraged to apply online via “a revised, streamlined recruitment process” to become a lay magistrate, in an effort to tackle a backlog of criminal cases caused by the pandemic. A week after announcing plans to double the maximum sentence that magistrates can pass to a year, Dominic Raab, the justice secretary, said the judiciary would recruit another 4,000. It will be the largest recruitment effort in the 650-year history of the magistracy, the Ministry of Justice said. Courts in England and Wales have been struggling to clear a backlog of cases. As of November, 372,000 cases were outstanding in the magistrates courts and a further 58,728 in the crown court system. The number of magistrates has plummeted in the past decade, from 25,170 in 2012 to 12,651, according to the most recent figures last year. The MoJ said it was investing £1m in the recruitment campaign, which would attempt to reach potential recruits “from teachers to bricklayers, to stay-at-home mums” and would seek to “make the magistracy more representative of the communities it serves”. The campaign would specifically target younger people, it said. Unpaid volunteer magistrates sit for at least 13 days a year, hearing family and criminal cases from their local community. As of last April, just over eight in 10 were over 50, and 56% were women. According to a 2018 estimate, 13% are from a black, Asian or minority ethnic background, compared with 13.8% of the UK population. The largest proportion of minority ethnic magistrates were from an Asian background, at 7%; 4% were black and 1% were mixed. Statistics on the intersection of gender and ethnicity groups in the magistracy were not available. “Magistrates are the unsung heroes of the justice system and we want people from every part of society represented in their ranks,” Raab said. “Alongside our plans to double their sentencing powers from six months to a year, this recruitment drive will ensure magistrates can play an even greater role in restoring the swift justice the public deserve.” Bev Higgs, the national chair of the Magistrates’ Association, said: “The Magistrates’ Association is pleased to support this recruitment campaign and would encourage people of all ages and backgrounds to contribute their lived experience, knowledge and commitment to the judiciary. “It is vitally important that magistrates courts reflect their local communities, and we welcome all who join us in this unique and very rewarding role.” But not all lawyers welcomed the plans. One leading criminal lawyer, Raj Chada, of Hodge Jones Allen, said: “In a post-pandemic world where job insecurity is even more pronounced, few can take time from their job to become lay magistrates. Those that do tend to be better off, older or retired and white. This creates the perception of an officer class, pronouncing judgment on those of a different class. It is hardly going to increase confidence in the criminal justice system.”The once familiar sight of bustling Bridgewater Hall greeted the Hallé orchestra, who opened their spring season with a long-awaited performance of Mahler’s Third Symphony – originally scheduled for May 2020. Where Mahler’s Second Symphony follows the passage of darkness into light, the Third gets even closer to his world-encompassing aspiration, charting nature’s journey via mankind towards God’s love. Involving six, lopsidedly arranged movements, requiring a vast number of musicians and lasting for well over 90 minutes, it’s an ambitious piece to programme at any time, but, with a vista of performers on one side and a packed auditorium on the other, Mark Elder was a picture of calm, interrupting his economical gestures only to shake more sound out of the strings. Elder’s dedication to painting the big picture can come at the expense of rhythmic transparency, but the sound he conjures from the Hallé is plush, dramatic and – crucially for this work – unhurried. The orchestra’s nine horns began proceedings resolutely as each section presented their own vivid colours in turn through the sprawling opening movement, Katy Jones’s sonorous trombone solo the pick of the bunch. Symphonic logic rapidly departs as the piece travels through an impish minuet to a folksy movement originally titled What the Animals of the Forest Tell Me – the latter possessed bags of the earthiness that’s key to releasing Mahler’s magic. The two vocal movements brought sharply contrasting characters: Alice Coote leant heavily into the world-weary mood of Nietzsche’s enigmatic “superman” text, while the Hallé Choirs delivered their short contributions with gusto. The slender fifth movement was a multi-layered delight, courtesy of beaming “bimm! bamm!”s from the Children’s Choir and genuine church bells (borrowed from the Liverpool Philharmonic). But the evening’s high point was Elder’s judicious handling of the finale’s consecutive peaks – measured in its passion, and rapturously applauded.The France scrum-half Antoine Dupont has been voted the Rugby Union Writers’ Club’s Personality of the Year for 2021. Dupont succeeds the Exeter director of rugby, Rob Baxter, as holder of the Pat Marshall Memorial Award following an outstanding 12 months for Les Bleus and Toulouse, the club he helped to a Champions Cup and Top 14 double. The current World Rugby player of the year has continued to redefine scrum-half play through the excellence of his running and kicking games, generalship and defence. Last May Dupont was also named European player of the year. The 25-year-old has emerged as a leader for France, captaining them last autumn in a successful series that included a first home victory over New Zealand since 2009. His pedigree means France head into the forthcoming Six Nations as the favourites, though he is expected to miss their opening match against Italy on 6 February having recently tested positive for Covid-19. He follows in the footsteps of greats of the game to have been acclaimed by the RUWC such as Gareth Edwards, Jonah Lomu, Martin Johnson, Jonny Wilkinson, Brian O’Driscoll, Maggie Alphonsi and Dan Carter. Dupont came out on top of a poll of the RUWC’s 250-plus members encompassing writers, photographers and broadcasters. Other top contenders who polled highly included the Wales and British &amp; Lions captain Alun Wyn Jones, the Pacific Islands rugby campaigner Daniel Leo, rising England and Harlequins star Marcus Smith, the Red Roses’ second row Zoe Aldcroft and the England Women’s head coach Simon Middleton.A cryptocurrency-backed consortium that paid £2.2m – 100 times the estimate – for concept art for an unmade film adaptation of Dune has claimed that their animated version has gone into development despite questions over copyright. The group, called Spice DAO, caused a flurry of excitement on social media when it announced last weekend that it had bought the book of art, created by director Alejandro Jodorowsky in the 1970s, at auction in November and planned to “make the book public (to the extent permitted by law)” and, more ambitiously, to “produce an original animated limited series inspired by the book and sell it to a streaming service”. Frank Herbert’s novel Dune has been filmed three times: David Lynch’s 1984 version, a TV miniseries in 2000, and Denis Villeneuve’s version released last autumn. However, as many people pointed out in the thousands of replies to Saturday’s Twitter post, ownership of a copy of a book, no matter how much was paid for it, does not confer any intellectual property rights to either distribute copies of it or to adapt it into another medium. The announcement was roundly dismissed as a stunt by social media users who suspect Spice DAO’s ultimate plan is to sell the individual pages from the book as NFTs – digital images with ownership rights – especially as there was speculation on a Spice DAO internet forum that the physical book could be burned as a publicity stunt after the NFTs have sold. While the book did indeed sell at Christie’s in Paris for €2.6m on 21 November, Spice DAO have offered no actual proof that they are the purchasers, nor explained why the price paid was so astronomical when the auction house had put a €25,000-35-000 estimate on it. It has been reported that Spice DAO’s co-founder, millionaire Soban Saqib, put up the bulk of the purchase fee from his own funds after raising $750,000 (£550,000) from the consortium’s members. Adrien Legendre, of the books department of Christie’s in Paris, told the Guardian that the book came from the private collection of an individual and that bids were taken on the day from the room, by phone and online – where the winning bid came from, which Legendre was not at liberty to discuss. As to the surprising price the book realised, Legendre said that the estimate was based on “previous sale results, reflecting the appetite and market for the object and the context”. In a Medium post on Thursday, Spice DAO seemed to concede that they did not have any rights to adapt Frank Herbert’s 1965 novel – and instead were ploughing ahead with creating an original animated series. The post reads: “After two months of outreach, conversations with former business partners and consultations with legal counsel we have not been able to reach an agreement with any of the rights holders involved in the creation of the contents of the book of collected storyboards of Jodorowsky’s Dune. “Our research over the past two months has only increased our respect for their project and we were so inspired by the book and learning more about its creation that we saw how we could develop our own intellectual property that we own 100% and control all aspects of the production of an original animated limited series. Spice DAO claims are in the development phase and have a “whirlwind week of meetings” coming up with writers, producers, three Los Angeles animation studios, graphic novel publishers, and the “entertainment attorney for Drake” – presumably the Canadian-born rapper. Kirsty Stewart, legal director and trademark attorney in the Dundee office of law firm Thorntons, wrote on the company’s site: “Unfortunately for Spice DOA, the collective who purchased the Jodorowsky Dune bible, Frank Herbert died in 1986, meaning copyright persists in the base text of Dune until at least 2056. Similarly, the book they purchased, as it was produced to sell the idea to studios at the time, is likely protected by copyright until at least 2092, as Jodorowsky, one of the authors of the book, remains alive. “As such, in order to produce or authorise derivative works such as an animated series, Spice DOA would need to obtain licenses from the Herbert estate, as well as potentially Jodorowsky (and any other authors such as Michel Seydoux) if the adaptation was based on the Jodorowsky book. Similar to how buying a Batman comic does not give you the inherent rights to produce a new Batman film, the purchasing of this director’s bible does not give Spice DOA any intrinsic rights to produce new material.” French-Chilean director Jodorowsky acquired the film rights to Dune in 1974, and envisaged an epic topping 15 hours. Jodorowsky engaged a trio of comic book and science fiction artists – Jean Giraud, known as Moebius; Chris Foss, a British illustrator famous for his science fiction novel covers; and Swiss artist HR Giger, who would later become known for his concept work on the Alien movies – to design the look and feel of his projected adaptation. They failed to get financial backing from the studios, though, and the project died, its only legacy being the concept art books that Jodorowsky produced – of which Christie’s say only around 10 survive. The lot sold in November was described by Christie’s as “oblong octavo (210 x 295 mm). 11 colour plates, after drawings by Christopher Foss, Jean Giraud-Moebius and HR Giger, one title-page, 268 black and white plates, mostly the storyboard for the movie, with dialogues in French and English, and some studies for characters, environments and vehicles, one page with the printer’s name and address. All the plates are photographic reproductions, printed single-side.” It has been pointed out on social media that many of the pages of the rare book are already available online. Spice DAO were contacted via their Twitter account and after initially seeming amenable to conversation, blocked this writer after being asked: “How do you propose to adapt a book that you don’t have the rights for and get a streaming service to take it? Or is this more about selling the pages as NFTs?”Food is a serious business in my family. Whenever I visit my aunt I’m always reminded of the scene from My Big Fat Greek Wedding where the fiance is revealed to be vegetarian: “What do you mean, you don’t eat no meat? That’s OK, I make lamb.” For her, the idea of a plate without meat on it makes no sense, and she is always trying to sneak something on, claiming “a little won’t hurt”. So I came prepared for my first family barbecue as a vegan. This was long before the days of Beyond Burger, so I opted for spicy jerk-seasoned portobello mushrooms and peppers, Creole spiced sweet potatoes and smoky carrot hotdogs. OK, smoky carrot hotdogs may sound abysmal, but I promise you they’re magic when done right. I prepared them the night before, marinating every inch, and was really excited to eat, drink and catch up with my cousins. My uncle was at the grill, babysitting sausages, burgers and chicken thighs, and I proudly walked up to him with my vegetables to inquire when I could get them on. He looked from me to the plate in my hand and back again, and threw back his head in booming laughter. One by one, everyone at the barbecue gathered round my plate of vegetables in hysterics, and I heard: “Is that rabbit food really all you’re going to eat?” amid bursts of derisive laughter. My journey to fully plant-based eating has been a marathon, not a sprint. My teenage social life revolved around south London chicken shops (Morley’s, please holla at your girl so we can develop a plant-based menu – I’m waiting). I referred to myself as a “chicken-eating pescatarian”, which isn’t actually a thing, and remember being horrified when a close friend told me she was contemplating becoming vegan. “But why?! It seems so miserable. Just go veggie. You’re being so extra.” Two years later, I was on holiday in Ecuador with a mouthful of roast guinea pig – cuy, a speciality – when I was suddenly struck by the fact that I was eating the flesh of an animal. Obviously I’d been aware I was eating animals before, but tucking in to guinea pig – in my mind a pet – was different. I realised the word “meat” disconnected me from that reality – flesh is so much more visceral. I committed to veganism, and in my first year of university I had Meat-Free Monday nights for my halls of residence, making amazing, budget-friendly meals with friends. These Monday sessions were the blueprint for my food business Sisterwoman Vegan, and helped me to get creative and confident with plant-based cooking. I made everything from pie and mash to curries and lasagne, as well as my signature soul food and traditional Jamaican dishes. I realised the impact of these sessions at my birthday dinner when the entire table ordered something plant-based – I thought they were doing it for my benefit, but after a year of trying vegan cooking they actually thought the veg options sounded more tasty. My favourite food to make for friends now is my annual friendsmas meal – the staples are perfect roast potatoes, musician Jme-approved mac and cheese and my vegan oxtail substitute. This meal would absolutely make any committed carnivore feel that they don’t need meat – it’s all about flavour and texture. Honest Burgers’ plant burger has me covered if I ever need a proper meaty fix, but I do crave seafood sometimes – a vegan calamari recipe using king oyster mushrooms and seaweed was one of the first recipes I perfected. ‘Many of my private catering clients aren’t vegan, they just appreciate plant-based cooking,’ says Robinson Being Black, plus-size and vegan is extremely interesting as I don’t fit into the assumed mold. A lot of people didn’t understand that veganism has little to do with health or clean eating and assumed I was trying to lose weight. While I did lose some, the biggest impact in terms of health was reevaluating my relationship with food. I had to be intentional rather than passive, which meant I was really aware of everything I was consuming. Vegan spaces are still considerably whitewashed and, at times, flat out racist. When I first became vegan, a popular vegan platform tweeted: “Black Lives Matter? More than chickens’ or cows’ lives … apparently”, amid protests in the US after the police shooting of Michael Brown in 2014. This was one reason I set up the Black Vegan Fest in February 2021; the other being the fact that Black people in the UK suffer disproportionately from food-related illnesses. I wanted to champion Black plant-based businesses and encourage my community to become plant-based. We are lucky now to have a plethora of Black-centred vegan platforms, sharing veganised traditional cultural dishes and advice, but they were rare when I first became vegan. Now, I no longer feel that my cultural identity and my choice to not eat meat are at odds. Plant-based eating is more normal, and I absolutely love it. Two of my cousins are vegetarian, and my aunt called me up to (lovingly) shout at me for brainwashing her household – and to ask for recipes. Many of my private catering clients aren’t vegan, they just appreciate plant-based cooking. The popularity of plant-based eating has changed my relationship with veganism. I identify less with that label and I’m much less militant – veganism and its followers aren’t morally superior to any other way of eating, especially if they fail to focus on eating local and limiting food waste. Sisterwoman Vegan’s spinach and mushroom carbonara The biggest thing I miss about no longer being “that weirdo vegan” is that my vegan alternatives used to always be affordable and available. It feels as if there’s now a “vegan tax” on niche products such as ackee, jackfruit and banana blossom, which are cultural staples for some communities. I also miss when some chefs would create a special plant-based dish just for me if I called in advance – hold the vegan burger please, I miss the VIP treatment! Looking for dietary advice from a puppet? Watch THE NEW NORM&amp;AL SHOW. Season 1 streaming now. Find out more at oatly.comI wasn’t always a boring eater. I used to have a slightly crackpot reputation among friends and family for ordering the weirdest thing on the menu in a restaurant. And yet I have had to reconcile myself to the fact that I’ve basically bottomed out as a meat and two veg guy. Sure, on the extremely rare occasions that I eat out, I’ll probably have something wild just so I can briefly feel alive again. But 99% of my meals are eaten at home, generally cooked by me, and with two fussy kids and a partner who responds with visceral horror any time I suggest we might try Polish cuisine (which is more like three meats and some cabbage), the good ol’ meat and two veg tends to win. It’s such a depressing-sounding phrase – like you’ve given up on life, like you’re simply spooning down drably uniform food units as you go about your tedious little day, too starved of inspiration to even attempt to respond to culinary developments of recent years. As plant-based eating becomes increasingly popular – and offers an ever-expanding array of options – meat and two veg remains obstinately rooted in the British psyche. But life, and food, have moved on. I don’t want to be too down on it. For starters: two veg – that’s pretty good, right? We’re talking about doing some solid damage to our five-a-day here. OK, in my house it’s often fairly unadventurous boiled things that won’t offend a six-year-old, but you don’t get more plant-based than a vegetable. “Meat” – well, it can cover a whole spectrum of possibilities: chicken! Beef! Vaguely avant garde sausages from our local sausage shop! It would be a struggle to paint a meat and two veg lifestyle as particularly sexy, but you can’t believe the endorphin rush that comes from persuading a small person to eat food that isn’t covered in breadcrumbs and processed to within an inch of its life. If you don’t screw up the cooking of what is basically food that’s very easy to cook, then meat is nice! That’s why people eat it. And you can be kind of ethical about the meat you choose, too: free-range chicken, grass-fed, organic lamb, avoid beef with a connection to deforestation in Latin America … Yes, it’s worse for the environment than simply not eating meat at all, but to eat meat and two veg is not to say I don’t care. Yet, I am well aware this way of eating is out of date, a feeling exacerbated for me by the fact that my day job involves working with a lot of cool younger people. They talk about individual dishes in specific London restaurants the way I used to talk about the latest single from a mid-2000s indie band. And where back in my day vegans were regarded as a sort of extremist vegetarian sect who ate their own, peculiar, nut-based cuisine, now veganism seems to have leapfrogged vegetarianism in terms of popularity – people go to vegan restaurants because they’re cool, because they’ve heard about some amazing new dish, because of colossal advances in food technology, because of increased open-mindedness about food, because of the increased internationalism in cuisine and, naturally, a desire to consume food in a more healthy, environmentally-friendly way. People go to vegan restaurants without even being actual vegans. Is it time for Łukowski to replace his sausages … Nonetheless, is it for me? For a long time, I’ve worried that nouveaux veganism is so cool that my dabbling with it would have the air of a midlife crisis. Is embracing veganism at the age of 40 the culinary equivalent of Ben Affleck getting a new tattoo? But recently it has become so obvious that the wind is blowing in a certain direction – there’s now a plant-based section in Tesco – that I’ve realised I’ve probably been overthinking it. Ultimately, the world is changing: in my lifetime meat might become scarcer, or more expensive, or beyond the ethical pale, or grown in a vat, or replaced with insect protein. I have made my peace with the fact that, at some point, my diet will have to change. So why not introduce some more plant-based foods into my already two-thirds plant-based diet? The need to appease my children has always been an excuse for lack of action, but the rise of faux meat is actually the perfect opportunity to pep up family mealtimes, be it from the now bewildering array of plant-based sausages available, to kievs, escalopes, and even fake bacon (that one’s a bit weird, to be honest). … with a plant-based alternative? I’m not sure I’m ready for the really cutting-edge stuff, and meat is unlikely to leave my diet. I need to give the kids something to rebel against when they’re older and go fully plant-based themselves. But, for now, yes, I’m a meat and two veg guy. But sometimes I’m also a fake meat and two veg guy. And that’s what we call progress. Looking for dietary advice from a puppet? Watch THE NEW NORM&amp;AL SHOW. Season 1 streaming now. Find out more at oatly.comA pufferfish had to undergo emergency dental work after her teeth grew so big she was unable to eat. The owner of Goldie the porcupine pufferfish, Mark Byatt, 64, rushed her to the vets in Kent after noticing she was losing weight because her long teeth prevented her from eating properly. Medics at Sandhole Veterinary Centre in Snodland, Kent, confirmed the five-year-old pufferfish’s teeth needed to be sawed down. They sedated her using a water bowl filled with a mild anaesthetic solution, so they could cut off one inch from her teeth. The veterinary surgeon Daniel Calvo Carrasco, who specialises in caring for exotic pets, said: “Porcupine pufferfish teeth are known as beaks and grow continuously throughout their lives. “They’re usually kept short naturally, as they’re worn down on their regular diet of hard-shelled foods, but, while these foods are provided in her home environment, she is not as forthcoming in eating them as her other tankmates. “As a result, her upper beak grew to the point where it was hindering her ability to eat effectively.” To calm Goldie during the procedure, the water was kept well oxygenated. “This meant she was still breathing nicely throughout, but was able to be held for brief periods out of the water without becoming too stressed,” Carrasco said. The veterinary nurse Debbie Addison held Goldie in a damp towel to prevent her from drying out – and provide a layer of protection if Goldie’s “puff up” defensive mode is activated. When they feel threatened or distressed, pufferfish can inflate to double their size to deter predators. Carrasco said it was during those brief periods out of the anaesthetic water when he could use a dental bur – a tool often made from diamond for cutting bone or teeth – to saw off half her upper beak. Once the hour-long procedure was over, Goldie was moved to another large bowl filled with water from her home tank to recover from the anaesthetic. “She responded well and there was no stress at all,” said Carrasco. “Within five minutes, she was able to stay up right in the water and within 10 minutes she was back to happily swimming around. Goldie was back home and eating well within two hours.” Goldie is now well settled back home in her tank in Leybourne, much to the relief of her owner. Byatt said: “About three months ago, we noticed her front beak was growing very quickly, even though she was eating cockle in shell every day. “We aren’t sure why Goldie’s teeth never really managed to grind themselves naturally, but we knew we needed to get them filed, although we were unsure about how to achieve this.” He said he was initially unsure about transporting the tropical fish to the surgery due to the risks involved. “We’re just thrilled to have Goldie back home. She is thriving back in her tank and none the worse for her visit to the dentist.’The WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange will be able to go to the supreme court in the UK to challenge a decision allowing him to be extradited to the US to face espionage charges. However, the high court refused him permission for a direct appeal, meaning the supreme court will first have to decide whether or not it should hear his challenge. The high court last month ruled that the WikiLeaks co-founder can be extradited, as it overturned a judgment earlier last year based on concerns about Assange’s mental health and risk of suicide in a US maximum-security prison. In their ruling in December, the high court judges sided with the US authorities after a package of assurances were put forward that Assange would not face those strictest measures unless he committed an act in the future that required them. Stella Moris, Assange’s fiancee, said after Monday’s ruling that what happened in court was precisely what she and those supporting him had wanted to happen. “The situation now is that the supreme court has to decide whether it will hear the appeal but, make no mistake, we won today in court.” A case has to raise a point of law of “general public importance” for a proposed appeal to be considered by the supreme court. Birnberg Peirce Solicitors, representing Assange, has previously said the case raised “serious and important” legal issues, including over a “reliance” on assurances given by the US about the prison conditions he would face if extradited. In their short pronouncement on Monday, the lord chief justice, Lord Burnett, and Lord Justice Holroyde ruled there was a point of law, but denied Assange permission for the appeal. They said that Assange had raised three points of law for the supreme court bid, but only succeeded on one about the use of assurances in extradition hearings. They added it was for the supreme court justices to make the final decision. Burnett asked the court to “take steps to expedite consideration of any application” that follows. Speaking outside the Royal Courts of Justice on Monday, Moris told supporters: “But let’s not forget that every time we win, as long as this case isn’t dropped, as long as Julian isn’t freed, Julian continues to suffer. For almost three years he has been in Belmarsh prison and he is suffering profoundly, day after day, week after week, year after year. Julian has to be freed and we hope that this will soon end. “But we are far from achieving justice in this case because Julian has been incarcerated for so long and he should not have spent a single day in prison.” “If there were justice, the crimes that Julian exposed, war crimes, the killing of innocent civilians, would not be immune.” Nick Vamos, a partner at Peters and Peters solicitors in London and a former head of extradition at the Crown Prosecution Service, said: “There will be a little bit of surprise about this as there is settled case law on the question that has been certified. However, in its 10 December judgment the high court discussed the different circumstances in which assurances could be considered on appeal, so it’s not completely black and white. “The supreme court could well say: ‘We are not interested in this question about the assurances because it has already been settled at high court level.’ Even if the supreme court takes the appeal, it may clarify the law for future cases in a way that makes no difference to Assange’s appeal.” Assange, who remains in prison, would have other routes to fight his extradition, irrespective of what happens in relation to any supreme court appeal. Were he to fail, his lawyers could mount a cross-appeal at a lower court level, which would take place first at the high court and focus on questions of free speech and political motivation of the extradition request.Eating game, particularly that managed by the British Game Alliance, is a brilliant way to protect ecosystems and natural habitats, and support good animal welfare. Game can make the most delicious feasts, adding wonderful flavour and goodness to curries, pilaus, roasts and stir-fries. I also love that it is so healthy, being higher in protein and micronutrients than anything reared indoors. Grilled Rajasthani spiced spatchcocked game bird with roast potatoes and raita I particularly love the mild, sweet flavour of partridge (when in season), but this dish also works wonderfully with quail or jointed chicken. Prep 15 min Cook 45 min Serves 4 1kg floury potatoes, peeled and cut into small chunks 7 tbsp olive oil 1 tbsp coriander seeds 1 tbsp cumin seeds ½ tsp black peppercorns 1 whole Kashmiri chilli, or ½ tsp chilli flakes Seeds from 4 green cardamom pods 1 clove 2 bay leaves ½ tsp ground cinnamon 4 partridges, or 4-8 quail, depending on appetite, or 8 chicken quarters, thighs and/or drumsticks Lemon wedges, to serve For the raita 300g Greek yoghurt 1 small garlic clove, peeled ½ cucumber 1 small handful mint leaves, chopped Ask your butcher to spatchcock the birds, or do it yourself by cutting out the backbone, then putting the birds breast side up on a board and pushing down to flatten them out. Heat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/425F/gas 7. Pop the potatoes in a large baking tray, pour over five tablespoons of the olive oil, season generously and toss with your hands to coat. Roast for 30 minutes, stirring occasionally. Meanwhile, blitz the whole spices and bay leaves to a powder in a small spice grinder (or grind them in a mortar). Transfer to a large bowl, stir in the cinnamon and remaining two tablespoons of oil, then add the birds, season and rub the spice paste all over the birds, so they’re well coated in the aromatics – they will be smelling delicious by now. Once the potatoes have done their 30 minutes, lay the birds skin side up on top, then roast for 15 minutes, or until the birds are just cooked through – they are much better served slightly pink and tender; overcooking dries out game because of its low fat content. Transfer the birds to a plate, cover with foil and leave to rest in a warm spot for five to 10 minutes. In the meantime, the potatoes will get even more of an opportunity to crisp up in the oven. To make the raita, spoon the yoghurt into a bowl, grate in the garlic and cucumber, stir in the mint and season to taste. Serve the roast birds with the hot potatoes, the raita, lemon wedges and perhaps a crisp, green salad on the side. The simple flex … For a veggie version, toss the potatoes in half the spices and roast as above. Sweat a large sliced onion with the rest of the spices, stir in some peas, toss into the potatoes and serve in flatbreads with the raita. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoFor more than a decade, Jake Xerxes Fussell tried and failed to sing an old American folk song he had loved since he was a teenager. The tune, Rolling Mills Are Burning Down, combines an industrial accident with personal woe, resulting in a violent verse: “Oh, go get your revolver / And come on and blow out my brain / For I’d rather be dead and in my grave / Than to be in this trouble I’m in.” Folk aficionado John Cohen captured Rolling Mills during a song-scouting foray into the ancient mountains of western North Carolina and south-west Virginia. He recorded banjoist George Landers singing it in a rail-thin voice, fingers pawing anxiously at his strings. It resonated with Fussell generations later, after an inferno ripped through Bibb Mill, a century-old textile plant that served as an economic engine of his home town, Columbus, west Georgia. Still, Fussell struggled with his own version this way and that, unable to sell its imagery. “There was no real spirit,” he says. But then he delivered it slowly, as if from under some great burden, with that violent bit recast as an ordinary argument between sad lovers. “I once would have thought this is taking too much licence,” says Fussell, 40, who speaks with the same affable southern lilt with which he sings, strolling around his North Carolina backyard on a crisp January day. “But as I get older, I think it’s getting closer, because it feels truer to me. If I connect emotionally, that’s as important as any other element.” Fussell, who has won admirers including Will Oldham, Wilco and Bill Callahan, is one of the great magpies of American song, collecting forgotten, tarnished gems with a folklorist’s zeal – on his exceptional 2019 album Out of Sight, these ranged from violent murder ballads to the lusty hollers of fishmongers. His renditions aren’t so much cover versions as composites, and Fussell’s sad-eyed take on Rolling Mills is the centrepiece of Good and Green Again, his fourth – and most poignant – album. This flexibility came slowly for Fussell, whose parents met at a living-history museum in Georgia, where blacksmiths and dressmakers demonstrated traditions of yore. Fussell describes himself as an obsessive “folk music dork” in high school, shuffling through stacks of dusty blues compilations and field-recording compendiums in rear corners of record stores. He absorbed the archivist lessons of family friends, American folklorists Bill Ferris and Art Rosenbaum. He wasn’t keen to share that side of his life with his peers, however. During his first paying gig, playing upright bass with local bluegrass standbys at a regional barbecue chain, some high-school pals shuffled in for dinner, and were stunned. “I was happy to have my social life and school be separate from my interests,” he says. “It was my thing, the stubbornness of my identity.” But as he learned more, especially while earning his southern studies degrees at the University of Mississippi, he began to realise he had little to guard, because the musicians he respected never meant for their work to be sealed in amber. He recalled meeting members of the Skillet Lickers, a venerated Georgia string band formed in 1926, at a Georgia folk festival in the 90s and understanding they were more than a static stereotype. “They weren’t wearing string ties,” he laughs. “They were wearing windsuits and puffy Nikes. That’s what folk singers wear.” On his first three albums, he mined decades of archival material for songs that felt relevant to his times, often recombining them with others or recontextualising them with updated arrangements. His 2019 take on Winnsboro Cotton Mill Blues, chronicled decades earlier by Pete Seeger, turned a raw lament of labour exploitation into a tragic country ballad that felt so contemporary it could be called Amazon Warehouse Blues. There were times, however, he felt he was too hesitant to add anything new, as with his atmospheric take on Pinnacle Mountain Silver Mine, an exquisite tune about the endless quest for riches delivered in 1980 by Virginia singer Helen Cockram. “I almost regret recording it,” he says. “For people who are aware of her original, why wouldn’t you listen to that?” Good and Green Again corrects that anxiety with a burgeoning confidence. Fussell, who became a father during the pandemic, bends tunes such as the wayward Georgia love song Carriebelle toward his own life, and includes a handful of originals for the first time. The album ends with Washington, a song Fussell built from boastful lines about the first American president – “noblest of men” – that he saw woven into an antique wool rug. His voice carries gentle scorn mirrored by the ragged bite of his guitar, making a sly eulogy for the myth of American exceptionalism. Fussell lists every reference in his liner notes, intended as a breadcrumb trail and not some recitation of allegiances. “Appropriation is a heavy consideration in my work, and it’s hard to know where to draw the line,” he says. “Art is appropriation. But I don’t feel like I’m doing anybody any justice by trying to sound like anybody else.” Still, the original material is always within view, glinting like a beacon to suggest how little anything really changes. “I don’t do this to push boundaries,” Fussell says. “I am finding connections in these songs to what’s going on now. They have to be there for me to want to sing them.” • Good and Green Again is out now on Paradise of BachelorsA video obtained by the Guardian appearing to show Egyptian police torturing detainees in a Cairo police station confirms the extent to which officers appear able to inflict violence on civilians with near total impunity, according to human rights groups. The video, covertly recorded by a detainee through a cell door, appears to show two inmates hung in stress positions. The detainees are naked from the waist up and suspended from a metal grate by their arms, which are fastened behind their backs. “Watch how they are torturing us and our colleagues. They came and told us we’re next,” one detainee says. Addressing the Egyptian president, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi he says: “Mister president, we want to ask why the police in el-Salam First police station are doing this to us.” The video is one of two believed to have been recorded in November last year inside a police station in the working-class el-Salam neighbourhood of northern Cairo. In the second, which the Guardian is not showing to protect detainees’ identities, inmates in an overcrowded cell line up to display injuries they say were inflicted by police officials and investigators, including open wounds on their heads and bruises across their chests and backs. “They are hitting us with sticks,” they say. Humans rights groups said the videos are visual evidence of widespread abuses that they have been documenting in police stations and detention centres across Egypt for the past decade. The Guardian has taken steps to verify the videos where possible, including requesting an assessment of the videos by a trusted expert. Detainees shown in the video also name multiple police officers who are listed in news reports as serving at el-Salam First police station. The videos surfaced nearly 12 years after the death of Khaled Said, a 28-year-old civilian, in police custody in Alexandria in June 2010. Said’s death proved to be a watershed, inciting public anger at the impunity of security forces and their treatment of Egyptian citizens, and sparking the protests that began on 25 January 2011, a national day traditionally honouring the police force. The 18 days of nationwide protests that followed ended the decades-long reign of autocrat Hosni Mubarak, where abuses by security bodies were widespread. Yet 11 years after the uprising, testimonies and evidence collected by rights groups allege that abuses by Egypt’s security services are once again out of control. Since coming to power after a military coup in 2013, Sisi has presided over a renewed era of impunity for security forces, down to the lowest ranks of the police. Despite a clear prohibition on all forms of torture in Egypt’s 2014 constitution, trials and convictions of security officials for torture or deaths in custody remain extremely rare, while abuses are regularly documented. Domestic organisations monitoring torture and abuse in detention now struggle to continue their work, amid a prolonged crackdown on civil society activity. “Police stations are even worse than prisons,” said Aly Hussin Mahdy, a former detainee and now exiled activist, describing his experience in detention. “The revolution happened because of this, and 11 years later we see it happening again.” Amr Magdi, an expert on Egypt at Human Rights Watch who reviewed the videos for the Guardian, said that the detainees’ injuries and the use of stress positions are consistent with documented examples of torture in detention centres. “They all show signs of severe beatings, and they mention batons and wooden sticks which are routine torture tools,” he said. “These videos show the sad and horrifying reality of Egypt’s detention system as the police enjoy near-absolute impunity.” Magdi said that abuse was common in police stations, where mistreatment can occur away from public view. “We know that most physical torture happens in police stations and secret NSA [National Security Agency] detention centres during the initial days or weeks after arrest, and before detainees are taken to larger prisons,” he said. Human Rights Watch detailed the use of stress positions and the systemic use of torture in police stations in a report in 2017, describing the issue as a potential crime against humanity. The report cites 19 individual cases where detainees “were tortured in police stations and national security offices across the country, including Alexandria, Aswan, and cities in the Nile delta”. For some, torture occurred in multiple places of detention. “The basic tools of torture were electrocution and stress positions, accompanied by beatings with fists, wooden sticks or metal bars,” they said. Police and NSA officers “handcuffed suspects’ arms behind their back, pulled up their arms, placed their handcuffs over the top edge of a door, and hung them above the floor, an unnatural position that caused excruciating pain in the back and shoulders, sometimes dislocating them. Some officers pulled suspects’ legs downward to increase the pain,” they said. They added that detainees were often left in stress positions for long periods. Rights groups have also documented frequent deaths among those detained. In 2015, Amnesty International provided evidence of at least nine deaths in custody in the Mattareya police station in Cairo. Three years later, it demanded an investigation after the suspicious death of 43-year-old Gamal Aweida in custody in the Mansheyet Nasir district of the city. In rare cases of accountability, a small number of police officers have been sentenced for shooting civilians in public over the past decade. In 2016, Sisi publicly instructed the interior ministry to prevent abuses by police following an outcry after an officer shot dead a taxi driver. Last year, a police officer from the el-Salam Second police station was sentenced to three years in prison with hard labour for shooting a civilian in the chest and wounding another. Yet convictions for deaths in custody are rare, even for low-ranking police officers. Four noncommissioned officers were imprisoned by prosecutors in 2020 for torturing a man to death at a police station in Giza. In December 2020, nine police officers were sentenced to three years in prison for beating a street vendor to death in custody in Cairo in 2016. The Egypt State Information Service, interior ministry, and current and former officials at the interior ministry either declined to comment or did not respond to requests for comment when contacted by the Guardian to discuss video evidence of abuses and the issue of torture in police custody. Additional reporting by Shams Mourad“We have to make sure,” said Hertha Berlin head coach, Tayfun Korkut, “that we put this week behind us and focus on the coming games.” A mere 109 seconds into Sunday’s game against Bayern Munich Corentin Tolisso had the ball in the Hertha net and was called for a marginal offside, and even before the midfielder eventually headed the opener it never felt like the home side were doing anything other than trying to contain the deluge in a paper cup, as Neil Finn might have said – but the coach meant more than just that. It is the whole week, rather than just the habitual ordeal against the Rekordmeister, that the club from the capital will aim to forget. It will be hard to do so. Underpinned by a DFB-Pokal loss against Union Berlin, a defeat that not only snuffed out any flickering hope of some joy being extracted from a miserable season but “consolidated [Union’s] title as city champions,” as Berliner Morgenpost’s Jörn Lange wrote on Thursday, it has been horrible. “You can’t make amends for a derby with the next game, even if it’s [against] Bayern,” recognised Korkut and though he insisted “I know how to beat them,” it was never going to be about producing an improbable result. Many fans had simply endured enough and the reverse to Union, with Hertha flattered by the 3-2 score lent a sheen by Suat Serdar’s very late consolation, was the straw that broke the camel’s back. On Thursday a banner with “Schande!” (Disgrace!) printed on it hung on the fence outside the Olympiastadion complex. By Saturday the disenchantment had escalated, with some 80 fans interrupting a behind-closed-doors training session to make their feelings clear to the players. The police were called, but didn’t need to intervene. Off the pitch things haven’t been going well either with reports from Business Insider detailing investigations into major investor Lars Windhorst – who has spent nearly €400 million in attempts to improve the team – and suspected involvement with a convicted money launderer from the UAE (Windhorst’s lawyer has refuted any deliberate involvement from his client). Despite Windhorst’s outlay resulting in little success, any pressure on him isunwelcome for the club. On the pitch Hertha are a combination of good ideas and terrible ones, of long-term plans and short-term panic. Their desire to build around young players like Márton Dárdai (19 years old) and Linus Gechter (17) and solid older pros is laudable, but some of the experienced members of the squad such as Stevan Jovetic and Kevin-Prince Boateng can’t be trusted to stay fit while others simply aren’t good enough. With a lack of leadership on the sidelines, it leaves Hertha looking a mess. “I have to say that there wasn’t really any defending for my goal,” Thomas Müller remarked with typical candour at being left alone to nudge in Joshua Kimmich’s free-kick on the cusp of half-time. There was a suggestion that the phantom whistler of the Olympiastadion striking again had led the defence to stop (the stadium’s announcer Fabian von Wachsmann made an appeal for the individual to refrain from doing so) on that occasion but there was no such excuse for the third goal as Alexander Schwolow’s pass in the approximate direction of Gechter got nowhere near the youngster and provided Leroy Sané with a tap-in. Serge Gnabry’s fourth compounded the misery. The appointment of Fredi Bobic as sporting director last July should have been the first step towards a credible plan for future success, but it is remarkable that despite installing a leader with vision and having funds available, hope is in short supply. “I’ve been a Hertha member since I was eight years old,” wrote Florian Comtesse in Monday’s Bild. “ I’ve been through two relegations but I’ve never been as disappointed as I am right now. I’m so tired of Hertha at the moment.” With so many teams with issues in the relegation scrap Hertha might be able to survive without genuine improvement – but it has reached the point where things can hardly get any worse. Talking points • Dortmund tightened their grip on second place with an impressive 3-2 win at Hoffenheim – impressive not in that BVB dominated, but in their ability to minimise profligacy at either end of the pitch. Home coach Sebastian Hoeness spoke of Dortmund’s two goals to quell his team’s surge at the start of the second half (a Marco Reus strike and a David Raum own goal) as being “in the style of a top team,” and this felt far more controlled from Marco Rose’s side, with Donyell Malen shining and laying on all three goals. • It wasn’t all great for BVB though, with Erling Haaland withdrawn in clear discomfort having opened the scoring, a thigh muscle injury looking the likely cause. The Bundesliga’s short hiatus is probably well-timed. “The break is not inconvenient for us,” noted Rose. • Another team licking their wounds from an early Pokal exit were Borussia Mönchengladbach, but maybe a humiliating elimination at second-tier Hannover wasn’t the nadir of their week as they were beaten at home again, this time by Union. Any side that scores a team goal of the quality of Manu Koné’s equaliser really shouldn’t be anywhere near the foot of the table – but there they are, held back by the desperate form of forwards Alessane Pléa and Marcus Thuram, questionable defending and a difficult-to-discern philosophy. Bild reported that Adi Hütter will be given the 14-day break to “finally inject his ideas into the team” – not least because he would be very expensive to fire, one assumes. The gloom was accentuated by modest Union’s win helping them crack the top four on the back of an expertly taken brace by former Gladbach star Max Kruse. • It’s now two points from the last nine Bundesliga games for Wolfsburg (11 winless overall) after Sunday’s defeat at Leipzig, who are slowly creeping up on the top four under Domenico Tedesco. It is thought that Die Wölfe, will delay any decision on the future of Florian Kohfeldt (who praised his side for a “really good performance” despite the loss), though he must surely beat bottom side Greuther Fürth next time out to continue. • Can we call Fürth in form? They bagged a second win of the season on Saturday, over Mainz, both achieved in the last six Bundesliga games, a space of time in which they’ve only lost once. Stefan Leitl’s team remain nine points adrift of third-bottom, the relegation play-off spot, but there is momentum – and confidence, as shown by Jeremy Dudziak’s delightful finish for the opener. “We’ll just see where the journey goes,” said Leitl. • Leverkusen consolidated third place after hammering Augsburg 5-1, with Moussa Diaby hitting a sublime hat-trick. It was also a good weekend off the pitch as the club announced the signing of prolific Iranian striker Sardar Azmoun, who will arrive on a free from Zenit St Petersburg in the summer.Thanks for reading the blog, we will be back tomorrow. The Rod Laver Arena will host these singles matches on Tuesday. (4) Barbora Krejcikova (Cze) v Madison Keys (USA), (14) Denis Shapovalov (Can) v (6) Rafael Nadal (Spa), (1) Ashleigh Barty (Aus) v (21) Jessica Pegula (USA), (17) Gael Monfils (Fra) v (7) Matteo Berrettini (Ita) This was a big big result in the women’s singles. Here’s our latest stories from the Australian Open. Stefanos Tsitsipas speaks, though takes his time to catch his breath. An epic match that’s all I can say, I gave everything, I am very proud. I am overwhelmed, too much, the stadium was on fire. It’s too good to be true. I knew it was going to get physical. It was important to have the crowd with me, and I feel like they were backing me up when things got tough. It was important to have that ambiance, thank you. I am very tired, I can barely speak right now. A thriller as Kaia Kanepi beats Aryna Sabalenka on a tie-break in the third set. What can Tsitsipas find on his serve? He’s beaten for 0-15 as he fails to bury a volley and Fritz finds a winner from deep on his backhand. But better and brutal to go to 15-15 with a forehand. Then a chipped lob leads Fritz to net once more, missing the volley. Then comes a brutal serve, and two match points. Two smashes, some Fritz chasing, and finally the ball goes out. Tsitsipas is through to the quarter-finals. Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 6-4 3-6 4-5 Tsitsipas* (*denotes next server) The break arrives! Long rally forces Fritz into an error, a big roar for just 0-15, which is cancelled out by a skidding serve, a slower delivery. Fritz misses the line to go 15-30 down, but goes to 30-30 when Tsitsipas misses himself. Then comes a double fault and a vital break point. The noise is very loud, and Fritz saves for deuce. But then goes long for another break point, and then from the back of the court plays some fantastic defence, and Fritz can only hit the net. Tsitsipas will serve for the match. *Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 6-4 3-6 4-4 Tsitsipas (*denotes next server) Tsitsipas punches a volley to level at 15-15, then aces for 30-15. Another ace for 40-15, and then a smash forces 4-4. The other game on court is something of a minor classic. Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 6-4 3-6 4-3* Tsitsipas (*denotes next server) Fritz serves three aces, and is on a run of 11 service points in succession. *Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 6-4 3-6 3-3 Tsitsipas (*denotes next server) Fritz wins a brilliant point for 15-30, scraping a lob from the back of a court to send his opponent scrabbling then smashing the ball home. The next point is an ace for the Greek player, who then forces an error to go 40-30 up. The hold is completed with an ace. Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 6-4 3-6 3-2 Tsitsipas* (*denotes next server) Confident service game from Fritz, who holds to love. Lovely. The pressure back on Tsitsipas. *Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 6-4 3-6 2-2 Tsitsipas (*denotes next server) We approach the third hour of this one, with Fritz looking to sag a little. Tsitsipas levels the final set with an ace. The tie break surely beckons. Kaia Kanepi looked set to go 5-3 up on Aryna Sabalenka in the third set, though has one hell of a fight in her last service game, an absolute marathon, and it ends up 4-4, with all to play for. Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 6-4 3-6 2-1 Tsitsipas* (*denotes next server) A rare double fault sets up 15-15, before Tsitsipas misses a winner off the next, but only just as Fritz holds. It’s getting nervous out there. *Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 6-4 3-6 1-1 Tsitsipas (*denotes next server) Fritz looks a little tired and is being sent around the houses by his opponent, who holds well to level. Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 6-4 3-6 1-0 Tsitsipas* (*denotes next server) Ahead of the final set, Tsitsipas receives a code violation as his dad has been coaching him from behind a mask from the stand. The umpire can lipread through masks, it appears, or read eyes. Fritz makes it to 40-15 relatively unscathed, but a whipped backhand forces it to 40-30 before the American sees it out. *Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 6-4 3-6 Tsitsipas (*denotes next server) Fritz isn’t done, going to 0-30 with a well executed smash. The Tsit fans roar an ace for 15-30. Then a break point beckons as Tsitsipas overhits a forehand. Two bites of the cherry, the first saved by a skidding serve. The second by a mid-court crash home after a second serve. Deuce it is. Then comes an ace for set point. And that’s claimed, and we are you levels, you devils. Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 6-4 3-5 Tsitsipas* (*denotes next server) A break! Fritz’s turn to worry as it goes to 30-30 on his serve. He misses his first serve, and then goes down the line and misses, going break point down, a first since the end of the second set. Fritz missed his first service, and then toughs out a long rally that ends with Tsitsipas being unable to keep his backhand shot in. Then Fritz does the same to set up another break point. And then misses, hitting the net. Tsitsipas can serve for the fourth set. *Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 6-4 3-4 Tsitsipas (*denotes next server) Tsitsipas using the short game more, dropping a volley that sets up 30-0. Then comes forward to take it to 40-0 and a love hold. The witching hour nears in this set. Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 6-4 3-3 Tsitsipas* (*denotes next server) Frustration from Tsitsipas, as Fritz wallops his ninth ace for 40-15. But a baseline forehand winner is beyond Fritz, who then recovers himself by reading the ball to crash his own winner. *Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 6-4 2-3 Tsitsipas (*denotes next server) Roared on by plenty of Greek fans, and going to the net far more, Tsitsipas serves and volleys to go 30-0 up. Then comes a loose baseline shot, and Fritz is let back in, and deuce comes. A better serve takes the advantage and game. Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 6-4 2-2 Tsitsipas* (*denotes next server) Fritz initially far surer on his service game this time around, going 40-0 up before an error takes it to 40-30. Nevertheless, he holds Kaia Kanepi v Aryna Sabalenka will likely go to a third set, with Kanepi leading 5-1 in the second. Pain for the home contingent. Emma Kemp reports. De Minaur will take his “bittersweet ending” to his tournament and take learnings into the rest of the year. That begins next month at the Rotterdam Open, meaning he will likely return to his home away from home in Alicante, Spain, before a possible return to Australia in March for the Davis Cup qualifying round against Hungary. *Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 5-4 1-2 Tsitsipas (*denotes next server) Tsitsipas comes forward and feels the benefit, to go 30-15 up before he holds, looking a little more sure of himself. Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 6-4, 1-1 Tsitsipas* (*denotes next server) There’s a close call to set up 15-30 and the prospect of a slight Fritz wobble. But it goes to 40-30 as he seizes on some hesitation, and holds. *Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 6-4, 0-1 Tsitsipas (*denotes next server) Fritz thwacks a winner to go 30-0 up in the first game, but then overdoes a whipped forehand from the baseline. The voice of Home and Away’s Irene tells him that’s “out”, and then comes another error for 30-30. He makes some funny old faces does Fritz, and calls out as he misses a winner. Tsitsipas holds with some relief. Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 6-4 Tsitsipas* (*denotes next server) Fritz surges to 30-0, his serve holding up just fine. Then come three set points. And he takes the first. *Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 5-4 Tsitsipas (*denotes next server) Tsitsipas is far more composed on this service game, only for a wobble on 40-0 that takes him back to 40-30. Then it’s back to deuce. And Fritz thunders a winner beyond him for break point and set point, an avenue closed off by a booming second serve. Then comes another crashing serve. A low-slung shot by Fritz forces an error, then a bullying shot after a Tsitsipas error sets up a further set point. A fierce rally sets up chance for Fritz to hit a winner but he can’t make it. Tsitsipas throws himself around the court as Fritz keeps searching for a break, but eventually, and after some sincere toil, the hold is on. Fritz must serve. Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 5-3 Tsitsipas* (*denotes next server) Fritz serves with real venom, and is keeping cool, leaving his rival needing to save the set. The American wins 11 points off serve in succession. Aryna Sabalenka has taken the first set off Kaia Kanepi by winning the first set 7-5. *Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 4-3 Tsitsipas (*denotes next server) Fritz breaks! An opening as it goes 15-30, and then a low shot means Tsitsipas can only net, two break points. The first is saved, the second two with an absolute bomb of a serve. Then he misses a backhand winner to set up another break point. And when his next bomb is returned clanks the ball out. The American has the lead, and can take this set. Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 3-3 Tsitsipas* (*denotes next server) Fritz holds to love, his service game having revived itself. The long haul awaits, and probably a tie-breaker in this set. *Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 2-3 Tsitsipas (*denotes next server) Tsitsipas’s serve is in good nick, now and in the third set he is matching the quality of the second set. This is even but the feeling is that Fritz is holding on to his opponent at the moment, the Greek player in the ascendancy. Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 2-2 Tsitsipas* (*denotes next server) Tsitsipas has chances but Fritz has recovered his step, and with some relief serves out to 15. Tumaini Carayol watched Danielle Collins continue her revival. Despite all of the obstacles before her, an athlete fighting her own body, Collins continues to rise. Since returning to the court following her surgery, her quality of life has improved significantly and she has played some of her best tennis of her career. Collins is a former Australian Open semi-finalist but she has never been as consistent as in recent months. She won her first two WTA titles in consecutive weeks last summer and since mid July she has compiled a 27-6 (82%) record. Fritz* 6-4, 4-6, 1-2 Tsitsipas (*denotes next server) Brutal serving from Tsitsipas gets the job done for a fairly easy hold. Fritz 6-4, 4-6, 1-1 Tsitsipas* (*denotes next server) Tsitsipas gets a glimmer of a break on the Fritz serve but then overcooks a whipped backhand, before Fritz does similar for deuce, only for the American to hold with some better quality serving. Fritz* 6-4, 4-6, 0-1 Tsitsipas (*denotes next server) Perhaps Tsitsipas still has that second set in his head as he serves here. He seems to lack concentration and allows Fritz to get to two break points. But he soon realises what trouble he is in and gets back to 40-40 by simply outlasting his opponent in two rallies. He saves another break but Fritz raises his game to force another break point. Tsitspas saves again and then produces a clever drop shot to make Fritz miss. He decides he’s having none of this and thwacks a big serve down the middle to finally hold. And with that I will hand over to John Brewin. On Margaret Court Arena it’s still on serve as the women’s second seed, Sabalenka, leads Kanepi 2-1. Fritz 6-4, 4-6 Tsitsipas* (*denotes next server) The American has to serve to stay in the set. Tsitsipas roars “Come on!” as he forces an error to get to 15-30. With Tsitsipas full of beans he steps into a second serve that kicks up at him. Fritz smashes back the Greek’s weak nudge over the net. 30-30. Tsitsipas uses his craft to get to 30-40 and his first break point of the match. A fierce return forces Fritz to hit long. He’s finally broken him. And what a time to do it! Fritz* 6-4, 4-5 Tsitsipas (*denotes next server) This is better from the American. He stands his ground at the back of the court and sends Tsitsipas scurrying hither and thither after getting into two lengthy points that he takes. At 30-30, the fourth seed fires a wonderful serve at Fritz that he can only parry back into the net. He holds to 30 after another big first serve that forces Fritz to err. Cool from Tsitsipas. Fritz 6-4, 4-4 Tsitsipas* (*denotes next server) Tsitsipas has some success against Fritz. He’s slowly working out his opponent’s serve and takes two points off him – but crucially no break point. Fritz is cool as you like and holds his nerve and his serve. On we go. Fritz* 6-4, 3-4 Tsitsipas (*denotes next server) It’s another love hold for the fourth seed. In case you missed it earlier, Alizé Cornet caused a bit of an upset when she knocked out two-time slam winner Simon Halep in a marathon match in stifling heat. Here’s the report from Emma Kemp: Fritz 6-4, 3-3 Tsitsipas* (*denotes next server) Fritz ignores the bugs fluttering through the Melbourne air to keep his focus and fire his way to a comfortable hold with some vicious serves. Tsitsipas takes just the one point off him. Over to you Stefanos. Fritz* 6-4, 2-3 Tsitsipas (*denotes next server) Tsitsipas will love this game. He mixes his serve up to hold to love and races back to his chair. The women’s second seed, Aryna Sabalenka, is warming up out on Margaret Court Arena as she prepares to take on the unseeded 36-year-old Kaia Kanepi. The winner will face Swiatek. Fritz 6-4, 2-2 Tsitsipas* (*denotes next server) Right, let’s focus on Rod Laver Arena now, where we could be in for a long old night. We remain on serve in the second set. The Greek fourth seed had a chance to put pressure on Fritz at 0-15 but the big-serving American responded and fought back to hold. “For me, a week without crying is not a week. I cry when I lose; I cry when I win.” Swiatek is emotional – as ever – after that hard-fought victory. As well she might be. She’s into her first-ever Australian Open quarter-final, where she will face either Kaia Kanepi or Aryna Sabalenka. Swiatek pounces on Cirstea’s serve and brings up three match points after a marathon two and a half-hour slog. The Pole falls to her knees after a wonderfully controlled backhand down the line gives her victory at last. What a match. Cirstea deserves great credit for pushing the seventh seed all the way. Over on Rod Laver Arena the men’s fourth seed, Taylor Fritz, has taken the first set against the fourth seed Stefanos Tsitsipas 6-4. Could be a long night. Świątek 5-7, 6-3, 5-3 Cirstea* (*denotes next server) Can Swiatek hold serve? A wonderful whipped forehand winner gives her a 15-0 lead. She rushes into the net to dispatch a volley to bring up 30-0. Cirstea has no answer to the Pole’s power as she takes a 40-0 lead but she does jump in to halt momentum with a vicious return to get back to 40-15 and another at 40-30. Swiatek makes sure with a big first serve to finally hold. She’s just a game away from victory. Świątek* 5-7, 6-3, 4-3 Cirstea (*denotes next server) But Cirstea can’t consolidate, with Swiatek returning fiercely to bring up three break points. The Pole takes the first and clenches her fist in delight. That didn’t take long. This is a proper tussle. Świątek 5-7, 6-3, 3-3 Cirstea* (*denotes next server) Fritz has the first break of serve and leads Tsitsipas 4-3 over on Rod Laver Arena. Back on Margaret Court, Cirstea is battling hard to break back. She turns up the pressure to get back to 30-30 and attacks a weak second serve to bring up a break point at 30-40. Swiatek finds a big first serve but the Romanian is undeterred and crashes it back, moves mid court, and whips a vicious backhand winner into the corner. Brilliant! Świątek* 5-7, 6-3, 3-2 Cirstea (*denotes next server) Thanks Will. Świątek has been fuelled by that last mighty hold, taking control from the back of the court and forcing Cirstea to thrash a forehand long mid-game to give the Pole a sniff at 15-30. Swiatek turns up the pressure with a delightful backhand winner to bring up two break points. Cirstea saves the first, but not the second. She dumps a weak backhand into the net and Swiatek has a crucial break. When I say “I” will focus on Świątek v Cirstea, I mean Gregg Bakowski will, as I am running away. Świątek 5-7, 6-3, 2-2 Cirstea* (*denotes next server) Świątek takes control of the game but then plays a dreadfully overhit shot to let Cirstea back into it. The Pole lets out a scream after another unforced error. An incredible cross-court forehand gets Cirstea to Break Point but she hits one very long from the baseline to take us to deuce. A rampant backhand earns the Romanian advantage but she follows it up with one straight into the net. Świątek eventually holds after Cirstea but she gets it back to deuce. Świątek saves four Break Points and eventually holds. It is tough out there. I am going to focus on this game for now as it is ruddy exciting but will keep you up to date with the score of Fritz v Tsitsipas where it is 3-2 to the Greek and going with serve. *Świątek 5-7, 6-3, 1-2 Cirstea (*denotes next server) Another hold for the Romanian. It is a very good time for the two to start holding their nerve. *Fritz 1-2 Tsitsipas (*denotes next server) It is fair to say the Greek is in the mood as he wins to love, winning the game with a beautiful volley. Fritz looks like he will need to come up big on his serve. Świątek 5-7, 6-3, 1-1 Cirstea* (*denotes next server) A hold for Świątek after one of the toughest games of the match so far. Fritz 1-1 Tsitsipas* (*denotes next server) Fritz shows he is up for the challenge today. The rallies are impressive but the ace across Tsitsipas is also wonderful. The American holds after a little wobble. *Świątek 5-7, 6-3, 0-1 Cirstea (*denotes next server) The Romanian holds in the opening game of the deciding set. It could be an intriguing finale. *Fritz 0-1 Tsitsipas (*denotes next server) The Greek shows he means business by winning the opening game of the match with limited fuss and including some whacking great shots within it. Taylor Fritz and Stefanos Tsitsipas are on court as they prepare for their match. Świątek 5-7, 6-3 Cirstea* (*denotes next server) Świątek looks to hold to win the set but gifts the opening point to Cirstea and things gets worse as she double faults. The Pole bounces back to get things back to 30:30. She reaches Set Point but pulls a looping forehand wide from the baseline to get us to deuce. Cirstea chase the ball around the back of court, culminating in a weak backhand into the net. Cirstea pings the ball into the net to give Świątek the set. *Świątek 5-7, 5-3 Cirstea (*denotes next server) The Romanian gets to game point after Świątek fails to return a smash that comes straight at her. Świątek sends one long to give Cirstea some hope in the second set. Świątek 5-7, 5-2 Cirstea* (*denotes next server) The Pole is in control as swiftly holds her service game, including a wondrous ace. Daniil Medvedev overcame Maxime Cressy and his own frustration to reach the quarter-finals of the Australian Open. American Cressy plays a throwback serve-and-volley game and has had an excellent start to the season. Medvedev’s emotions threatened to boil over after he lost the third set but he stayed just cool enough to win 6-2 7-6 (4) 6-7 (4) 7-5. “It was not easy,” said the second seed. “If I wouldn’t win the fourth one I’d probably be in a difficult mental shape because I had so many break points. Hell of a match. The fourth set was crazy.” Medvedev ranted about the match being boring and declared it his unluckiest day ever as Cressy kept hitting the lines on big points before the Russian eventually took his ninth break point of the fourth set. In the last eight he will face ninth seed Felix Auger-Aliassime, who battled past Marin Cilic in four sets to reach the quarter-finals for a third successive slam. *Świątek 5-7, 4-2 Cirstea (*denotes next server) The game could go either way; the Romanian looks in control and should complete the win but lets Świątek back into the match. We head to deuce as Świątek smashes one into the ground at the net. Świątek breaks after dragging out deuce a bit too long for anyone’s liking. Świątek 5-7, 3-2 Cirstea* (*denotes next server) Świątek fumes with herself after pinging a forehand into the net from the baseline. We get to 30:30 after a Świątek double fault. We head to deuce after Świątek finds the net from back of court. Świątek holds her nerve during deuce to win. *Świątek 5-7, 2-2 Cirstea (*denotes next server) A couple of breaks in the second set gets things back on serve. Cirstea holds her second service game to level things up. Sinner speaks: “I think in the beginning I was serving well. He had more chances than me in the first set. After I tried to push a little bit more. The ball especially in the tie-break first point which made maybe a little bit of difference. And then I went into my confidence. After I played a little bit stronger, I tried to move him a little bit. It is very tough playing against Alex especially here in Australia, he always plays very well and obviously thank you for coming out because it is a great atmosphere.” Cirstea wins the first set against Świątek 7-5 but loses the first two games of the second to let the Pole back into the match. Sinner serves for the match. He pushes De Minaur around, allowing him to volley into space at the net. De Minaur does plenty of grunting in defence but Sinner knows what he is doing as he smashes a winner. Sinner gets to Match Point and takes it after De Minaur finds the net from the baseline after being pushed around the court by the Italian. De Minaur 6-7, 3-6, 4-5 Sinner* (*next server) Sinner pings one into the net and the loops a backhand return very wide. The crowd roar as Sinner finds the net again but their mood is knocked by a double fault. De Minaur holds his nerve and the game thanks to a long backhand. *De Minaur 6-7, 3-6, 3-5 Sinner (*next server) There is pressure on the Italian to close this out but you would not know it as he moves quickly to the net to win the first point with a volley. A cross-court forehand puts Sinner in control of his service game but he then pings a shot from the baseline incredibly long. De Minaur pays back in kind, allowing Sinner to hold after a fine rally. De Minaur 6-7, 3-6, 3-4* Sinner (*next server) De Minaur is desperate to use this momentum to advantage but his slice does not come off. He moves to 30:15 by opening his body up to whack a forehand into the corner. The hold is complete thanks to a wonderful ace down the middle. *De Minaur 6-7, 3-6, 2-4 Sinner (*next server) Sinner offers some hope to his opponent by losing the opening point with a miscued forehand coming off the frame of the racket. The Italian toys with De Minaur, moving him along the baseline culminating with a long forehand. Sinner pings one into the net to make it 30:30 to offer De Minaur more hope and he gets the chance to break after the Italian clips the top of the net to send the ball looping long. De Minaur just about returns a fine serve down the middle only to watch Sinner whack the ball into open court for Deuce. Sinner gifts advantage with an appalling forehand that drifts long. Another pitiful forehand from Sinner is pulled wide to cost him a break. De Minaur 6-7, 3-6, 1-4 Sinner* (*next server) Sinner takes control by pushing De Minaur around the court, earning him a chance to dispatch a shot into space from the net. De Minaur looks tired, which explains his long backhand followed up with a weak shot from the baseline that reaches the net on the second bounce as Sinner breaks. *De Minaur 6-7, 3-6, 1-3 Sinner (*next server) New balls are on show. Sinner uses them to his advantage to get to 30:0. De Minaur pings a return very long to gift Sinner the chance to hold to love which he accepts with a beautiful backhand from the centre of the baseline. De Minaur 6-7, 3-6, 1-2 Sinner* (*next server) A double fault to start his service game implies this is a lost cause for the Australian but he gets to fist pump the air as Sinner sends one wide to level things up. Sinner smells blood and looks to put De Minaur further on the back foot, resulting in the Australian forcing one long. De Minaur bounces back to hold, however, thanks to some impressive shots. *De Minaur 6-7, 3-6, 0-2 Sinner (*next server) Sinner is certainly on top now and it is a very long way back for De Minaur. The game is won at a canter with the Australia offering little resistance as Sinner completes the win after De Minaur finds the net. De Minaur 6-7, 3-6, 0-1 Sinner* (*next server) It is an underwhelming start to the third set for De Minaur as he loses the first two points. He gets back into the game by whacking one at the net into space. The Australian sneaks one up the line to level at 30:30 but it follows it up by losing a long rally after hitting a shot low into the net. We head into the deuce after Sinner whacks a long forehand. The Italian picks up advantage and the break is completed as De Minaur sends a forehand very long. In the women’s draw, Cirstea holds her serve to go 3-1 up in the first set against Swiatek. *De Minaur 6-7, 3-6 Sinner (*next server) The double-handed backhand does a lot of good work for Sinner but De Minaur wins a wonderful rally by smashing a forehand into open court to level at 15:15. Sadly, for De Minaur, he follows it up by mishitting a shot to send it looping long. A ninth ace of the match gives Sinner two set points but he only needs one as De Minaur sends a shot wide. De Minaur 6-7, 3-5 Sinner* (*next server) De Minaur breezes to win the game thanks to fine some fine server to stay in the set. He completes the hold as Sinner whacks one into the net from the baseline. *De Minaur 6-7, 2-5 Sinner (*next server) Good morning from England. Sinner takes the game with a wonderful ace down the middle. He looks in control now. Right, it’s handover time here. Thanks for your company, next in is Will Unwin. De Minaur 6-7, 2-4 Sinner* (*next server) Alex de Minaur holds serve with an ace, and keeps within sight of Sinner. Hasn’t been able to brea serve all day though, from many opportunities. Must do so. *De Minaur 6-7, 1-4 Sinner (*next server) A break of serve essential for the Australian, who produces a couple of long rallies to go up 30-15. But Sinner’s power on the forehand is enough to see de Minaur flailing to reach a return, lobbing it long past the baseline, before Sinner aces for 30-40. Up past 200 kph that time. Back to deuce as de Minaur snags a tiny bit of paint on the sideline and Sinner hits back into the net. Sinner aces again but it’s a let. His follow-up is so wide that de Minaur stumbles in reaching it, and so can’t get back to cover the open court. Sinner holds. De Minaur 6-7, 1-3 Sinner* (*next server) With a lot of work to do, de Minaur gets it started by holding serve. That’s the first anchor point hammered into the cliff. It’ll take more from here. Anyone else getting vaguely Steve Roggenbuck vibes from Alex de Minaur? Just me? Ok. *De Minaur 6-7, 0-3 Sinner (*next server) Sinner backs it up with a fast hold of serve, and is suddenly away to a good lead. De Minaur 6-7, 0-2 Sinner* (*next server) Sinner breaks! The first break of serve in this match. It’s another hard-fought game, it takes a long time to prise away from de Minaur, but eventually it’s there. *De Minaur 6-7, 0-1 Sinner (*next server) A very long service game for Sinner to open the second set, who again has de Minaur hurrying and harrying him and ultimately failing to take the break. De Minaur 6-7 Sinner in the first set. It all comes apart for de Minaur in the tiebreak, just as it all comes together for Sinner. The Italian gets to really lay into a few shots, blasting his way to a lead of 2-5. Then de Minaur pumps a forehand wide on his own serve, scrambles the next point back, but hits the net to end it at 3-7. De Minaur 6-6 Sinner (tiebreak to come) This is de Minaur’s last shot at breaking Sinner’s serve in the first set, and again he overhits an attempted winner. And again. He’s had far more opportunities than Sinner against serve but he’s blown them. In the men’s fourth round, Auger-Aliasseme has knocked off Marin Cilic in four sets to go into the quarters against either Cressy or Medvedev. They’re still going, because Cressy has won the third set after trailing by two. De Minaur 6-5 Sinner* (*next server) Going after the body is de Minaur, denying his opponent room to return. When Sinner can use his wingspan out wide, the ball comes back with interest, but when he finds himself at the net again he bundles his shot into the string. Serve held. *De Minaur 5-5 Sinner (*next server) First point goes to de Minaur on Sinner’s serve, after which the Italian misses a serve out wide. De Minaur tries to attack the second serve but overcooks a groundstroke, then Sinner aces down the middle. Three aces apiece. Quite a mixed bag from Sinner, whose unforced error out wide makes it 30-30, but then it’s the Italian’s turn to race to the net like a newborn giraffe and put away a volley. Next point he misses long for deuce, next one is ace number four for advantage, next he pumps into the net to go back to deuce. Eventually he holds on. De Minaur 5-4 Sinner* (*next server) Bold from de Minaur, who attacks the net on the first point and wins it decisively, then takes that as a cue to charge through the game. After those long early games, they’re picking up pace towards a first-set tie-break. *De Minaur 4-4 Sinner (*next server) Sinner burns through another service game in quick time. He’s a powerful hitter when he has the full length of his arms in play. De Minaur 4-3 Sinner* (*next server) A couple of unforced errors from de Minaur, who misses a volley before hitting a groundstroke long, and it gives Sinner a break point. But de Minaur attacks the next return early and pushes Sinner too deep to get a controlled shot back. Saves the break, goes to advantage, and holds serve by again forcing Sinner to try a lob return from way behind the baseline. *De Minaur 3-3 Sinner (*next server) That’s more decisive. The lanky Italian gets more chance to lay into his shots in this service game, and wins it quickly. De Minaur 3-2 Sinner* (*next server) A quick hold for the Australian, who hasn’t been troubled on serve. *De Minaur 2-2 Sinner (*next server) Much like Sinner’s first service game, de Minaur has a break point that he can’t take, then drags it back to deuce a couple more times before the Italian can finally hold serve. Making him work early. De Minaur 2-1 Sinner* (*next server) Games on serve, as de Minaur attacks the net and forces Sinner to try a lob over the top, which goes long. *De Minaur 1-1 Sinner (* denotes next server) Bold play from de Minaur, who is standing very close to the baseline to receive serve early. Runs around a wide serve and whips a forehand winner return across court. Gets up to break point but blasts long. Sinner needs a couple of game points to hold, but does so in the end. De Minaur 1-0 Sinner* (* denotes next server) Alex de Minaur starts the game with an ace, but Sinner pushes back into the set. A net-cord pops up in a helpful way. But de Minaur gets up to advantage, then bookends it with an ace. A piece from Emma Kemp at the tournament. Well then. Let’s get ready for the next match. Very brimstone in theme, the Demon versus The Sinner. Alex de Minaur versus Jannik Sinner. Cornet says that after 30 minutes on court, her vision was blurring and she couldn’t think clearly because of the heat. “But I thought that on the other side of the court, she is not feeling much better than me.” She praises Simona Halep with enthusiasm, saying that she is one of the hardest fighters on tour and an inspiration. From a player in her 17th Australian Open, that is saying a lot. Then quite a beautiful moment when Jelena Dokic wraps up the interview. Cornet says, “Wait, there is one thing I want to say. To you, the way you have moved on with your life. You were an amazing player, now you’re an amazing commentator. Congratulations.” The crowd goes up, Cornet hugs Dokic, and Dokic bursts into tears. She is taken completely by surprise. Goodness me. That’s lovely. Auger-Aliassime is not going away against Cilic. Two sets done, one apiece, and he’s rallied to go up 4-2 in the third. For the first time in a Slam tournament, she’s through. Holds serve against Halep, and wins a match that took nearly three hours in the mid-afternoon heat. 4-6, 6-3, 4-6. Cornet consolidates the break before Halep holds her own serve. So it’s Cornet serving for the match at 4-5 in the third. Cornet breaks serve! The first break in the deciding set. It comes out of nowhere, quickly and a little surprisingly. She was on the ropes against Halep but she’s come back out swinging. It’s 4-3. Auger-Aliassime has taken the tiebreak from Cilic, so they’re one set apiece on John Cain Arena. Medvedev has won his tiebreak over Cressy, so the Russian has two sets to none. Again! Cornet has to really dig deep to hold serve. They’re at 3-3 now, but these games must be costing her. Yet when she seems exhausted, she produces a wicked shot or two to get out of trouble, and keeps fighting in the rallies. Meanwhile, both of the men’s fourth-rounders have gone into tie-breaks for the second set. Cressy nearly broke Medvedev to take it 7-5, but the Russian held on. Maybe the switch has flicked again? Cornet plays a barnstorming game to hold her serve to deuce, and level up the set again at 2-2. Impressive. She’s still nowhere near it when Halep serves though, just can’t get into the points, Halep dictating placement until Cornet makes errors. Certainly looks that way from the comfort of home. Cornet manages to hold serve after a battle, but she has started missing shots in strange ways, she’s muttering to herself in distress between points, she serves a double-fault to waste a game point, and has to really fight to get it back. The heat must be really taxing. It’s searing hot at Rod Laver Arena and Cornet is melting with it. The Frenchwoman’s aggression helped her take the first set but her form has since fallen off a cliff, and the second set with it. Long rallies in the heat can’t be helping either player. Cornet has been plonking an ice pack on her head during changes of ends and Halep is repeatedly leaning on her racket for support. The Romanian leads 1-0 in the decider. From an Australian perspective, everyone is waiting for Alex de Minaur’s match against the Italian Jannik Sinner. They’re due on Rod Laver Arena after Halep and Cornet, so it’ll be another set of waiting for the local lad. Halep comes back to win the second set 6-3. So she and Cornet will go into a decider. And the Croatian Marin Cilic won his first set by the same margin over Felix Auger-Aliassime, with the Canadian taking it to 4-4 in the second set so far. All of the active matches are fourth-rounders. Meanwhile, the men’s two-seed Daniil Medvedev is beating up Maxime Cressy in their fourth-rounder, games on serve in the second set after a walloping 6-2 in the first. What’s happening live? Well, there’s a ding-dong second set underway between Romanian former numero uno Simona Halep and French ice-cream maker Alize Cornet. The unseeded Cornet has broken and led Halep at various times in the set but has finally been pushed out of her comfort zone, going a break down at 4-3. G’day, racket freaks. It’s time for another day of highly strung action at Melbourne Park, as the tournament gets serious. The day is hot and sweaty, as are the players. Mid-30s on the temperature gauge and plenty of humidity with the sunshine. Electrolytes in the daytime, electric lights in the evening. Only one result so far today, which is that American Danielle Collins (seeded 27th) has knocked out the wily Belgian Elise Mertens (seeded 19th) for a place in the women’s singles quarters.“Our endeavour with respect to art was commensurate with our will to live” the composer Viktor Ullmann wrote in the 1940s, when he was held at Theresienstadt (Terezín in Czech), the ghetto camp near Prague which housed the Czech-Jewish artistic community before transportation to Auschwitz. Composition as an act of defiance or self-definition in the face of the ultimate obscenity was the subject of the BBC Symphony Orchestra’s Total Immersion: Music for the End of Time, a day of concerts, films and talks about music written in the ghettos and camps of Nazi-occupied Europe. The programme included not only works from Theresienstadt, but also music by the communist Erwin Schulhoff, who died of tuberculosis in Wülzburg prison in 1942, and Messiaen’s Quartet for the End of Time, written in 1941 when Messiaen was a prisoner of war in Görlitz. Alpesh Chauhan conducted the BBC Symphony Orchestra in a lunchtime concert, which placed Schulhoff’s Fifth Symphony, raging against the Nazi invasion of Czechoslovakia, alongside Hans Krása’s nervously ironic Overture for Small Orchestra and Pavel Haas’s taut Study for String Orchestra, both written for the Theresienstadt Orchestra. Players from the BBCSO under Josep Pons, also formed the chamber orchestra for the evening performance of Ullmann’s opera Der Kaiser von Atlantis, in an austere hard-hitting semi-staging by Kenneth Richardson, and sung by a superb ensemble cast. The opera’s bitter ironies and despairing laughter contrasted with Messiaen’s extraordinary Quartet, with its unswerving proclamation of faith amid the encroaching darkness, sensationally played by musicians from the Guildhall School. Yet the day’s most powerful concert was given by the BBC Singers and Guildhall musicians at Milton Court in the afternoon. Devised by baritone Simon Wallfisch, it interwove choral works, chamber music and songs with a narration, spoken by Wallfisch himself and drawn from documents from Theresienstadt. A father addresses his baby son in his diary, the entries breaking off with the sudden news that the two are to be transported elsewhere. We were reminded that of the 15,000 children who passed through the camp, only 100 survived. The music embraced arrangements of traditional songs by Ullmann and Gideon Klein as well as Klein’s exquisite String Trio, and astonishing, savagely ironic cabaret numbers by Dieter Gogg. Not always easy to listen to, it was an unforgettable affirmation of the human spirit in the most appalling circumstances. • Alpesh Chauhan’s concert and Der Kaiser von Atlantis will be broadcast on BBC Radio 3 and BBC Sounds on 11 March.It was supposed to be one of those Sunday night spectacles that define a Serie A season. Milan, second in the table and needing a win to keep pace in the title race, up against Juventus, fifth and fighting for their Champions League lives. Two of the giants of Italian football squaring off at San Siro, the country’s grandest arena. Juventus were yet to beat any of the teams ahead of them in the table – Milan, Inter, Napoli or Atalanta. But their manager, Massimiliano Allegri, had never lost in 18 career meetings with his Rossonero counterpart Stefano Pioli. This was an occasion for someone to rewrite the narratives. Instead, all the pens ran dry. There is barely a tale to recount about the football match itself. Juventus went the full 90 minutes without taking a shot on target. The last time that happened to them in a game against Milan was March 2011, with Alessandro Matri up front and Luigi Delneri in the dugout. They finished that season seventh. Milan pushed harder, but still never looked much like scoring. Rafael Leão forced Wojciech Szczęsny to get down quickly when he dug out a shot between four defenders on the edge of the box. Olivier Giroud sent a header straight at the keeper from near the penalty spot. That was as close as either team came to breaking the goalless stalemate. Perhaps things might have gone differently if Zlatan Ibrahimovic had not been forced off for Milan after 28 minutes with an achilles injury. It was he who laid the ball off to Leão for the first of those opportunities, redirecting a pass from Junior Messias into the path of their Portuguese teammate. Even before the Swede’s exit, however, this felt like a diminished spectacle: a Broadway show with a cast full of understudies, performed on a crumbling stage in an almost-empty theatre. Milan were missing the spine of their team, with Fikayo Tomori and Simon Kjaer injured, Franck Kessié away at the Africa Cup of Nations and Ismaël Bennacer returning too late to be considered for the starting XI. Juventus arrived without Leonardo Bonucci or Federico Chiesa. The players who did line up for kick-off found the pitch in a shocking state. Keeping the grass green at San Siro has been a struggle ever since the stadium’s third tier was added – blocking out sunlight – but its condition on Sunday was especially poor. This was the sixth game at San Siro in 12 days. Inter had hosted Venezia on the same turf barely 24 hours before. New Covid regulations, meanwhile, had capped the attendance at just 5,000 fans. That restriction applied across all Serie A games but inevitably was felt most keenly at a venue with more than 70,000 empty seats. Neither manager sought to make alibis. Although Pioli suggested that the heavy pitch made attacking harder, often requiring players to take an extra touch or play an extra pass, he stressed that his team should have been more precise. He framed the draw as an acceptable result, but said his “glass is half empty because of [last Monday’s] loss to Spezia.” You could not blame him for lingering on that defeat. Milan had themselves to blame for missing a hatful of chances but still ought to have taken all three points when Junior Messias swept the ball home in injury time. His goal was cancelled out by a premature whistle from the referee Marco Serra, and Spezia snatched a winner moments later. During an interview for the Observer, Pioli said he was proud of his players’ mature reaction, declining to scapegoat the referee for making a mistake. Yet regret plainly remains. By the end of Sunday night, his team had fallen four points behind Inter – who also have a game in hand. The derby that awaits in Serie A’s next round after the international pause might be make-or-break now for Milan’s hopes of sustaining a title push. Juventus’s sights are set lower. A win on Sunday would have vaulted them ahead of Atalanta into fourth place, but Allegri suggested he was happy just to keep pace for now with the Bergamo club, who drew 0-0 at Lazio on Saturday. His glass, he said, was “completely full”. The Bianconeri have tightened up after a disastrous start to the season, extending their unbeaten run to nine games and recording their eighth clean sheet in the last 12. Restoring the defensive solidity of his previous tenures has been a priority for Allegri. One wonders how many of the club’s supporters, however, shared his description of Sunday’s game as “beautiful”. Allegri also celebrated the fact that his team had “kept the gap to Milan at seven points”, a sentiment that felt alien to hear from a Juventus manager when theirs is the team trailing. The Old Lady’s sights have fallen dramatically over the past 18 months. To achieve such a robust defensive performance with the maligned Daniele Rugani at centre-back brought additional satisfaction, even if the player responded to Allegri’s praise of his timing and positioning at full-time by saying that “these are fundamentals I picked up from a few managers, in particular [Maurizio] Sarri.” There is time yet for Juventus to upgrade their attack in this transfer window. The club’s interest in Dusan Vlahovic is well-known but up until recently the suggestion had always been that Juventus would prefer to sign him in the summer. The total absence of attacking threat on Sunday might help to persuade the club of the need to make something happen sooner, even at a higher price point. That much, though, is speculation. Milan, too, are exploring options to strengthen their squad over the next few days but if nothing else they know that the playing conditions at San Siro ought to be better by the time they face Inter – with the pitch being fully re-laid. A spectacle is never guaranteed in football, but at least the next scene in Italy’s Scudetto drama ought to unfold on a less shabby stage.Show, don’t tell. It’s one of cinema’s cardinal rules – not that anyone told Colm Meaney’s compulsively questioning priest in David Beton’s laborious thriller, or the wounded gunman (True Blood’s Stephen Moyer) who staggers into his church with a yarn to spin. You have to be very gifted to successfully flout that rule, and writer-director Beton – also responsible for 2017’s The Hatton Garden Job, under the name Ronnie Thompson – can’t get his characters to transfix, even if they keep interest flickering intermittently. Meaney’s Father Peter is admirably stoic with a gun in his face. In fact, he soon turns the tables on the interloper, Victor, who he implores to own up to whatever sins have led to him bleeding from the stomach in the nave. But while Victor recounts his saga – something about his dead wife and his estrangement from his teenage daughter – another bleeding intruder, Willow (Clare-Hope Ashitey, little seen since Children of Men), is lurking in a wardrobe in Father Peter’s study. When she finally emerges, brandishing a police badge, she upends everything Victor has been saying. But while she is telling it, and Victor retorts, this pulpy braiding of corrupt and in-deep-cover cops feels arbitrary and inconsequential. Despite all three leads pulling their weight, the scenes only build up tepid dramatic heat and offer no real Rashomon-style perspective shifts. Father Peter has his own story, feeding into the theme of failed fathers and setting up an effective final twist. For all the rueful mood Beton tries to nurture, there’s something inert about Confession. The budget presumably prohibited it, but it is what flashbacks were invented for. • Confession is available on digital platforms on 31 January.The opening of Paris haute couture fashion week, trailed as a celebratory return to live catwalk shows, was overshadowed by the death of the fashion legend Manfred Thierry Mugler. The unexpected announcement of Mugler’s death at the age of 73 made a dramatic start to fashion’s most theatrical week. Haute couture produces showstopping, headline-grabbing gowns for the upcoming red carpet season and for the world’s most extravagant parties. The pedestrian business of hemlines, which other fashion weeks concern themselves with, has no place here. Couture week had been hailed as a cheerful post-pandemic celebration of live fashion, with twice as many physical catwalk shows scheduled as last season, but the news of Mugler’s death, which came just days after a Louis Vuitton show paid tribute to the late Virgil Abloh, moved the mood music dial to bittersweet. Daniel Roseberry, the American creative director who over the past two years has plucked the Schiaparelli name out of fashion’s history books and put it back onto Vogue covers, paid homage to Mugler at his show. A recent visit to Thierry Mugler: Couturissime, a retrospective of the designer currently being staged in Paris, “made me realise how much I had absorbed directly from his work”, Roseberry said. “[Mugler’s] legacy in fashion today is so vibrant, in the way he created characters on the runway. This is very sad news. To be able to show today, in a space that is almost like a church, is an incredible honour.” The winter sunshine that flooded the Beaux-Arts splendour of the Petit Palais gallery added sublime dazzle to a show of foxy blacked-out curves accented by pieces of polished gold which are ornaments, rather than mere accessories. There was an hourglass gold metal corset, a handbag fashioned as a miniature sofa complete with ornamental legs, and earrings in the shape of dinosaur-sized molar teeth. Delicate gold sculptures bobbed in space around the models as they walked the catwalk, echoing the mobile sculptures of Alexander Calder. Previous incumbents to the Schiaparelli design job have struggled with a brand weighed down by its history, but Roseberry has brought it back to life not by trying to move away from surrealism but by leaning hard into it – specifically into an obsession with exaggerated body parts which connects 1930s avant garde art to Instagram’s obsession with filtered bodily perfection. There are no lobsters on Roseberry’s catwalk, but plenty of teeth, breasts, ears and toes. “Anytime that people see themselves reflected back in fashion – especially seeing the body reflected back – there is a visceral reaction to that,” the designer said after his show. In its idiosyncratic hot takes on the human body, the Schiaparelli collection emphasised how Mugler presaged contemporary fashion and pop culture. Mugler once said “I have always been fascinated by the most beautiful animal on the Earth: the human being”, and a preoccupation with the body shaped not just his catwalk shows, but all three of his careers. Mugler was a professional ballet dancer before he became a fashion designer, at which point he rejected the wispy lines of the ballerina in favour of exaggerated corsetry. Later, on parting company with his fashion house, he became a full-time bodybuilder. The extent to which Mugler’s point of view remains alive in fashion was also underscored by the front row presence of Kanye West at Schiaparelli, wearing a full black face covering which, while technically rendering him anonymous, has become an attention-grabbing signature look. With matching leather trousers, boots and jacket, West’s all-black silhouette evoked ex-wife Kim Kardashian’s Balenciaga look at the most recent Met Gala. Mugler was an industry maverick who broke rules in every category, putting a just-divorced Ivana Trump on his catwalk in 1991 and scoring his biggest commercial success not with a dress but with the best-selling fragrance, Angel, which has notes of melted milk chocolate. He continued to create one-off pieces long after bowing out of fashion in its business mode, and in 2019 dressed Kardashian in a latex gown intended to look as if she had just emerged from a dip in the ocean in a wet T-shirt. Roseberry pointed to clean, sculptural silhouettes as a direction for the upcoming red carpet season. Describing last year as “a kind of disco goddess sensibility” he said he was “tired of ballgowns, tired of pouffiness. I want to see some legs.”Aviva Investors, an important UK asset manager, has put the directors of 1,500 companies on notice that it is willing to seek their removal if they fail to show enough urgency in tackling issues including the climate crisis and human rights. The firm said the way it votes on the re-election of company board members in the upcoming AGM season would be heavily influenced by its four key stewardship priorities for the year, which also include biodiversity and executive pay. In its annual letter to 1,500 companies in 30 countries including the UK, Aviva Investors urged companies to develop their own biodiversity action plans, publicly state their commitment to human rights, with appropriate due diligence, and ensure that executive pay plans – particularly bonuses – are linked to its four stewardship priorities. Aviva Investors, which manages £262bn in assets including savings and pensions, and is a big shareholder in many leading companies, said its strong message was part of efforts to create a more sustainable, inclusive and low-carbon future. “We acknowledge the magnitude of many of these challenges and will evaluate companies on the strength of their commitments and their ability to demonstrate progress over time,” the asset manager said. “However, we will hold boards and individual directors accountable where the pace of change does not reflect the urgency required.” Last year, Aviva’s concerns over a lack of ethnic diversity on company boards – which was one of its stewardship priorities in 2021 – led to votes against directors at 137 companies. It opposed board members at 85 companies because of human rights concerns, including at the American meat processing company Tyson Foods, which was accused of negligence towards its workers during the pandemic. Aviva also rejected 33% and 68% of executive pay proposals in the UK and US respectively, amid concerns over pay levels and the structure of remuneration plans. The Aviva Investors chief executive, Mark Versey, said that this year’s stewardship priorities were meant to “encourage companies to consider the whole picture of sustainability because this is how they will create the greatest return for shareholders, while helping to build a better future for society”. Aviva welcomed the promises some firms had made to change, including during the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow. However, Versey said “companies must now turn their pledges into concrete and measurable plans of delivery”. He added: “Our letter sets out clear expectations as to how they should do this, and what those plans must address across climate impact, biodiversity and human rights.” In terms of climate commitments, Aviva Investors said all companies should be developing credible climate transition plans and work towards having them officially verified by the science-based targets initiative. Firms are also expected to measure their climate risks and emissions using new climate accounting standards.Britain will send a team of 50 athletes to the Winter Olympics that will be more competitive in more disciplines than ever before, Team GB’s chef de mission has predicted. Georgina Harland said athletes were ready to write a new chapter in the country’s history and challenge established alpine countries in the pursuit of a record Winter Games haul in Beijing. Harland said: “We are delighted to welcome the 50 athletes who will make up the team at Beijing 2022 and feel these athletes have the opportunity to not only challenge established winter nations but compete with the success we enjoyed at both Sochi and Pyeongchang.” “This is an exciting new chapter for British winter sport with a number of new names for the British public to enjoy and get behind and with athletes who have experienced four Olympic Winter Games, they will undoubtedly be a great support to the emerging talent. Team GB’s record medal success at a Winter Olympics is five, achieved in Sochi and Pyeongchang, however the hope among insiders is that they will be at the top end of their three to seven medal target for Beijing. “It promises to be a fantastic Olympics and Team GB will go into the Beijing Games as one of the best prepared teams and one that will be competitive across more disciplines than ever before,” added Harland. On Monday the British Olympic Association announced its 50th and final athlete for the Games, the speed skater Ellia Smeding, who will compete in the 1,000m and 1500m in Beijing. The 23-year-old will join her partner, Cornelius Kersten, as the first British long-track speed skaters to compete at an Olympics for 30 years, after she set national records in the 500m, 1,000m and 1500m last month. The Team GB squad includes three returning bronze medallists – Izzy Atkin in slopestyle, Laura Deas in skeleton and Eve Muirhead in curling. There are also high hopes for a strong team that includes alpine skier Dave Ryding, who won his first World Cup race on Saturday and world champion snowboarder Charlotte Bankes. The athletes will be departing the UK over the next 10 days. The competition starts on 2 February with the mixed curling, two days before the opening ceremony on 4 February.The official memorial of Auschwitz, the largest Nazi concentration camp in which more than 1 million people were murdered, has accused the prominent anti-vaxxer Robert F Kennedy Jr of “moral and intellectual decay”, after he compared vaccine mandates to laws in Hitler’s Germany and invoked the name of Anne Frank. The Auschwitz Memorial and Museum responded swiftly to remarks made at an anti-vaccine mandate rally in Washington DC on Sunday. In a tweet, the institution criticized Kennedy for “exploiting the tragedy of people who suffered, were humiliated, tortured and murdered by the totalitarian regime of Nazi Germany – including children like Anne Frank”. To do so during a debate about vaccines and how to deal with the coronavirus pandemic was a “sad symptom of moral and intellectual decay”, the memorial said. Kennedy made his public reputation as an environmentalist but in recent years has used his legendary family name to back conspiracy theories and oppose vaccines. At the “Defeat the Mandates” march on Sunday, which was staged by his organization, Children’s Health Defense Fund, he likened government efforts to contain Covid-19 to the Holocaust. “Even in Hitler’s Germany you could cross the Alps into Switzerland, you could hide in an attic like Anne Frank did,” he said. Frank, who wrote a diary chronicling how she hid from the Nazis for two years before being arrested by the Gestapo in 1944 and sent to Auschwitz, was in fact apprehended not in Germany but in Amsterdam. She died in the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp in 1945. Kennedy also rehashed conspiracy theories about the Microsoft founder and vaccine advocate Bill Gates and 5G, the mobile technology which Kennedy said was designed to “control our behaviour”. He also invoked his father, the attorney general and New York senator Robert Kennedy, who was assassinated in 1968 as he was making a bid for the US presidency. “I’ve visited 1962 East Germany with my father,” Kennedy Jr told the anti-vaxxer crowd, “and met people who had climbed the [Berlin] Wall and escaped. It was possible. Today the mechanisms are being put in place where none of us can run and none of us can hide.” Survivors of the Holocaust also lamented Kennedy’s words. Lucy Lipiner, 88, who fled the Nazis from Poland when she was six, said: “Robert Kennedy Jr is so ignorant. I’m speechless.” She added: “Running/hiding in the Holocaust was rare, almost impossible. I’m lucky to have survived. Anne Frank didn’t.”A Russian invasion of Ukraine would be “painful, violent and bloody business”, Boris Johnson has warned as he said a “lightning war” was possible but not inevitable. The prime minister said it would be “disastrous” if Vladimir Putin directed thousands of soldiers to cross into Ukraine seeking to take further parts of the country after the annexation of Crimea in 2014. Russia has mobilised 100,000 troops and heavy weapons on the Ukrainian border. Tensions escalated further when Nato reinforced its eastern borders with land, sea and air forces, while the White House and Downing Street announced some diplomats’ were starting to be withdrawn from the country. Johnson said he would be talking to political leaders “in other capitals and in Washington” on Monday evening. Speaking to broadcasters on a visit to a hospital, Johnson was asked about the prospect of an imminent invasion by Russian troops. “I think the intelligence is pretty gloomy on this point,” he said. “The intelligence is very clear that there are 60 Russian battle groups on the border of Ukraine. The plan for a lightning war that could take out Kyiv is one that everybody can see. We need to make it very clear to the Kremlin that that would be a disastrous step.” Johnson stressed he thought an invasion was not inevitable and that “sense can still prevail”, but he said the UK was working with other countries to draw up a package of economic sanctions against Russia. He also said that if Moscow sent troops in, it would be a “painful, violent and bloody business – and I think it’s very important that people in Russia understand that this could be a new Chechnya.” If forced, Johnson said he believed the Ukrainians would fight, and he said the Kremlin should understand that. He added: “The UK is in the lead in creating that package of economic sanctions, helping to stiffen the resistance of our Ukrainian friends with defensive weaponry that we’re supplying and making it clear that we stand fully foursquare with the people of Ukraine.” Russia’s deputy foreign minister, Alexander Grushko, earlier condemned Nato’s buildup of soldiers, saying the military alliance was “demonising Russia” in order to “justify military activity on [Nato’s] eastern flank”. “The language of Nato is the language of threats and military pressure,” he said in remarks published by Russian media. “This is nothing new.”It was Lisa Faulkner’s deep-fried face that started it. Almost 20 years ago, swishy new BBC spy drama Spooks seized viewers by the lapels – and saw the Broadcasting Standards Commission inundated with complaints – in only its second episode when Thames House trainee Helen Flynn (played by Faulkner) volunteered for a risky undercover mission, but found herself getting served up with salt and vinegar. Brookside alumnus and lads’ mag favourite Faulkner had just completed a stint on Holby City. Among a cast of newcomers, hers was the biggest name. Viewers assumed she would be a key player in the show taglined “It’s MI5, not 9 to 5”. Hence it was a jaw-dropper in spring 2002 when her character infiltrated an extremist group but got rumbled and gruesomely murdered. First, her hand was plunged into a deep-fat fryer by Kevin McNally’s far-right leader, which was wince-inducing enough – until he shoved poor Helen’s head in, too. Her fellow agent, Matthew Macfadyen’s Tom (not Wambsgans, sadly) was held at gunpoint and could only watch in horror. The set piece was originally pencilled in for the series finale, but as producer Jane Featherstone reasoned: “Let’s move the most dramatic thing you’ve got to episode two and kill off the only actress the audience recognise and then you’ve got them hooked.” The Guardian’s Charlie Brooker approved: “The moment her head was forced into the deep-fat fryer, viewers reared on the formulaic, it’ll-be-alright-in-the-end blandness of cookie-cutter populist dramas … sat up and blinked in disbelief: here was a major BBC drama series that actually had the nerve to confound expectation.” Despite airing after the watershed, the grisly scene sparked the most complaints of any show that year. It also set a trend in box set drama for bumping off big names early. It might be risky (what if fans switch off in protest?) but it’s a bold move that drastically raises the stakes. Viewers are kept guessing and gripped. If they can wipe out a headline name, what else might they do? ITV’s bomb disposal drama Trigger Point began with a similarly loud bang on Sunday night. Slight spoiler in case you have miraculously managed to avoid them and intend to catch up, but a central character got blown to smithereens before the credits rolled on the opening episode. As with Spooks, the message to viewers was clear. In this show, the jeopardy is real. Nobody is safe. Trigger Point, of course, hails from the Jed Mercurio stable. The don of tense TV thrillers didn’t script this one, but he executive-produced, and mentored screenwriting debutant Daniel Brierley. Mercurio the Merciless has a track record of swiftly killing off his star signings. Keeley Hawes was blown up by a briefcase bomb before the midway mark of ratings blockbuster Bodyguard. Jessica Raine, Daniel Mays and Jason Watkins got guest-star billing in Line of Duty series two, three and four respectively. None survived beyond the first episode. Sign up a major star, then unceremoniously off them – that’s the Mercurio method. His trademark life-or-death cliffhangers suddenly become a lot more potent when someone genuinely could cark it. (As a budgetary bonus, it also means paying a pricey performer’s fee for fewer episodes.) The trick soon spread across the Atlantic, where perhaps the prime exemplar was Game of Thrones. The debut season of HBO’s shagging-and-dragons saga placed Sean Bean’s brooding patriarch Eddard “Ned” Stark front and centre, not just on the billboard posters but within the narrative. It had been a casting coup to lure the craggy Lord of the Rings star back to the fantasy genre, let alone the small screen. Ned was established as the show’s moral centre – until episode nine, when he was gasp-inducingly beheaded on the whim of punchable poison dwarf Joffrey. “This is probably the first time a US drama series has ever killed off its main character in the first season as part of its master creative plan,” wrote Entertainment Weekly. “It’s just not done. You don’t cast a star, put him on bus stops and magazine ads, get viewers all invested in his story, and then dump him nine episodes later just because it arguably makes the story a bit more interesting.” Oh yes you do. Showrunner DB Weiss admitted that Ned’s early demise had been a “selling point” for him and co-creator David Benioff. “It completely ups the ante whenever a character is in danger if you know someone else didn’t survive a similar situation,” he said. Slaughtering a high-profile cast member early not only has shock value but promises all manner of unexpected twists. Christopher Eccleston’s amiable scientist was viciously mauled to death in the first episode of Sky’s frost-bitten Fortitude. Ariana Grande was dispatched equally swiftly in Ryan Murphy’s Scream Queens, stabbed in the back while sending a tweet. There’s a metaphor in there somewhere. Real-time thriller 24 gleefully killed off anyone who wasn’t Kiefer Sutherland. David Haig’s spook lasted just three episodes of Killing Eve before Villanelle did her thing. Tragedy at the end of act one provides an emotional climax early in the piece. And who can forget Nancy’s beloved bestie Barb (Shannon Purser) getting dragged into the Upside Down and killed by the Demogorgon within two episodes of Stranger Things’ debut season? It not only cranked up the fear factor but made her such a cult figure that #JusticeforBarb trended on Twitter. Purser earned an Emmy nomination for mere minutes of screen time. We got another big one – or should that be Big one? – only last month. Divisive Sex and the City sequel And Just Like That began with Carrie Bradshaw living smugly ever after with John “Mr Big” Preston. Forty cringe-making minutes later, Chris Noth’s cigar-puffing, eyebrow-waggling alpha male keeled over from a fatal heart attack after a home workout – plunging Peloton into a PR crisis in the process. HBO execs can be forgiven for breathing a sigh of relief though, because multiple women have since accused Noth of sexual assault. He has denied the allegations but writing out his character proved a smart move in more ways than one. The show itself immediately switched from nostalgic lifestyle larks to bittersweet sad-com. Not entirely successfully, sure, but at least grief and midlife widowhood made for more interesting subject matter than cosmos, corsages and camp one-liners. And just like that, Carrie swapped her bright blue silk Manolos for a deeper, darker hue. Moral of the story? On 21st-century TV, no character is safe. Nowadays the bigger the star’s name, the higher their odds of getting cruelly killed early doors. Also: steer clear of exercise bikes, deep-fat fryers and improvised explosive devices.As countless football managers have discovered over the years, the hardest thing of all to manage is the fans’ expectations. Amid the euphoria after Saturday’s Clarence House Chase at Ascot, though, a race that promised much and delivered even more, it was only natural that thoughts would soon turn towards Shishkin vs Energumene II: the Rematch. If both horses turn up and if both run to form, the Queen Mother Champion Chase at Cheltenham on 16 March seems certain to be the race of the Festival. But those are, of course, two very big “ifs” right there, and if racing history tells us anything, it is that you can only hope, and never expect. Saturday felt like the kind of race we are fortunate to see once in a decade, not twice in the space of eight weeks. Such concerns are unlikely to affect the demand for tickets for the second afternoon of the Festival, however, and day two of the meeting just happens to be the one that is in need of a bit of a lift. Wednesday’s card slipped to the bottom of the attendance list in 2011 and shifted just 57,000 tickets in 2019, the only day of the four which did not pull in at least 60,000 racegoers. If the prospect of a rematch between Shishkin and Energumene does not see an uptick in sales, then nothing will, although it has to be said that Ascot’s crowd on Saturday was not noticeably swelled by their keenly awaited first encounter. The likelihood, perhaps, is that many occasional racegoers plan their trips to the track weeks in advance, to fit in with wider groups of friends or colleagues. They already had plans by the time a very welcome, but equally unexpected, head-to-head crystallised a few days before the race itself. Like it or not – and there are plenty of National Hunt devotees who do not – Cheltenham in March is the only stage that means anything to many with a more casual interest in the sport, and Nicky Henderson and Willie Mullins both made it plain too on Saturday that the Champion Chase is the race that really matters. If Energumene can reverse the form at the Festival, it will feel more like a 3-1 win for his connections than a 1-1 draw. Both trainers deserve huge credit for having their horses spot on for Saturday when Cheltenham is already on the horizon. It bears repeating that Shishkin and Energumene went into the Clarence House with official ratings of 172 and 171 respectively and both apparently ran to within an ounce or two of their best. They also, understandably, drove each other on to the finest performances of their careers. The official handicapper’s verdict on Shishkin’s performance is due tomorrow, but Timeform moved him up to a mark of 181 (still 1lb ahead of Energumene) which also puts him 1lb in front of the peak rating for Altior, his former stable companion and dual Champion Chase winner. The time of Saturday’s race was also as strong as the visual impression implied, with both horses comfortably posting the best Timeform timefigure of their careers. That, of course, also underlines that it was the hardest race either has experienced, and it would be no great surprise were either or both to be still feeling the effects just 51 days later. A big head-to-head somewhere other than the Festival made for a refreshing change but it could potentially have its downside too, though in that respect, Shishkin and Energumene could not be in better hands. Mullins and Henderson have 148 Festival winners between them and have no peers when it comes to training a horse to the minute in mid-March. They both still have some way to go to match another former resident of Seven Barrows, Sprinter Sacre, whose win in the 2013 Champion Chase earned a Timeform rating of 192, the operation’s highest mark over jumps since the 1960s. But all being well, and if their trainers can work their now-familiar magic, Shishkin should at least have an exceptional opponent to aim at as they set off up the hill at Cheltenham.The UK economy grew at its slowest pace in almost a year in January as hospitality, leisure and travel businesses felt the impact of the Omicron variant. The monthly flash PMI (purchasing managers’ index) estimate of activity from IHS Markit and the Chartered Institute of Procurement and Supply reported a two-speed recovery with an easing of supply-chain bottlenecks for manufacturing offset by weakness in consumer-facing service companies. Service sector growth eased for a third month, according to the survey, amid reports from businesses of a loss of momentum caused by pandemic disruptions and very subdued demand. Amid widespread reports of severe cost pressures, the IHS Markit/Cips measure of output fell from 53.6 to 53.4 in January – its lowest level in 11 months. Any finding above 50 denotes that the economy is expanding rather than contracting. Chris Williamson, IHS Markit’s chief business economist, said: “A resilient rate of economic growth in the UK during January masks wide variations across different sectors. Consumer-facing businesses have been hit hard by Omicron, and manufacturers have reported a further worrying weakening of order book growth but other business sectors have remained encouragingly robust. “Looking ahead, while the Omicron wave meant the hospitality sector has sunk into a third steep downturn, these restrictions are now easing, meaning this downturn should be brief. Many business and financial services companies have, meanwhile, been far less affected by Omicron and saw business growth accelerate at the start of the year.” The gloomy picture for consumer-facing parts of the service sector contrasted with a report from Lloyds Bank showing spending on debit cards in the first two weeks of 2022 up by 27% on the same period in 2020, before the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic. While less was spent on commuting and holidays, there were sharp increases in payments in restaurants and bars, shops and cinemas, the bank said. Flash PMI estimates for the eurozone showed activity in the service sector affected by Omicron, with growth slowing to its weakest in 11 months. Germany, France, Italy and Spain – the four biggest economies – have all tightened restrictions in recent weeks.Dominic Cummings has submitted written evidence to the inquiry into lockdown breaches in Downing Street in 2020, telling Sue Gray he did not trust Boris Johnson not to leak his conversations with the inquiry chief. The former senior adviser also claimed that officials were deeply uncomfortable with handing over some evidence to the inquiry, believing that they could face retribution for damaging evidence. Cummings has claimed Johnson was warned in advance that a summer party invitation held in No 10 during the first lockdown was a breach of the rules. Both Cummings and another senior official are said to have warned Johnson the party was a mistake – but Johnson has claimed he believed the 20 May drinks in the garden to be a work event. Senior police officers are understood to have also have been interviewed by Gray, with evidence reported to be extremely damaging. Cummings said he was hesitant to speak directly to Sue Gray, the official leading the probe into multiple lockdown breaches. He said that other private discussions he had had since leaving government had been leaked. Cummings said that he had told Gray: “If we speak the PM will invent nonsense and spin it to the media and you and I will both have problems, let’s keep everything in writing, therefore he cannot invent things I’ve supposedly said to you, there is only a written record, this makes both our lives easier.” He added: “She agreed. So I have answered questions in writing and will answer further questions in writing if she wants. But I will not speak and therefore provide the PM with more chances to lie and confuse everybody.” Cummings said he believed officials would not hand over crucial evidence to the inquiry. “I know others are very worried about handing things to the Cabinet Office because they know the PM will see everything SG [Gray] collects,” he said. “This inevitably means that evidence, including photos, is not given to her and instead will keep leaking after her report. To stress, this is a consequence of beliefs about the PM’s integrity, not SG’s.” He said he believed more damaging stories would emerge this week, saying “many officials are desperate to shove the kunlangeta off the ice this week”. The latest detail from Cummings came amid transparency fears over the publication of the report, as two cabinet ministers said only the “findings” of Gray’s report will be published. Asked if it would be published in full, the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “So the terms of reference for Sue Gray’s report is that the findings of her report will be made public, and the prime minister has pledged he will come to parliament to then make a statement and be scrutinised by colleagues on the findings of that report.” Dominic Raab, the justice secretary and deputy prime minister, said on Sunday that it would be up to Boris Johnson to decide how much information was released.Calls to protect Pakistan’s critically endangered wildlife have increased after a leopard died from injuries sustained when it was shot on the banks of a river in Pakistani-administered Kashmir. The injured female leopard was found by locals on Sunday and transported to Islamabad for treatment, but did not survive. An X-ray revealed that it had been hit by six pellets from a 12-bore shotgun. Local police said a suspect had been arrested and a case registered against him, and that they had recovered a shotgun. The suspect has been released on bail. Rina Saeed Khan, the chair of Islamabad Wildlife Management Board (IWMB), said one bullet had lodged in the middle of the leopard’s vertebral column, paralysing it. “Our vets have informed us that the leopard was a mother and the cubs should be around where the leopard was shot,” Khan said. “We have seen people shooting leopards in AJK [Azad Jammu and Kashmir region] for quite some time. Across the country wildlife is diminishing. We have to save our wildlife.” The country’s former prime minister Nawaz Sharif tweeted that he was saddened by the “brutal killing” and called on the wildlife department to punish those responsible. In 2020, the prime minister, Imran Khan, ordered the establishment of 12 national parks and announced plans to preserve and protect wildlife and plantations. But hunting of endangered animals – including leopards – has persisted. Rina Saeed Khan said people hunted leopards for two reasons: to sell their fur or to protect livestock. She said the government should make sure people were properly compensated for dead livestock in order to deter them from shooting big cats. Villagers are increasingly coming into contact with leopards due to deforestation to make way for homes where once there were jungles, she added. Imran Khan championed the protection of wildlife on the campaign trail, and in opposition criticised the government for allowing royals from the Middle East to hunt endangered Houbara bustards. In 2016, he tweeted:“Never thought I would see the day when hunting of the endangered Houbara Bustard would become a ‘pillar of our foreign policy’.” In January 2021, however, he issued special permits for hunting bustards to visitors from the Middle East, drawing harsh criticism from conservationists and activists.The head of the World Health Organization has warned member countries that the UN’s global health body is being “set up to fail” without a “paradigm shift” in the way that it is funded and supported. In stark language delivered to the WHO’s executive board, the organisation’s director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said that the coronavirus pandemic, which has claimed more than 5.5 million lives, had underlined the need to strengthen health systems as well as pandemic preparedness plans. Addressing the specific issue of Covid-19, Tedros also cautioned that conditions remained ideal for more variants to emerge. He said it was dangerous for countries to assume Omicron is the last variant or that “we are in the endgame”. “There are different scenarios for how the pandemic could play out and how the acute phase could end,” he said. “But it’s dangerous to assume that Omicron will be the last variant or that we are in the endgame,” he added. “On the contrary, globally, the conditions are ideal for more variants to emerge.” He insisted, however, that “we can end Covid-19 as a global health emergency, and we can do it this year,” by reaching goals such as the WHO’s target to vaccinate 70% of the population of each country by the middle of this year, with a focus on people who are at the highest risk of Covid-19. “It’s true that we will be living with Covid for the foreseeable future and that we will need to learn to manage it through a sustained and integrated system for acute respiratory diseases” to help prepare for future pandemics, he said. “But learning to live with Covid cannot mean that we give this virus a free ride. It cannot mean that we accept almost 50,000 deaths a week from a preventable and treatable disease.” In wide-ranging remarks on Monday, Tedros told members: “Covid-19 has proven that health is not just a national issue; it’s an international issue. The scale of challenges we face is immense, and is reflected by the breadth of your agenda this week.” Supporters say the WHO’s reliance on voluntary funding from member states and charities forces it to focus on priorities set by funders, and makes it less able to criticise members when things go wrong. A proposal by the WHO’s working group on sustainable financing calls for members’ mandatory contributions to rise gradually to account for half the agency’s $2bn core budget by 2028, from less than 20% now. “For far too long, health has been compartmentalised and deprioritised, nationally and internationally. It’s time to recognise that if we fail to invest in health, we fail to invest in the future,” Tedros said. Addressing long-term concerns over the performance of the organisation, Tedros said that members were within their rights to expect higher standards from the organisation, including “enhanced governance, efficiency, accountability and transparency”, saying that included “zero tolerance for sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment”. The reference to sexual abuse appears to be a reference to a damning report last year that found that 21 employees working for the UN global health body were among perpetrators of serious sexual abuses during the Ebola crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The comments appeared directed at concerns – some of them politically motivated and levelled in particular by the former Trump administration, which withdrew from the WHO – around the WHO’s initial response to the coronavirus pandemic and research into its origins. Underling the continuing scale of the pandemic, Tedros said: “This Sunday marks two years since I declared a public health emergency of international concern – the highest level of alarm under international law – over the spread of Covid-19. “At the time, there were fewer than 100 cases and no deaths reported outside China. Two years later, almost 350 million cases have been reported, and more than 5.5 million deaths – and we know these numbers are an underestimate. Returning once again to the issue of vaccine equity, he added: “As it stands, 86 member states across all regions have not been able to reach last year’s target of vaccinating 40% of their populations – and 34 member states, most of them in Africa and the eastern Mediterranean region, have not been able to vaccinate even 10% of their populations. “Eighty-five percent of the population of Africa is yet to receive a single dose of vaccine. How can this be acceptable to any of us? We simply cannot end the emergency phase of the pandemic unless we bridge this gap.”A woman in Michigan checked her spam email folder – and found out she had won a $3m lottery prize. “I saw an ad on Facebook that the Mega Millions jackpot was getting pretty high, so I got on my account and bought a ticket,” Laura Spears, 55 and from Oakland county, said in a release from the Michigan Lottery. “A few days later, I was looking for a missing email from someone, so I checked the spam folder in my email account. “That’s when I saw an email from the lottery saying I had won a prize. I couldn’t believe what I was reading, so I logged in to my lottery account to confirm the message in the email. “It’s all still so shocking to me that I really won $3m.” Spears in fact won $1m on her original ticket but had paid another $1 to add a “Megaplier”, a gambit the Michigan Lottery said can multiply prizes up to five times. Spears said she will retire earlier than planned, and will share her winnings with family members. She also said she had “added the Michigan Lottery to my safe senders list just in case I ever get lucky enough to receive another email about a huge prize”. The lottery operator was keen to emphasize that a huge prize is now on offer in the Mega Millions draw, which operates in 45 US states, Washington DC and the US Virgin Islands. “The Mega Millions jackpot was last won on 22 October 2021,” the operator said, “when a family in Lake Havasu City, Arizona, won $108m. The current jackpot stands at $376m.”You must remember Thomas Gainsborough’s Blue Boy. It’s the painting that gets stolen from a rich man’s house in the 1929 Laurel and Hardy short Wrong Again. Trying to claim the reward, Stan and Ollie fetch a racehorse called Blue Boy instead and attempt to “leave it on the piano” as they were asked. If only the National Gallery screened this in their tiny exhibition to mark The Blue Boy’s return to Britain for the first time in a century, we might get a sense of what it once meant. In 1921 railway magnate Henry E Huntingdon bought this 1770 painting for a world record price, making it as famous in 1920s America as Banksy is now. Perhaps The Blue Boy even inspired pop art, for it injected glamour into jazz age Hollywood. But that was then. This glittering dazzle of blue and silver with a bonny face on top has come home far too late. Shown with two other Gainsboroughs and two portraits by his inspiration, Anthony van Dyck, it embodies a vision of English art that’s as hokey as a Disney cartoon of a fox hunt. It makes you wonder if as a nation, when it comes to art and the soul, we have something missing. I thought I loved Gainsborough’s virtuoso brushwork, like a bravura bit of Mozart or Haydn in paint, pleasing itself in molten chromatic fripperies. But staring too long at The Blue Boy is a good way to get fed up with his talent. This painting of an entitled, arrogant youth in a fancy dress costume has a country-house worth of technical magic but no soul. It surely appealed to people a century ago – including Americans who still emulated the English upper class – as a quintessentially English icon of snobbish disdain and style. Today it might stick in our throats for the same reason. But that is not, exactly, what is wrong with it. The craft of this show-off painting scintillates. You enter the small room where it is on display and are delighted by that burst of silvered azure. Whoever this adolescent was – the identity of the Blue Boy has never been established – Gainsborough turned him into precious artwork. He got him to dress in an archaic costume inspired by the cavaliers Van Dyck painted in the 1600s on the eve of the English civil war. Van Dyck, from Antwerp, created a definitive swaggering look for high-style English aristocratic portraiture. In Gainsborough’s day, when portraitists were vying for the custom of an elite enriched by the agricultural revolution, global trade and slavery, the Van Dyck manner was hot. So, in this tour de force of oil painting, Gainsborough takes on Van Dyck and out-primps him. Van Dyck’s portrait of Lord John Stuart and his Brother, Lord Bernard Stuart, painted about 1638, is hung for comparison. These two youths with expressions of ice-cold hauteur become a bit more sympathetic when you realise they would both shortly be killed in the civil war, probably while brushing their long hair. Lord Bernard Stuart wears a silver and blue cloak, blue pantaloons and fawn boots. He poses with one knee raised, hand on hip, looking down on us over his shoulder. Gainsborough’s youth wears a version of this very garb yet it is painted much more playfully. Van Dyck’s brushwork is meticulous. Gainsborough’s is rollicking. He lets loose glancing dazzles and dips of light and cool in every crease, riffs on each frolic of lace like a drunken flautist. He has great fun, riffing on ruffs. If that was enough to make a portrait great, this would be one of the greatest. However, it is not. The painting’s most brilliant visual coup is also the beginning of what it lacks. Gainsborough sets off the electric storm of blueness against a rainy English sky. As the Victorian critic Ruskin noted, Gainsborough’s weather is the most British thing about him. This sky is brown and brackish, laden with chilly moisture, a sublime bass note to contrast with the piping flute. It is a romantic landscape – one of the first. Yet Gainsborough does not use it romantically. He uses it for pure visual effect: the morose setting exaggerates the figure’s brightness. Instead of a solitary walker lost in landscape we get an overdressed cocksure kid looking right through us. Gainsborough sacrifices emotion for effect. The Blue Boy’s face doesn’t betray the least hint of introspection. In reality, the youth’s aristocratic demeanour may be a put-on. One possible candidate for the model is Gainsborough’s nephew and apprentice Gainsborough Dupont. That makes sense if, as I suspect, The Blue Boy is not a real portrait so much as a display piece Gainsborough kept in his studio to razzle-dazzle potential customers. It was painted when he had a portrait business in Bath. Gentlefolk staying at this spa town for the season could pose for him between playing cards at the Assembly Rooms and marrying off their daughters. Gainsborough called it “pickpocketing the rich”. And yes, he was happy to pickpocket people whose money came from slave plantations. To me The Blue Boy looks like his brilliant advert – today it might be a video he played for the client so they could see how he might transform them. That would explain why it has so much style and so little soul. Gainsborough could be so much better than this. And the National Gallery accidentally shows that by including one of his real masterpieces, Elizabeth and Mary Linley, which is a risky move if you want people to look at anything else in the room. Mary Linley returns your gaze with true feeling and intelligence while her sister looks into the landscape with Romantic feeling. This is how Gainsborough could paint people he really cared about – who usually tended to be women, or fellow creative workers. The musical Linleys were both. These paintings are keepers but The Blue Boy had me fidgeting after five minutes. It is as boring as it is impressive. It seems the art market a century ago was as silly as it is today. Gainsborough’s Blue Boy is at the National Gallery, London, from 25 January to 15 May.Colm Tóibín has been named as the new laureate for Irish fiction, taking over from Sebastian Barry. The three-year role is intended to “acknowledge the contribution of fiction writers to Irish artistic and cultural life”, as well as to encourage new writers, and engagement with “high quality Irish fiction”. The Arts Council of Ireland, which runs the initiative, described Tóibín as “one of our finest writers”, whose award-winning novels – from The Master to Brooklyn – “are not just acclaimed by critics but they are also loved by readers”. Eleanor Wachtel, a Canadian critic who sat on the selection panel for the role, said that Tóibín was “a true man of letters”. “I’ve been following Colm Tóibín’s work for almost 30 years and have long admired his intelligence, erudition, wit and compassion,” she added. “From his thoughtful essays to his engaging fiction, he’s remarkably talented and prolific, full of warmth and enthusiasm.” Tóibín said he was “honoured” to be appointed to a role which was first filled by Anne Enright, and then by Barry. “I will do what I can to work with a community of readers so that fiction continues to enrich our lives, allow us to see the world more clearly, or with a deepened sense of mystery,” said the author. “I will also work with fellow writers and aspiring writers to enhance the role novels and stories play in Irish life.” He will begin his role with a monthly book club, The Art of Reading, in which he will discuss “outstanding” Irish writing, sometimes interviewing the authors of the books he is discussing. The event, which will be offered online on the last Thursday of every month, kicks off on 24 February, when Tóibín will be talking to Claire Keegan about her recent book Small Things Like These. It is, said Tóibín, “quite an exciting time to be a reader in Ireland”. “It is as though here in Ireland there’s still things to be said that no one has worked out a way to say yet, and it is as though writers are putting up flags, and big flags, over a place, over a sensibility, or over a story that has not yet been told or else needs a new version.”The RSPB has called for an emergency shooting ban after an “unprecedented” outbreak of bird flu that has left wildfowl populations in “catastrophic decline”. Migratory geese that overwinter on the Solway Firth, which stretches between Scotland and Cumbria, are being hardest hit, with a 38% decline in the Svalbard barnacle goose breeding population from winter last year. While these are protected species and not subject to hunting, experts argue that pressure from wildfowlers on nearby, legal quarry species can have an impact. Shoots nearby can cause stress, scaring the birds into the air where they use up vital energy. Some estimates suggest the UK is facing the worst outbreak of avian influenza on record. Latest population counts of the Svalbard breeding population show a drop in numbers from 43,703 in November last year to 27,133 in this month’s counts. Paul Walton, the head of habitats and species at RSPB Scotland, said: “We are in the grip of an unprecedented outbreak and unfortunately the Solway seems to be the epicentre of this in the UK. Our birds are suffering and they need an urgent reprieve to help them get through this winter and ensure that as many as possible of those remaining survive to make their migration back home to Scandinavia to breed in the summer. “The best way we can do this is by reducing the cumulative impacts of disturbance, including by wildfowling. Our teams on the ground are seeing many birds that are sick or dying and under significant stress. Anything that can be done to limit activities which incur additional disturbance at this time should be implemented with urgency. This action could help these populations during this period of catastrophic decline caused by the outbreak.” There are allowances under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 for a temporary pause in the hunting of wildfowl if there are prolonged periods of freezing weather. The RSPB is asking for this consideration in the event of a severe avian influenza outbreak. It has also asked the public to keep dogs under close control in the Solway coastal area to avoid further disturbing the birds. After the barnacle goose gained protection in the 1950s, following a long campaign by conservationists, the world population rose from just a few hundred individuals to about 40,000. But the recent sharp decline has made experts concerned the good work could be undone. Wild birds migrating to the UK from mainland Europe during the winter months can carry bird flu. Many bird populations, from chickens to swans, have been hit by the flu, which is deadly. An avian influenza prevention zone came into force across Great Britain on 3 November, meaning birdkeepers must keep their flock separate from wild birds and put strict biosecurity measures in place. Anyone who finds dead birds is advised not to handle them and to report the bodies to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs.“It’s life itself.” On Friday afternoon Diego Simeone said Atlético Madrid hadn’t been through anything like this in the years he had been there. That’s how bad things had got. The very next day they went through something they hadn’t experienced in the 118 years anyone had been there. That’s how good it got, how much they had needed this. “Madness,” Ángel Correa called it. “Incredible,” José María Giménez offered. It was “unbelievably beautiful,” Matheus Cunha said. It was also a timely reminder of who they are. At least, they hoped so. “What did you feel?” Simeone was asked when it was over, everyone exhausted but alive again, the final whistle coming on 100.51 with Atlético having somehow beaten Valencia 3-2 at the Metropolitano, the club’s anthem belted out like an act of faith. “What did I feel? Pfff. That this place is wonderful where I am. And every time you see it getting away, ah, I want to reach out and grab it even tighter.” They certainly have to hold on to something, and maybe this was it. “There are nights that stay with you; this is one,” Simeone said. This was “D Day: origin of evil”, AS had claimed on Saturday morning, and it had been set to be a disaster. Three days earlier the same paper declared Atlético had hit “rock bottom” but they hadn’t stopped yet. In a week they had been beaten by Athletic in the Super Cup and deservedly knocked out of the Copa del Rey by Real Sociedad. Beaten four times in December, they had collected four of 18 points and started the weekend 16 behind Real Madrid, their season over. Now, on a night of “barbaric cold,” in Giménez’s words, they were losing again. Atlético were 2-0 down to the team who had most exposed their vulnerability, coming back from 3-1 down to draw 3-3 with two goals in added time in November, foreshadowing their fall. Three teams were lined up to take a Champions League place off them and two more could climb to within a point. But it wasn’t just that; it was that, by Simeone’s own admission, they had done “absolutely nothing” they wanted. When Yunus Musah scored the first, it was the 25th league goal Atlético had conceded – as many as in the whole of last season, no longer good at the things that defined them. It was nicely taken; it was also dreadfully defended, and still it wasn’t as bad the second, scored by Hugo Duro and assisted by half the Atlético team. “My heart hurt,” Simeone said. There was, he admitted, “desperation, anxiety, sadness about what was happening to us”, not least because it had happened before. At half time he told his players that they could lose, but not like this. Ultimately, they didn’t lose at all. Correa came on at the break, Cunha was introduced 12 minutes later for Lemar, and centre-back Felipe replaced João Félix. That decision drew whistles, but it worked. “In the second half I could see something I identify with,” Simeone said. Cunha scored the first after an hour but going into the last minute Atlético were still losing 2-1. They had never won a league game from that position. Now, they did. On 89.58, Correa made it 2-2, dashing into the net to get the ball back. On 92.13, Mario Hermoso made it 3-2. Between the equaliser and the winner, the ball had only been in play 46 seconds. Now suddenly, Luis Suárez was leaping on to Hermoso’s back, crashing to the ground, teammates chasing. From the touchline they came too, 11 men sprinting towards the south end. In the leading pack, Simeone was flat out. From the tunnel came Antoine Griezmann, injured and unavailable but moving fast, leaping into them and almost sending Simeone to the turf. As he headed back towards the bench, Simeone’s head lolled and his legs gave way, looking to the sky about to cry like a marathon runner approaching the line, nothing left. He paused, put his hands on his knees and spat, as if post-puke, a portrait of the pressure. There were eight more minutes to endure: when the final whistle went, for once Simeone didn’t sprint straight up the tunnel. Instead, Valencia’s players were first, one booting the wall, a miracle he didn’t break his foot. “This can’t happen; we have to defend tooth and nail,” Duro said. His teammates said worse things, if they said anything. Another sat on the stairs alone, silently waiting for an opponent’s shirt. By the time he arrived, he had given it away. They all had. Simeone had embraced them all, leaping into Lemar, strangling Suárez, leading them towards the fans to throw their shirts into the stands. “Any other fans would have turned against us,” Simeone said. Can you explain what that felt like, Cunha was asked. “No,” he said and started laughing. “To be honest, no.” It is not the only thing that evades easy explanation; the whole season does, that Atlético again found themselves needing to come from behind, why their title defence ended so fast. The hope now is that this can be a turning point – a phrase just about everyone used afterwards. “I’m convinced,” Correa said. “We needed this.” Hermoso added: “It’s been difficult since the [last] Valencia game; what better day to turn it around?” “The first half is not us, the second is,” Simeone said, which was partly the point: too often that first half has been them. This is a recurring theme, a question of identity: who they are, what they want to be and how. Asked why this Atlético is not Atlético, there was something pointed in his response: “Maybe the coach doesn’t clearly individualise which players can transmit what we saw in the second half. [He has] to identify those who can do that.” This season Yannick Carrasco – fabulous on Saturday – has started 18 of 21 games. Hermoso has too, in different roles. Koke, left out recently, has started 16. No one else is over 14. One of them, Marcos Llorente, has not had a defined role. Another, Suárez, has not scored since the Valencia game, often withdrawn early and increasingly often not starting. Stefan Savic has been injured and missed. So too Giménez. Griezmann needs accommodating. Correa somehow never quite feels like an automatic first choice. “When they score the second goal you start to think: ‘why is this happening to us?’” Correa admitted. So why is it? “I don’t know,” he replied. “I couldn’t explain it to you, but it’s a reality.” Sometimes the margins are fine: expected goals, for and against, suggest Atlético shouldn’t have dropped so many points. Even Jan Oblak has looked normal, not the saviour he was. But chance is an unsatisfactory explanation even when it does play a part, which it always does. Last year too, Atlético had been forced into rescuing results in an extraordinary run in, but they did win the league. And maybe that’s part of it too. Success shifts things, shaping expectation, mind-sets, group dynamics, altering or even eliminating the sense of resistance or rebellion, of collective cause. Signings do too. Administering abundance is not the same, creating different challenges. Who are they? The league champions, supposedly the best squad Atlético have ever had. “For a team like Atlético it’s not easy to be champions; it’s a club not used to being champions every year,” Simeone said. “They were champions after 25 years [actually 19, from 1977 to 1996]. We took it to 18 [between 1996 to 2014], then seven [from 2014 to last season]. You have to maintain that [trend] and it takes a lot to do that. You have to prove yourself daily; nothing you did before counts; what counts is what lies ahead. That has to be a lesson to teach for me and the players to the path now.” “When you win the league, lots of teams relax because they say ‘well, it’s happened’,” Giménez said. “Four new players came and the team relaxes a bit. You think that if they score, no worries, you have players who can win it for you [still], and that was a bit what happened to us. Last season, games started and we would bite. This year, I see a slight relaxation in comparison. We were first to the challenges, the loose balls, we were aggressive in the areas, we defended games to the end. This year, that wasn’t happening. Why? Because we have a great team, but a great team is built on results too. “Today, it did: hopefully this can be the push we need to be better,” Giménez added, “but you have to believe it: you can’t say ‘done’, next week we win just with the shirt. This is a turning point we have to grab. In the end, what you need is a win. What you need is this. If you play like you always played, like Atlético Madrid, you can win any game.”Billy Bragg, singer-songwriter I wrote the song in 1979 when I was 21, living in Northamptonshire and playing in the punk band Riff Raff. I was coming back from the pub one night and saw two satellites in the sky. I thought they were a great metaphor for a relationship, so when I got home I wrote down: “I saw two shooting stars last night / I wished on them but they were only satellites.” When I came back to the song the following year to finish it, I realised I could truthfully open it with the line, “I was 21 years when I wrote this song / I’m 22 now but I won’t be for long”, just like Simon and Garfunkel’s Leaves That Are Green. By 1980, Margaret Thatcher had been elected, the band had broken up and punk had dissipated into synthesiser groups, so A New England was my way of saying that I needed a hug as well as a new ideology. The line “the girls I loved in school are already pushing prams” was about my cohort. We’d all left school at 16 and were looking for different ways to become adults. As a singer-songwriter, I played electric guitar because if I had played an acoustic, the rock clubs would have sent me to the folk clubs. If audiences heckled, I could just turn it up. A New England is like a Ramones song: all bar chords on the bottom two strings. The quiet bit before the solo, where I dampen the strings with the bottom of my hand for a chugging sound, was a technique I borrowed from Thin Lizzy. Jeff Chegwin - TV presenter Keith’s twin – read a review of my tape in Melody Maker and gave me some studio time. He worked at music publisher Chappell and was the first person to show faith in me. When the resulting album, Life’s a Riot With Spy vs Spy, came out, I left a copy at the BBC. That evening, Jeff and I were playing football in Hyde Park and afterwards we stood around a car listening to the radio. John Peel came on Radio 1 during Kid Jensen’s slot and asked if someone could bring him a mushroom biryani before his show later. Fifteen minutes later, me and Jeff were at Broadcasting House, still in our football gear, with a mushroom biryani. I told John that I’d left a record. Later that night, I tuned in and heard him say: “I’d have done this without the mushroom biryani.” Then he played The Milkman of Human Kindness and I was away. A couple of years later, when Kirsty MacColl said she wanted to record A New England, she said she would need the genders changing and an extra verse. She invited me round for a fried breakfast and by the time she’d cooked it, I’d written the extra verse. Her shimmering pop version took it into the Top 10. I think it’s better than mine. Oliver Hitch, producer I was the in-house engineer at Chappell, where I would record songwriters trying to sell their songs to publishers. Billy was initially booked in for a day to see how he got on. I didn’t really get what he was about and waved goodbye in the corridor thinking: “What a nice bloke. Shame he’ll never make it.” Then Jeff took me to see him playing in a pub, and that made all the difference. Billy could stand on stage, make people laugh, tell a story and turn it into the introduction of the song. In those days, everything was becoming more about high production values, so to see a guy doing it raw and live with just an electric guitar was very different. I had an idea how I could record him. We recorded Life’s a Riot in three days. We spent the first day getting a good sound using various delays and the studio’s very old-fashioned plate reverb on the vocals. Once we’d got that, he could run through the repertoire, do take after take and we’d pick the best at the end. Billy was rough round the edges but to me, A New England, Richard and The Milkman of Human Kindness were really standout songs. A New England took a handful of takes, and not long after, Life’s a Riot started selling in enormous quantities. I wasn’t due any royalties from the record but Billy, bless him, turned up at Chappell’s offices with a cheque saying: “I thought you deserved something.” • A new vinyl edition of Billy Bragg’s recent album The Million Things That Never Happened is released on 4 February. Riff Raff play a one-off reunion gig at Dingwalls, London, on 8 February, for guitarist Wiggy’s 60th birthday.A police force left residents “in danger, at risk and unprotected” for a “protracted period” during a riot in which cars were set on fire and bricks were hurled at houses, leaving people fearing for their lives, an independent review has concluded. The chief constable of South Wales police, Jeremy Vaughan, apologised that his force had failed to act quickly enough during the disturbance in Swansea and accepted residents had been “tormented” by the rioters. The independent review of the Mayhill disturbance, which happened in May 2021, highlighted that scores of officers were in the area but stood by, rather than tackling the rioters. It also said that one officer in charge that night twice asked for extra police to be scrambled from other areas as backup but was refused. It highlighted one example of a vulnerable person whose life was feared to be in danger. Officers with shields were deployed but withdrew for their own safety, leaving the person and others like him “lost”, the report said. It concluded: “Significant failings are evident. Currently available evidence strongly suggests failings in command structures and decisions, operational decisions and tactics, and communications.” There were 46 arrests over the disturbance and the charging decisions by the Crown Prosecution Service on 37 people allegedly involved are expected imminently. Vaughan said: “I want to apologise to all those who have been affected by this incident and particularly those local residents who were tormented by those responsible. We failed to take action quickly enough on the night and for that I am truly sorry.” The review, undertaken by a former senior police officer, an ex-council chief executive and a barrister, said the impact of Covid lockdowns may have been one of the catalysts for the disturbance. It said: “The adverse effects of the Covid-19 pandemic and consequent lockdowns have been identified throughout our engagements: these include impact upon the public and communities, disproportionate impact on children and young people, on policing, on the council’s work and engagements and upon partnership working between agencies.” But it added: “However, no one has suggested to us that Covid was the sole or primary cause of the events.” It calls for investment in the area – one of the most deprived in Wales – such as safe spaces, community activity and youth engagement, adding: “Identifying, supporting, and nurturing community capacity to generate positive action in sport, community events, social activity, youth engagement, etc. is a significant challenge, but an essential one.” But the role of the police is the main focus of the report. “There was a protracted period during which the residents of Waun Wen Road [the centre of the violence] were in danger, at risk and unprotected by the police,” it said. “Some of the views shared with us include the following: ‘The police let us down’; ‘They failed to protect us’; ‘They weren’t there for us when we needed them’; and ‘We don’t understand why they didn’t do anything.’” The report says that up to 60 officers were on the streets, including some equipped with Tasers and with dogs, and that residents could not understand why they did not intervene. It said: “We have been unable to identify a clear command structure either properly identified or working in practice.” The panel expressed concern over why a request for reinforcements under the force’s Operation Scorpion plan was twice refused. “There appear to have been breakdowns in communications that night,” the report said. Examining the buildup, the panel said police had told it a vehicle had been obtained in advance, with a view to using it in the trouble. There was also a car chase involving the police shortly beforehand. Swansea council said it was investing in the area, such as improving facilities for young people. “We will be further boosting our youth services and facilities in this area as part of our ongoing investment in our young people,” a spokesperson said.Tom Holland was obsessed with Spider-Man as a boy. Growing up in Kingston upon Thames, he came to own more than 30 Spider-Man costumes and cherished his Spider-Man bedsheets. And, unlike for most, his childhood obsession paid dividends later in life: he would eventually get to play his hero, landing the role that has made him the most famous young British actor in the world. Holland, 25, has been at the centre of Marvel’s cinematic universe for years. After making his debut in Captain America: Civil War in 2016, he has starred in two Avengers and three standalone Spider-Man films. The latest, No Way Home, has so far grossed more than $1.6bn (£1.18bn) worldwide, and Holland is now one of a small handful of Hollywood big-hitters being touted by some to be the next host of the Oscars – the event’s first formal presenter in three years. The actor’s cheeky British charm, vulnerability and wit have made him one of the internet’s favourite crushes. Whether he’s accidentally spoiling the latest Marvel movie, mispronouncing “croissant” or adopting a chicken after supermarkets ran out of eggs, he has a knack for making audiences laugh and warming their hearts. But his ascent to Hollywood superstardom was not always a given. In fact, his roots lie not in drama schools or small acting roles but in gymnastics and dance, something the young Holland fell into almost accidentally. The eldest of four brothers, Holland credits his interest in dancing to the music of Janet Jackson. His dad, Dominic, a standup comedian and author, and his mum, Nikki, a professional photographer, noticed their son’s natural rhythm and signed him up to hip-hop classes at Nifty Feet dance school, run by the choreographer Lynne Page in a leisure centre in Wimbledon. During a performance one Easter, a 10-year-old Holland was spotted by a member of the Royal Ballet school and asked to audition for Billy Elliot the Musical, then on at London’s Victoria Palace theatre. In his book Eclipsed, Dominic Holland, who later became his son’s unofficial manager and agent, recalls taking Tom to see the musical and laughing at the preposterousness of him playing Billy. “There was just no way. No chance. Ballet, tap, singing, acting; Tom had never done any of these things. He had never even been cast in any of his school plays.” Despite his lack of experience, Tom still caught the eye of the director, Stephen Daldry, because “he could see that Tom could act and, even more crucially, that he could take direction”, his father wrote. After two years of preparation, including ballet, tap and acrobatic lessons, Holland was finally on stage – first as Michael, Billy’s friend, and then as Billy in 2008. Craig Gallivan, who played Tony in the musical, said it was clear from the very first rehearsals that Holland was special. “The children I was lucky enough work with on Billy Elliot were all exceptional talents so it was something of an impossibility to stand out from that, but Tom did,” he said. “For me, it was his connection to the dialogue. He had access to an emotional sensitivity that was way beyond his years.” Holland’s turn as Billy Elliot would transpire to be more consequential than he and his family would ever have imagined. JA Bayona, the director of The Impossible, Holland’s first feature film, in which he starred alongside Ewan McGregor and Naomi Watts, was originally struck by the young actor when he saw a video of him discussing Billy. The German actor Sönke Möhring, who starred alongside Holland in the 2012 film, said it was “amazing to see how professional he was”. He said: “Besides his great talent he is blessed with a deep soul. You could feel that he was more connected with the story than other actors of his age. Most of all, he was down to earth, very polite and a friendly kid.” It was around the same time that Holland was cast in Kevin Macdonald’s How I Live Now. Macdonald, the Oscar-winning director behind One Day in September and The Last King of Scotland, said it was “a beautiful experience” working with the then teenager. “He’d done Billy Elliot, so he had this confidence with having been on stage in front of thousands of people night after night. When you’re meeting teenagers, they’re mostly crippled by shyness. But he was articulate and enthusiastic.” For Macdonald, this positive energy helped to make Holland a star. “It’s lovely to be around. He’s so bright-eyed.” But if his personality was what drew directors to him, it was the physical agility he developed as a result of playing Billy that kept them there. And none were more keen than the Captain America: Civil War directors, Joe and Anthony Russo. According to the Captain America star Chris Evans, who met his future co-star during the Spider-Man audition process, Holland ended up doing a flip during a scene. “Marvel doesn’t want to see this kid break his neck, so everyone from the studio was like: ‘Don’t! Don’t!’ And Joe just started salivating: ‘Just do it!’ And he did it – and stuck it,” Evans said. When Holland was cast as Spider-Man in 2015, he beat thousands of other young actors to the role, including Asa Butterfield and Timothée Chalamet. Critics have consistently praised his performances, and a campaign to get No Way Home Oscar recognition is gaining traction. Holland himself is an arch-defender of the artistic merits of the Marvel films. When Martin Scorsese likened the franchise to “theme parks”, he hit back, saying: “I’ve made Marvel movies and I’ve also made movies that have been in the conversation in the world of the Oscars, and the only difference, really, is one is much more expensive than the other.” Beyond the set, he has said that having Zendaya – another precocious actor, who plays Spider-Man’s onscreen love interest – in his life has kept him sane. The pair’s relationship has long obsessed fans, with videos such as “Tom Holland and Zendaya flirting for 8 minutes straight” racking up more than 1.8m views on YouTube. Last summer, when pictures emerged of the two kissing, Spider-Man fandom was sent into a frenzy. To Holland it was an invasion of privacy, to critics a publicity stunt, and to fans a dream come true. Holland, who has spoken about the huge responsibility that comes with playing Spider-Man, has a host of upcoming projects, including Uncharted (based on the video game series) and the Apple TV drama The Crowded Room. But of late he’s been more vocal about his desire to branch out into directing and return to dancing. “The 20-year goal is to be a film director,” he told Interview magazine in 2017. “The 15-year goal is to win an Oscar.” Whether or not he has the chance to triumph at this year’s awards is yet to be seen. But to his millions of fans, he’s already a winner.At the start of 2020, I was working on a piece about Question Time, and how it had transformed over time from being an ambling, rather niche discussion show into politics’ answer to Jeremy Kyle, with an audience of incredibly angry people trash-talking imaginary immigrants living in mansions with their 14 imaginary children. Oh, the spiral! Some lefty would invent the term “gammons”, and then the Twitterati would have an even more vicious spin-off row about whether that word was itself more racist than the original racism. It was all quite hard to unpick. So, with what I now know to be a terrifying naivety, I remember thinking, when the pandemic hit: “Thank God; we’ll surely be right as dodgers in a month or two, but for those few weeks nobody will be wanting dispatches from this peculiar front of the culture war.” Well, Covid was obviously more horrifying and lasted rather longer than I had supposed, but this week the worlds of Question Time and corona collided. The host, Fiona Bruce, appealed on social media for unvaccinated people to appear in the audience. On the one hand, a laudable – nay, splendid – effort to seek out the voices of the unheard, the people Hillary Clinton might describe as “deplorables”, the citizens saying out loud what so many think, in order to break the liberal-elite stranglehold on common sense. On the other hand, dude, have you really thought this through? What if, being unvaccinated, they all give each other Covid and some become seriously ill? What if the vaxxed audience members, after a risk assessment, decline to sit next to them, and your balanced discussion forum is torpedoed, replaced by middle-aged Hunger Games? What if someone dies? People say that, when you’re making a complex ethical decision, you should try to imagine explaining yourself to a magistrate: “Well, your honour, a lot of people have had enough of science …” This is very much the preoccupation of our age, how to knit a fraying public discourse back together, how to communicate with people whose views don’t match your own. Established principles range from the obvious (try not to be a dick) to the well-worn (don’t hector anyone with your facts and statistics). You’re not supposed to myth-bust, as that tends to reinforce the myth in your opponent’s imagination. Instead, establish from the start that you see the good in them. In a debate with an anti-vaxxer, that might go something like: “I can see that you just want to keep your family safe …” I wouldn’t be able to say a thing like that with a straight face, but that’s just a curse some of us have – highly legible features, like Buster Keaton. Increasingly, though, theorists are moving away from the idea that a perfect argument exists, where you listen in the correct, active way, and use exactly the right language and tone, to metaphorically unblock the Suez Canal, whereupon commerce can once again open up between one side and the other. Instead, if you find yourself in a culture war, figure out whether your opponent is persuadable or implacable. “Persuadable” is wondering what the civil liberties implications are of mandatory vaccination; “implacable” is thinking vaccines are really a plot by a cabal of billionaires to wipe out sheeple by making them infertile. “Implacable” is QAnon, it’s climate change or Holocaust denial, it’s white replacement theory, it’s any idea that relies on a secret, concerted, long-range conspiracy that, if you know anything about humans (their ability to keep a secret, for one), you know to be functionally impossible. There’s no point trying to persuade the implacable, but you do have one job, and it’s the very devil of a job: to stop them persuading anyone else. I think maybe “Keep them off Question Time” is good start but I am – and I hope always to remain – persuadable. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistBoris Johnson and the Conservative party are facing crises on multiple fronts, all interconnected in various ways. As the pressure mounts on the prime minister, his MPs are spotting opportunities to take advantage of a weakened leader by pressing hard for different concessions. Here we take a look at the challenges facing Johnson, and the demands he is facing from his MPs that may help those challenges go away. The challenges Partygate Still the biggest threat to Johnson’s premiership, the government and the Conservative party have been rocked by a series of claims about staff parties held in Downing Street and elsewhere in Whitehall while lockdown restrictions were in place. From the “bring your own booze” party of 20 May 2020 in the Downing Street gardens to the Christmas party in December 2020 that the PM’s former press secretary was filmed joking about, allegations of Covid rule-flouting have mounted up. Sue Gray, the senior civil servant tasked with looking into the claims, is expected to publish her findings this week. She has reportedly interviewed Downing Street police officers about the allegations and was due to interview Dominic Cummings, the PM’s former adviser, on Monday. Covid fraud Theodore Agnew, a Cabinet Office minister whose brief also covers the Treasury, dramatically resigned his post on Monday over the government’s handling of fraudulent Covid business loans. Agnew, a life peer since 2017, announced his resignation in the Lords in response to a Labour urgent question about the Treasury’s decision last week to write off £4.3bn in Covid payments lost to fraud. Oversight of Covid loans by the business department and the British Business Bank, which oversaw the scheme, had been “nothing less than woeful”, Agnew said. Islamophobia Johnson has been forced into ordering a formal inquiry into allegations by the Tory MP Nusrat Ghani that she was sacked as a minister after being told her “Muslimness” was “making colleagues uncomfortable”. Ghani, an MP since 2015 who lost her job as a junior transport minister during a reshuffle in early 2020, said Tory whips told her that her “Muslim woman minister status was making colleagues feel uncomfortable”. The Conservative chief whip, Mark Spencer, identified himself as the person accused of making the remarks. Whips’ tactics The Conservative party whips – officials whose task is to ensure party discipline – have been accused of using blackmail against MPs seeking to oust Johnson. The senior Conservative MP William Wragg, who chairs a government scrutiny committee, claimed there was attempted blackmail against some of his colleagues involving public money. Two MPs – the Tory defector Christian Wakeford and Andrew Bridgen, another Johnson critic – have spoken publicly about the tactics they claim were deployed against them. Wakeford backed up the claims by Wragg that threats involving public money were made by the whips. Wragg and others have encouraged MPs to report such behaviour to the police. The culture at No 10 Underpinning all of the above are questions about the culture over which Johnson has presided at the very top of government, including an allegedly rampant drinking culture among staff. Reports of a member of the team filling up a suitcase with booze from a supermarket for one of the parties were reportedly not a one-off. There have been numerous reports that the PM is considering firing several of his aides, including but not limited to Dan Rosenfield, the longtime civil servant who became his chief of staff only a year ago; Martin Reynolds, the PM’s principal private secretary who sent the above-mentioned “bring your own booze” invite; and Jack Doyle, the No 10 director of communications. The demands There are reports that frustrated MPs are taking advantage of the prime minister’s weak position to press for concessions on key policy and legislative changes. These include: Drop planned rise in national insurance contributions (NICs) Conservative MPs have reportedly met the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, to apply pressure on the Treasury to ditch the planned 1.25% rise in NICs in April, which they argue will hit families at a time when they are also facing a sharp rise in the cost of living. Cut VAT on energy bills The PM is reportedly considering cutting VAT on energy bills. Labour and energy firms have called for the move – and so have some Tory MPs, who are piling pressure on the PM to act. Push back mandatory NHS jabs The Sunday Telegraph reported that an option being considered by Downing Street is to delay by six months the requirement for all NHS staff to have a Covid vaccine, to help quell a revolt among Tory MPs. Other policies facing scrutiny from Johnson’s MPs include pressure to drop what the Tory peer Lord Marland has called “fluffy” environmental policies, for which Marland provides the animal welfare sentience bill as an example, while the prominent backbencher Steve Baker has said net zero emissions targets could be “bigger than Brexit” for potential to cause unrest. Post-Brexit politics continue to play a role, though, with reports that the Tory MP Bernard Jenkin has laid out Brexiter demands in return for support for Johnson. Elsewhere, a ban on gay conversion practices could be in backbench sights, with as many as 30 Tory MPs warning against rushing through a new law “without debate”.A call from a stranger may elicit myriad responses – panic, confusion, maybe even excitement – but it turns out that hippos have a rather more corporeal reaction: they spray dung. Researchers studying hippopotamuses in Mozambique have revealed that the creatures not only react to the vocalisations of other hippos, but that the calls act as an identity signal. In other words, they allow hippos to tell the difference between a familiar individual and a stranger. “Hippos are quite talkative. They have a repertoire of different calls: wheeze honks, grunts, bellows, squeals,” said Prof Nicolas Mathevon, of the University of Saint-Etienne in France, a co-author of the study. “However, the function of these calls has not been studied experimentally. Our study is the first to test experimentally the function of a hippo call.” Writing in the journal Current Biology, Mathevon and colleagues report how they studied the loud “wheeze honk” calls of hippos – a sound not unlike a growling laugh. The team recorded calls from individual hippos within groups – or pods – living in the same or different lakes in the Maputo special reserve. Five pods were then played back calls from an individual in their own group, a neighbouring group at the same lake, and a distant group of hippos that were strangers to them, while two pods were played calls from their own group and a distant group. The team found that hippos responded to the calls by calling back, approaching the sound or by spraying dung. The latter, however, was more common when the call was from a stranger than from a hippo of the same or neighbouring group. “When we played back familiar calls … the reaction was not aggressive. Basically, they just called back,” Mathevon told the Guardian. The team add that the hippos’ responses were stronger for calls from individuals that were less familiar. “Our experiments suggest that in hippos, the arrival of a stranger individual is perceived as more threatening than that of a neighbour,” the team write. While Mathevon said it was not a surprise that hippos use vocalisations to communicate – noting they are an excellent way to send information – he said the results show that hippo groups are territorial. The team add that their experiments show wheeze honks can travel more than 1km (0.6 miles), suggesting hippos would be familiar with the calls of others living on the same lake. “The most interesting thing to come out of this study is that hippos may have a fine-grained knowledge of the voices of all the individuals around them, and that this knowledge can help them navigate in their social network,” said Mathevon. The team said the findings could have implications for conservation, particularly when it comes to relocating individuals. “It may be possible to get the local hippos used to the voice of the new ones before they arrive and vice versa,” said Mathevon. “Of course, we are not saying that this measure will be sufficient to suppress all aggression, since other sensory signals are certainly also involved, but it may help.”Here is a continuation of Gabriel Tejedor’s fascination with the debris of the former Soviet Union; this latest documentary sets its gaze on the industrial city of Magnitogorsk, situated 2,000km from Moscow. Here, time stands eerily still. Once celebrated as the “socialist city of steel”, Magnitogorsk typifies Stalin’s vision of transforming the largely agrarian nation into an industrialised superpower. Sprawled over the landscape is the colossal structure of Magnitogorsk Iron and Steel Works (MMK), the “kombinat”, or conglomerate, whose formidable influence embodies state authority, reflecting numerous key chapters in the country’s history. More than a Soviet relic, MMK is still the main employer in Magnitogorsk, and one of the biggest steel manufacturers in the world. Its unnerving omnipresence is evoked here in its conspicuous glossy billboards, and also in the lengthy tracking shots that swirl leisurely around the metal arches and the ever-burning furnaces of the factory – images at once grandiose and terrifying. Making for a stark juxtaposition is Tejedor’s moving attention to the mundanity of everyday life. Next to MMK, and its strange, over-the-top PR ceremonies held in the style of old-school Soviet propaganda, the people of Magnitogorsk appear small and insignificant, but their simple hopes pierce through the city’s iron-gray listlessness. They dream of leaving, of escaping the hazardous pollution, of sending their children to better schools, or simply of doing anything but steelwork. These snapshots of everyday life capture a growing generation gap – the older residents are grateful for Vladimir Putin’s government while the younger ones do not shy away from criticism. Kombinat could have dug deeper into the historical context of MMK’s creation, but nevertheless it conveys a searing sympathy for those whose future is shrouded in darkness. • Kombinat is available on 28 January on True Story.A metal detectorist who gave up his hobby when he started a family, only to return to it when his children were old enough to nag him into taking them out detecting with him, has been rewarded with one of the most extraordinary finds – a fine example of England’s oldest gold coin, which has sold for a record-breaking £648,000 at auction. Michael Leigh-Mallory, 52, found the Henry III gold penny buried 10cm deep on farmland in the Devon village of Hemyock shortly after taking up his old hobby again. Not realising what it was, he posted a picture of the coin on social media, where it was spotted by the auctioneers Spink in London. He will split the proceeds of the find with the landowner and plans to use his windfall to help fund the future education of his children, history-loving 13-year-old Emily, who has ambitions of studying archaeology at university, and Harry, 10. On Monday, Leigh-Mallory made a pilgrimage to Henry III’s tomb in Westminster Abbey to pay his respects and offer thanks for his good fortune. “It is quite surreal really,” he said. “I’m just a normal guy who lives in Devon with his family, so this really is a life-changing sum of money which will go towards their futures. “Emily and Harry are very much a part of this story. I used to be a keen metal detectorist but once I had a family the detector ended up getting buried in a cupboard. “One day my wife said to me: ‘You realise you promised you’d take the kids metal detecting.’ So, I said: ‘Right, kids, we’re going detecting.’ We found an Elizabethan coin, which they were so excited by. It really ignited my passion so I invested in a new detector. “The day after it arrived, I went out into this field. It was a bright, sunny day and within 15 minutes I found the coin. I knew it was gold but I had no idea how important it was.” Leigh-Mallory, a retired ecologist from Cullompton, added: “Both of my kids are very passionate about history. Emily has joined a local archaeology society and may study it at university, so the money could go towards that. “Had it not been for a promise I made to my children to go out searching, I do not believe this gold coin would ever have been found. The fine margin between discovery and loss makes this result all the more remarkable. “I really owe it to them for having found the coin in the first place, as they were my inspiration to go out prospecting.” Describing the moment he found the treasure, Leigh-Mallory said: “My trowel exposed the coin. The sun was shining over my shoulder and it glistened. My heart jumped; I thought: ‘This is gold.’ As I picked it up, the sun glinted on the king and my heart seemed to stop.” Leigh-Mallory said he would continue metal detecting, though did not expect to find anything as valuable again. “But it’s not about money. It’s about finding connections to our past.” The penny found by Leigh-Mallory was struck in about 1257 by the king’s goldsmith, William of Gloucester, with precious metal imported from north Africa. The coin features a portrait of the bearded and crowned Henry III on his throne, and about 52,000 of them were minted. It became apparent they were financially unviable because the value of the coin was less than its weight in gold and almost all were melted down. Leigh-Mallory’s is only the eighth known example. The coin he found is thought to have belonged to John de Hyden, a former lord of the manor. Six months before the coin was introduced, De Hyden paid 120 grams of gold to the king to avoid jury service and public office. He later served in a military campaign in Wales, for which he may have received some of the gold pennies. Gregory Edmund, a senior numismatist at Spink, said: “Not only does this stand as the most valuable single coin find in British history, but also the most valuable medieval English coin ever sold at auction.” It achieved a hammer price of £540,000, with extra fees taking the final figure to £648,000. Edmund said: “It was bought by an anonymous private collector in the United Kingdom who intends to place the coin on loan to a public institution or museum. “The sale itself was very unusual because the buyer was there to bid in person. He loved that this fascinating story had unravelled from a chance discovery by a metal detector.”How should culture respond to the climate crisis? Can it provide a wake-up call that isn’t so brutally loud and depressing that we don’t just smash the alarm clock and go back to sleep? Exhibit A in such debates right now is Don’t Look Up, Adam McKay’s comedy/disaster film about two astronomers (Leonardo DiCaprio and Jennifer Lawrence) trying to warn that an Everest-sized comet is hurtling toward Earth. The star-studded allegory of distraction and denialism has been panned by critics but praised by climatologists. Don’t Look Up zooms out on a stellar scale; FloodZone: Photographs by Anastasia Samoylova zooms in to hyperlocal effects of sea level rise, tidal flooding and shoreline erosion in Florida. But the exhibition – at the Chrysler Museum of Art in Norfolk, Virginia – takes aim at the same human flaw of cognitive dissonance. Samoylova is well placed to explore it, having been born in the Soviet Union in the 1980s and observed the gap between its government’s utopian imagery and the grind of everyday life. When she moved to Miami Beach in 2016, she again found a disconnect between idealised visions of tropical paradise and the reality of flooded construction sites, rusted infrastructure and endangered wildlife. After riding out Hurricane Irma in a mandatory evacuation zone, Samoylova wandered the deserted city and photographed gleaming high-rise condominiums towering over flooded streets. Her show juxtaposes giant adverts selling an optimistic image of the future with scenes of decay and disrepair – testament to a rapacious property market determined to keep partying on the eve of apocalypse. “She talks quite a bit about looking at Soviet propaganda images of the good life and how that counteracted her personal experience of things and that, I think, is what she first found in Miami, too,” says Seth Feman, the Chrysler Museum’s deputy director for art and interpretation and curator of photography. “You have the wraparound privacy screens that they put over building sites and those will have images of what is to come: beautiful minimalist condos with happy people lounging about in them. It is propaganda at its core.” But before climate anxiety turns to despair, visitors to the museum will find a companion exhibition: Waters Rising, which includes scientific models, video simulations, photos and artwork examining sea-level rise in coastal communities across Norfolk and other parts of the Hampton Roads region – and some potential solutions. The show, a collaboration with the Institute for Coastal Adaptation and Resilience at nearby Old Dominion University, offers a series of action steps including practical advice on green electronics, light bulbs and washing clothes and how commuters can reduce their carbon footprint. Feman says: “We really wanted to put this in people’s hands to give them a sense that they’ve seen something pretty horrific but they can leave the museum thinking about what they can do.” He adds: “It goes beyond that, too, because I wanted people to try to come to terms with how to express what’s going on. As somebody who lives facing water every day, I often feel like I don’t have the terms to even describe what we’re facing because it’s a slow catastrophe. “It’s not like a volcano erupts or an earthquake happens. It’s this slow wearing away and rising of water. One of the installations in the exhibition specifically focuses on language and how we might grow new terms in order to express the strange feelings that we have when confronted by this. “That really goes hand-in-hand with Anastasia’s work because she is visually expressing this strange emotion of fear and anxiety but also there are moments of real beauty. How do you hold this all together at the same time?” The threat to Norfolk from sea level rise is comparable to that facing Miami and New Orleans. The Chrysler Museum overlooks an inlet from the Elizabeth River, a tidal estuary at the southern end of Chesapeake Bay. During storms, the museum itself can be cut off, effectively becoming an island. “Every day I have to look at the weather and make a decision on how I’m going to walk into the office, how I’m going to walk my dog,” says Feman, 42, who lives four blocks away. “There are roads that are impassable depending on what’s happening. “If there’s a flood or if there’s been heavy rains or sometimes if there’s been heavy winds, it can cause water to pile up in certain areas. So sometimes I have to go right instead of left because I can see from where I’m coming that the road will be impassable if I go down that way. It’s anecdotal, it’s not scientific, but it’s to my mind much worse than it was nine years ago when I got here.” The museum hosts a two-day symposium examining themes and questions raised by the exhibitions on 12 and 13 February. Feman welcomes the ways in which artists are trying to think and feel about the climate crisis differently. “There’s an important role to play for document here but I’m also interested in images that might help us get our minds and our actions moving. Part of the motivation here is that we wanted people to take time and look closely at a problem and it’s really hard to show people images of disaster and to get them motivated. “Sometimes fear works, but oftentimes people will just turn the page or look away and finding artists who can really invite people in to think seriously and effectively about about the world around them is immensely valuable.” The curator notes that Samoylova’s exhibition includes two photos that are not from Florida but Tangier Island, a Virginia fishing town of about 400 people with a rich seafaring culture that appears doomed to sink under water. “She presents two very beautiful images from Tangier and it gets to the point that, since we know it’s about when not if, how might we live differently now? Do we just go wild – the sky is falling so let’s do whatever we want? – or do we meaningfully connect with people? “Do we find another way to move forward in the time in the places that we’ve got? Those images depict things but they are, at their core, about absence. They’re about loss and there’s no escaping it when you look at them.” FloodZone: Photographs by Anastasia Samoylova and Waters Rising: A View From Our Backyard are on display at the Chrysler Museum of Arts in Norfolk until 29 MayClubbers in London’s Tiger Tiger were mistakenly given caustic soda instead of salt when knocking back tequila slammers, sending four people to hospital with burns. Police attended the nightclub near Piccadilly Circus in central London last month after receiving reports that people had chemical-related injuries, believed to be caused by a staff error. Authorities then closed Tiger Tiger as a precaution. A Metropolitan police spokesperson said: “Police were called to Tiger Tiger at approximately 10.50pm on Tuesday 7 December following reports of four people who had suffered burns after coming into contact with a substance, believed to be a strong alkali, at a venue in Haymarket. “Four females received treatment at the scene before being taken to hospital. None of their conditions are life-threatening. A fifth person, a male, also came into contact with the substance but has declined hospital treatment. “The incident is not being treated as suspicious and there have been no arrests. The Health and Safety Executive has been informed.” Caustic soda, or sodium hydroxide, is an alkali often used in soap and paper production and in powerful cleaning substances. The Haymarket venue, known for its Ibiza-inspired party rooms, is operated by the British hospitality group Novus Leisure, which owns 41 bars, restaurants and nightclubs in cities across the country. A shot of tequila is made into a slammer by licking salt first and then sucking a lime or lemon after. A source told the Sun: “A group of four women and a man necked the tequilas and used salt and lemon to soften the taste, then began to retch. One girl keeled over. Despite music blaring, everyone knew something was wrong. There was panic. People thought it was some kind of terrorist incident. It took a long time to establish what happened.” According to the Sun, one of the victims is still requiring hospital treatment more than a month after the incident. Tiger Tiger and Novus were contacted for comment. A Met police spokesperson said the force was not aware of any similar incidents in London, but said they were not always referred to the police and may instead go to the Health and Safety Executive or emergency services. The Health and Safety Executive did not respond to a request for comment. Novus was listed for sale by its private equity owner, Hayfin Capital Management, in 2018. David Cameron had been a non-executive director for the chain when it was briefly listed on the London stock exchange in 2005 under the name Urbium.Global stock markets have fallen sharply as fears of military conflict in Ukraine spooked investors, wiping £53bn off the value of the UK’s blue-chip share index. European markets tumbled by 3.8% to their lowest levels since October, their biggest one-day fall in more than 18 months, after Nato said it was reinforcing its eastern borders with land, sea and air forces as a Russian invasion of Ukraine appeared increasingly likely. Volatility soared, as investors also feared the US central bank, the Federal Reserve, would raise interest rates several times this year, starting in March, after US inflation hit a 40-year high of 7% in December. In the City of London, the FTSE 100 index fell 2.6% to a one-month low, its biggest fall in two months, as Boris Johnson warned that a “lightning war” in Ukraine was possible but not inevitable. The blue-chip index lost 197 points, falling to 7,297. The educational publisher Pearson led the FTSE 100 fallers, down 9%, with the Russian steelmaker Evraz dropping 8%. Miners, energy producers, travel firms and housebuilders also slid. In Frankfurt, the Dax index of leading German companies lost 3.8%, while France’s Cac shed 4%. The New York stock market saw wild swings. Heavy selling pushed the S&amp;P 500 index down over 3% at one stage, more than 10% below its record high, before a late rally pushed the major US indices higher at the end of the day. Investors rushed to safe-haven assets such as the US dollar, and also the Swiss franc, which hit a six-year high against the euro. The sell-off in risk assets hit cryptocurrencies, with bitcoin falling to a six-month low of about $33,000 (£24,500), less than half its all-time high of $69,000 reached last November. The Fed, which will meet this week, could also start to run down its balance sheet this year, removing some of the stimulus introduced since the Covid pandemic began. “Traders continue to be in selling mode as fears mount surrounding the Russia-Ukraine situation,” said David Madden, a market analyst at Equiti Capital. “Also playing into the mix are the concerns the Federal Reserve will issue a hawkish update on Wednesday.” The prospect of tighter monetary policy has driven technology stocks lower, with the Nasdaq Composite index dropping into correction territory earlier this month.. “The double-whammy of risk events is proving too much for Wall Street to handle, with the Nasdaq once again leading the charge lower as the tech rout deepens,” said Fiona Cincotta, a senior financial markets analyst at City Index. “Meanwhile, embassy staff are being pulled out of Kyiv amid growing fears that Russia could send troops into Ukraine imminently. Talks last week between the US and Russia failed to pave the way to a solution. Fears of war are driving the risk-off trade with bonds rising.” There was heavy selling on Moscow’s stock market, with the Moex index of Russian companies tumbling almost 6% to its lowest level since December 2020, taking its losses in 2022 to almost 15%. The rouble hit a one-year low, dropping 2.5% to more than 79 roubles to the US dollar. The Bank of Russia said it was halting purchases of foreign currency in an attempt to ease pressure on the rouble, which has slumped amid tensions over Ukraine. The UK’s FTSE 250 index of medium-sized companies tumbled by 3.6%, hitting its lowest level since March 2021. The cybersecurity firm Darktrace was down 14.6%, the newspaper publisher Reach fell 11%, while the cinema chain Cineworld and the luxury carmaker Aston Martin dropped 8.7%. Gas prices soared, with the wholesale day-ahead price of UK gas jumping 17%, on concerns that Russian supplies of energy to Europe could be disrupted. There were also signs that the Omicron variant had slowed the global recovery. Private sector growth in the UK and eurozone hit its lowest in 11 months, while US business activity grew at its slowest pace in 18 months in January, according to the latest surveys of purchasing managers.At Moorgate tube station in London’s financial district, more commuters braved the return to office on the first Monday since government guidance to work from home was lifted. “It does feel busier today, it’s good – London’s waking up,” said the woman staffing the barriers of the station. The great awakening is happening slowly, however. Customers at the Lazy Coffee stall in Abchurch Yard, a stone’s throw from the Bank of England, suggest it may take a while. Matthew Staite, the proprietor, has kept the stall going except for in the very depths of lockdown: “It’s been a pretty good barometer.” He hasn’t seen a significant rise in numbers but expects next week to be busier. “I’ve heard companies are starting to work out their gameplan. But no one’s said that people are coming back full-time.” He greeted a familiar customer returning to a nearby investment bank. The young man, who did not want to be named, said he had not made the choice to return. “It’s coming from the top,” he said with a grin. The bank will do an 80/20 office/home split in theory, “but not every week”. Transport for London recorded about 6% more tube journeys in the morning peak than a week ago. A similar picture was played out in Manchester, where 9% more tap-ins were recorded on Metrolink trams before 9am this Monday than last, according to Transport for Greater Manchester. Some have happily returned, after Boris Johnson revoked the work from home guidance for England last week. One of the few suited passengers on an early Northern line train to Moorgate, James Warnaby, 32, was heading for a first day back in the office this year at his financial services recruitment firm. “I’m very much pro going back.” But his job-hunting clients have made him think few will return to offices full-time: “We have people saying I want two days a week at home now or I’m not moving.” On London Bridge another recruitment professional, Alex Edwards, 37, who has commuted in from Brighton throughout, said his train remained “nice and empty – I always get a table for my laptop”. But he said while some clients were “social animals who want to be in the office”, most of the older ones were devotees of home working, leaving the City barren. “It’s not the same. I don’t think it ever will be.” Walking towards Bank was Diane Nagy, 54, head of bids at the IT firm NTT, on her second day back in the office. “I’m delighted,” she said. “I’ve put a note out to say I was going in. I think everyone’s excited – all my colleagues have been really positive.” Many she has only met so far on Zoom: “I joined this company during the pandemic and don’t know how tall or short they are.” She had walked to work from Wapping in east London, and admitted she may have been more hesitant if commuting. But she missed busy office life: “I miss queueing.” There were no queues at Nicholson &amp; Griffin hairdressers at Leadenhall market. “It’s not changed today,” said Jana Lanka, 27, without a client in the first hour of opening. Pre-Covid, the early slot would be sought-after, and staff had hoped the changed guidance would mean immediate custom. “But on Friday we only had two clients walk through the door. And looking at appointments for this week, it’s not busy at all.” Network Rail, which owns and operates most of the UK’s big train stations, said Monday morning’s footfall was down 0.3% from a week ago, with Mondays now the quietest day of the week for commuting. In Manchester, Holly Paterson was on her way into her city centre solicitor’s office “for the first time in ages”. Her firm has allowed staff to choose their own pattern of working and Paterson was less concerned about the Omicron variant: “I’ve been there, I’ve done it, we’ve had it, so I feel fine.” Dan Draper, one of two solicitors going into his office throughout the whole pandemic, said: “It’s clearly a lot busier than it was 12 months ago on the trams, people are becoming more confident.” But, he added: “Nowhere like pre-pandemic levels … There’s loads of businesses really suffering still.” One passenger making the journey by Metrolink into the city centre was Aisha Iqbal, who works in customer service and had been asked to return to the office every day. She said she felt safe commuting in from Oldham on the tram: “The windows are open and the majority of people are wearing masks.” Iqbal said she welcomed the return to the office: “I prefer it, it just gives me a break. At home, it’s waking up 10 minutes before, logging on, and then after work if there’s more to do, I literally sit there until 7pm.” Phoebe Scott, a trainee accountant, had cycled in to central Manchester, after returning by choice in early January. “I’ve got quite a small room, a really, really small desk and a flatmate as well,” she said. “So it’s hard to concentrate.” Back in London, Soho was busier with builders in hi-vis vests than the media and marketing industry workers that thronged its bars and restaurants before the pandemic. Most cafes and flexible working spaces had only a smattering of clients. Francesco Pucino, the owner of Bar Bruno cafe on Wardour Street, said business was still at least 40% down. He said he had not seen a significant return of office workers, and was also missing out on business from early morning clubbers, taxi drivers and tourists. “I hope it will pick up. We need it. We have been struggling. Each person that comes back spends £5 or £10 here and there, and that makes the economy go round. Like this it is impossible to live.” Ben Ravenscroft, in London for a social media marketing photoshoot for the first time since mid-December, said: “It’s good to be back, seeing people and socialising again. With an agency it is really collaborative and it is a lot easier to have a conversation than write an email, a lot quicker.” Lily Hewitt, a receptionist at a suite of media offices, said: “The trains were packed on the way in, and a lot more people have come in today. It’s much better. Before Christmas no one came in for five days. It was really spooky, I had the whole building on my own. It’s been so quiet it’s weird but I hope we will get there.”Seven weeks before the Australian Open began, as most tennis players were figuring out how they would tackle the off-season to come, Stefanos Tsitsipas had a different predicament. After years of pain management and a bitter withdrawal from the 2021 ATP Finals, he had undergone surgery on his right elbow to alleviate his problems for good. As he lay in his hospital bed on 23 November, Tsitsipas faced a race to be ready in time for a new season. On Monday night, before a thunderous crowd filled to 50% capacity with members of Melbourne’s Greek community, Tsitsipas, the fourth seed, recovered from two sets to one down against one of the tour’s in-form players, defeating American Taylor Fritz 4-6, 6-4, 4-6, 6-3, 6-4 to reach the quarter-finals. Tsitsipas will next face the 11th seed, Jannik Sinner, who was an efficient 7-6 (3), 6-3, 6-4 winner over Alex de Minaur. “An epic match, that’s what I can say,” said Tsitsipas afterwards. “I gave everything out on the court today. I’m very proud of myself, the way I fought, the way I stayed consistent in the moments that were very close and crucial. I’m overwhelmed. Just too much. The stadium was on fire. It’s too good to be true.” Fritz, the 20th seed, has recently been playing the best tennis of his career. He does not have the athleticism of some of his peers, but he is blessed with a fast arm, a big serve and solid technique off both wings. He used those weapons and his confidence seamlessly, dominating on serve and generating 13 break points on the Tsitsipas serve. While Tsitsipas was not his direct, attacking best, he dug in; he fought desperately for every last point and used every inch of big-match experience he has accrued in his young career. Such was his focus, Tsitsipas lost track of the score in the second set and initially did not realise he had won it. When the decisive moments came, Tsitsipas was ready. He snatched the decisive break by soaking up Fritz’s attack and then produced a sweet, dipping forehand passing shot at 4-4 in the fifth set. He ended the set with only four unforced errors and, under immense pressure, he moved on. Tsitsipas, followed by cameras for a Netflix documentary, said afterwards that his recovery from elbow surgery was a surprise even to his own doctor, yet he is still here. “I knew that Australia was coming soon and I would have to be playing again very soon. I missed two weeks of preseason, which was not too bad, because the doctor predicted otherwise. My recovery was faster than anyone would have thought it would have been. My recovery was very surprising to my doctor.” Earlier in the day, tournament favourite Daniil Medvedev moved into the quarter-finals with a tough 6-2, 7-6 (4), 6-7 (4), 7-5 win over Maxime Cressy. Cressy, a 24-year-old American born in Paris, has frustrated many with his serve and volley style as he has risen up the rankings. On Monday, it was Medvedev’s turn to be irritated as he struggled to convert break points in the third and fourth sets. As his anger rose, Medvedev began to vent, calling the match boring and complaining about his opponent’s luck. He spoke in English throughout, his third language. In an interview with Eurosport, Medvedev admitted, apologetically, that he was playing some mind games, which he regretted. “During the match I got a little bit crazy, I think, with myself,” he said. “I even tried to talk something in the air to get into his mind a little bit so maybe he starts saying: ‘What the hell is Medvedev saying?’ And maybe, I don’t know, he’s gonna miss some shots. I’m not happy with what I said today but the most important is that I managed to keep on fighting.” Medvedev expressed regret for his comments in his press conference afterwards. “I don’t like trash talking. I sometimes can unfortunately roll into this, but I don’t like it. I think I try almost never to do it, especially against other players, and again, today was borderline. I don’t think I actually said anything bad about Maxime, but, yeah, borderline where I’m not really happy about it,” he said. Medvedev will face ninth seed Félix Auger-Aliassime next, who recovered from a set down against Marin Cilic to reach his third consecutive major quarter-final with a 2-6, 7-6 (7), 6-2, 7-6 (4) win.Newcastle could turn their attention to Tottenham’s Dele Alli if they are unable to reach an agreement with Manchester United over a loan deal for Jesse Lingard. Eddie Howe, who has strengthened his squad by signing Chris Wood and Kieran Trippier, is desperate for further additions as he tries to save his side from relegation. Newcastle want more firepower and have targeted Lingard, who has fallen down the pecking order at Old Trafford. The 29-year-old forward is likely to leave on a free transfer when his contract expires at the end of the season but it remains to be seen whether he will be allowed to spend the rest of the campaign at Newcastle. Newcastle, who boosted their survival hopes by beating Leeds last Saturday, have had one loan bid turned down by United and could attempt to make the deal happen by offering a bigger loan fee for the England international. However United are being indecisive about whether to let Lingard go out on loan, keep him or make money by selling him. Lingard, who has made 14 appearances this season, is not short of suitors. Spurs and West Ham are interested, though United are reluctant to do business with their rivals for fourth place. Lingard had a productive loan at West Ham last season, but it is unlikely that he will return. The situation is unpredictable, though, and United’s indecision has forced Newcastle to make alternative plans. They are considering a move for Alli, who has fallen out of favour under Antonio Conte at Spurs. The 25-year-old was not even on the bench when Spurs lost to Chelsea on Sunday and has been told that he can leave on loan. Alli’s career has stalled in the past two years and his days at Spurs look numbered. The forward is not in Conte’s plans but his talent is not in doubt. It is understood that Howe has not made up his mind on him yet. Newcastle are also trying to sign a central defender. They have been in negotiations with Sevilla over Diego Carlos and also admire Burnley’s James Tarkowski, who is out of contract this summer. However Burnley are determined not to sell. Sevilla have agreed a deal to take Anthony Martial from United for the rest of the season, paying a loan fee of about €6m (£5m) and covering the forward’s £150,000-a-week salary.Scott Morrison enters a federal election year with his approval languishing at levels not seen since March 2020, and the Coalition’s handling of the Omicron wave has prompted some voters to signal they are now less likely to back the government on polling day. The first Guardian Essential poll of 2022 confirms the prime minister’s approval rating (46%) hasn’t budged since last December, and disapproval of Morrison is up two points to 46%. The Morrison government had hoped to recover standing with voters over the summer break, but the desired political fillip hasn’t eventuated. The prime minister needs to recover lost ground – voter approval of Morrison dived 19 points during the controversies and missteps of 2020. While the uptick in voter disapproval of the prime minister during January falls inside the survey’s margin of error, more emphatic is voter disillusionment over the government’s handling of the pandemic. Last December, 41% of respondents rated the federal response to Covid as good. After the challenging summer of Omicron – with surging case numbers, increased numbers of deaths, and rolling controversy over shortages of rapid antigen tests – only 35% of respondents think the Morrison government is doing a good job, while 38% (up from 32%) of the sample describes the response as poor. Ominously for the government, Morrison’s performance over the summer has also prompted 37% of respondents to say they are now less likely to vote for the Coalition at the federal election expected in May – although 19% say events have made it more likely they will stick with the incumbents. The latest data suggests voters are concerned about the surge in cases, and a shortage of rapid antigen tests remains a hot button issue – 38% of respondents say they are less likely to vote for the government based on their handling of that issue. There is significant lived experience in the community – 26% of respondents say they have have tried but have been unable to procure a RAT test in the last month. If the current negative sentiment holds or accelerates, the latest Guardian Essential data suggests the Coalition would go backwards on polling day. Also challenging electorally for Morrison is a plunge in voter approval of the New South Wales government’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic. Only 37% of respondents now rate the Perrottet government’s management of the pandemic as good – down from 54% in December. Morrison needs the Coalition to poll strongly in New South Wales to secure a fourth term. While the mood has soured in New South Wales, public sentiment appears to have rebounded marginally in Victoria, with 47% saying the Andrews government is doing a good job (up from 43% in December). Voter support for the state responses to the pandemic in Queensland, South Australia and Western Australia also went backwards in January as case numbers surged after restrictions lifted. While the new poll shows Morrison and some of his state counterparts have endured a difficult summer, the deportation of tennis star Novak Djokovic was a winner with the Coalition’s base, with 43% of self-identified Liberal and National supporters nominating that controversy as a reason to vote for the Coalition at the looming election. Looking at Labor, Anthony Albanese’s approval and disapproval metrics have not shifted decisively over the summer break. On the latest numbers, 39% of respondents approve of the opposition leader’s performance and 39% disapprove (23% of the sample say they don’t have a view). But Albanese has closed the gap between himself and Morrison in the poll’s better prime minister measure (42% say Morrison is the better prime minister, while 34% say Albanese, which is up three points since December). Voters were also asked about their priorities for government in 2022. Additional health investments topped the list, with 54% of respondents putting that issue in their top three. Nearly half the sample want more investments in systems like aged care and childcare. Next on the list is action to combat global heating, and reducing cost of living pressures.Financial news has started to turn negative, both at home and abroad. Is the debt-fuelled party that has provided solace amid the pandemic as well as jobs and rising asset prices for millions if not billions about to end? There are certainly some near-term nasties but the larger and more serious threats are geopolitical and difficult to predict – including the next stage of the Covid pandemic – or of our own making. Here’s a non-exhaustive list of the economic challenges we face. Gathering storms First up, Omicron has been around for more than a month but the more infectious Covid variant hasn’t – so far – derailed financial markets. Sure, there’s mass absenteeism of infected or close-contacted staff, upsetting supply chains in Australia where many businesses have started to disclose fears of running out of cash. And, globally, firms are scrambling to secure inputs for everything from cars to fertilisers. Monday’s financial media warned of brewing market turbulence, as the binary world of punters are apparently shifting from “risk on” to “risk off”. US stocks dropped more than 5% last week, reportedly the worst return since Covid got serious in March 2020. The famously tech-heavy Nasdaq was about 14% lighter since the start of this year. But a bigger plonk, though, is coming from the cryptic world of crypto-currency. The Washington Post over the weekend estimated digital tokens had “vaporised” $US1.4tn (almost A$2tn) in just two months as the ethereal market halved in value. When Australia’s sharemarket opened on Monday, stocks duly dived about 1%. By close of play, though, losses were a more modest 0.5% – not a savaging by any measure. Another tumultuous day beckons, though, with Australian stock futures projected to open lower on Tuesday after wild swings of sentiment on Wall Street. Europe’s STOXX 600 index earlier fell by 3.8% ‑ its worst day since June 2020. Inflationary threat Investors have reason to brace for a big week in financial markets. The big bugbear is inflation with nations such as Britain and the US recording their fastest price spurt in decades, and the US Federal Reserve meeting for two days this week to signal if higher interest rates are coming sooner than flagged. Those with variable-rate mortgages know having to repay more on a loan typically discourages purchases of everything else. One’s sense of wealth, too, takes a hit if others become less willing to borrow as much for property, nixing the chances of repeating last year’s 25% run-up in average Australian “home values”, for instance. For Australia, the next glimpse of inflationary pressures lands on Tuesday, when the ABS releases December-quarter consumer price figures. The headline figure of 3% or so will largely be ignored, with attention focusing on the trimmed mean – a gauge that strips out the more transient spiky movements. The expected 2.4% rate will be the highest in more than seven years, and will renew fears Australia’s Reserve Bank will move earlier than its 2023-24 projected first rise in official rates. Westpac last week brought forward its tip for the first RBA move to this August, a shift that gained more credence after another strong job recruitment month – at least before the Omicron disruptions kicked in. Weathering the supply storm Analysts like Nathan Roost, a logistics expert at consultancy Ernst and Young, reckons we have about six weeks or so of supply shortages to get through. One lesson learned, he says, is we need investment not just in highly efficient, just-in-time supply networks, but also a more resilient workforce. Even so, “there’s this pent-up demand for lots of things, services, goods, travel” which will remain as an underlying driver of the Australian economy for the next six to nine months. “There’s a shock clearly in the short term, but I think longer term, the economic momentum will remain somewhat positive,” Roost says. The OECD, too, expects growth this year to be a robust 4.5%, down from 5.6% in 2021, but rosier than the 3.2% predicted for 2023 as Covid-related stimulus packages peter out. ‘Roach motel’ Other economists, though, offer a less sanguine view. Stephen Anthony, a former Australian Treasury official, and now chief economist with consultancy Macroeconomics Advisory, argues the central banks have shed credibility and distorted economies as they have become massive investors in economies. The RBA, for instance, has been buying up Australian debt, mostly federal, at the rate of $4bn a week to push down bond prices and so, lower the cost of borrowing to stoke economic activity. Debt holdings exceed $330bn, and amount to the bank “owning a third of the yield curve”, Anthony says. In a recent paper released through the Australian National University’s Agenda journal, Anthony argued the RBA was a latecomer to so-called quantitative easing but had done much to close the gap with counterparts in the US, Japan, Europe and elsewhere. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning All that easy money has had a “pretty profound effect” in inflating house, share and other asset prices here and all around the globe, he said “Markets are getting nervous because they know that there is a contradiction in those policies,” he says. “What happens in the next market rout if a major central bank such as the Fed has to choose between supporting financial markets and/or maintaining lower inflation?” As the Hotel California song goes, central banks are finding “you can check in but you can never leave,” Anthony says. “And once you do, you got a roach motel. It’s something you just can’t get rid of it.” In other words, withdrawing support would probably trigger a market selldown by investors that would bring back that same central bank binge to avoid an economic collapse. Debt trap, geopolitics and climate Satyajit Das, another independent economist, warns of similar excesses and the limited options for Australia’s leaders in his latest book, Fortune’s Fool, scheduled to be published by Monash University in March. “Policymakers are skint,” Das says, adding that the trust of governments and central banks, dimmed by the global financial crisis and subsequent super-bubbles, has been further diminished in the current Covid crisis. “If they had retooled their economies, if they’d invested massively where there’s a stream of income that’s going to amortise the debt on the other side, I’m very relaxed” about the debt build up, he says. “You can’t get funding consumption from borrowing” as they have done for 30 years, Das says. “That’s the problem that they’ve created and now they are kind of trapped.” Das says investors are poor at picking geopolitical issues, although he doesn’t think a Russian invasion of Ukraine is likely to be a big threat. For one, Russia’s Vladimir Putin will not be keen to disrupt China’s Winter Olympics run by his mate Xi Jinping. Another is the Pinsk Marshes, a giant bog covering much of Ukraine’s border that has stalled other armies in the past, will soon start to thaw as spring approaches, Das says. Other surprises though could include China clamping down on its supply chains to eliminate Covid. Another threat is also not going away: climate change. “The other risk … is extreme weather events,” Das says. “They have massive costs, and they have massive disruptive values, and nobody seems to even be talking about those any more.”Aged care providers are telling essential visitors to find their own rapid tests or be denied entry as the industry grapples with what it describes as a “dire need” for the devices. The huge demand for rapid antigen tests is posing yet another Covid-related barrier to those wanting to visit their loved ones in aged care, something crucial for residents’ physical and emotional wellbeing. The commonwealth says it has provided 6.6m rapid tests so far to the sector and providers have been instructed to give them to visitors, in cases where providers are mandating a negative rapid test before entry. The measure is designed to prevent isolation among residents by relieving visitors of the burden of paying for and hunting down large volumes of rapid tests to facilitate their regular visits to loved ones. But Guardian Australia has seen evidence of at least two providers mandating that visitors record a negative rapid antigen test but telling them they must source their own due to shortages. Both the Council on the Ageing (Cota), a peak group for older Australians, and the main workforce union, the Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation (ANMF), said the uncertain supply of rapid antigen tests in the sector was posing significant problems. Cota chief executive, Ian Yates, said it was “true that you will find providers that are not [providing rapid tests]” to visitors, and said he had raised the issue through the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee. Yates said erecting barriers to visitation threatened residents “physical and mental and emotional wellbeing, particularly for people with dementia”. “In principle, if you’re a regular visitor, and the home is requiring [a rapid test], it should be providing you with the RAT,” he said. “And it shouldn’t be requiring them of you any more often than staff.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Leading Age Services Australia (Lasa), the industry’s national peak body, said the government was currently giving priority to getting supplies to facilities experiencing an outbreak. But spokesperson Sean Rooney said the government had yet to fully commence the proactive distribution of rapid antigen tests to providers not experiencing an outbreak, after announcing plans to do so on 23 December. “Notwithstanding an improvement in RAT and PPE supplies last week, many providers are still in dire need of RATs and PPE. Lasa staff have been escalating these requests with government,” he said. Rooney said the sector was continuing to meet with ministers and the department on a range of pressing issues posed by Omicron, including “a stable and secure program for the distribution of RATs and PPE to residential aged care providers and home care operators”. “The department has been prioritising distribution of PPE and RAT and provided assurance that the supply chain issues which have hampered distribution are being addressed,” he said. ANMF federal assistant secretary, Lori-Anne Sharp, said staff who worked at facilities with rapid test mandates were being put in positions of enormous stress. Sharp said the high demand for rapid tests meant providers were closely protecting the supplies they did have. “If residents’ families could access them for free in the community, it wouldn’t be an issue. But they can’t,” she said. “In Germany, they’ve got them in vending machines. They send them to the home in some countries.” The industry has adopted its own code for visitation during the pandemic. It requires that residents are always permitted to have at least one essential visitor. Essential visitors are deemed either partners in care, named visitors, or anyone in the case of end of life care. “Access by essential visitors should always be facilitated on a regular basis,” the code says. Aged care minister, Richard Colbeck, said visiting arrangements were restricted through state and territory public health orders, which varied between jurisdictions. The Commonwealth’s provision of rapid antigen tests, he said, was designed to “support screening of all entrants to facilities”. “Delivery of rapid antigen test kits is currently being prioritised to facilities in outbreak or recent exposure,” he said. “More than 78 million RATs have been purchased by the Government, and these are being prioritised for aged care.” Colbeck said the government was aiming to provide an “updated guide” to allow for more social interaction for residents, given Omicron was “at this stage appearing not to have as significant health impact”. Health minister, Greg Hunt, said on Monday the federal government had focused its supply of rapid tests to the aged care sector. “We have been in the market and supplying since August, and we have been able to provide continuous supply of over 6.6m rapid antigen tests to aged care,” he said. “And so, in relation to priority populations, that is one of the things that we have been able to do, is to foresee, to acquire and to supply throughout the course of not just Omicron, but before Omicron ever existed.”Nearly half of all people who sought help with homelessness last year in New South Wales did not get it, a new report has shown. According to data from the Productivity Commission’s annual report on government services, 48.2% of people in Australia’s most populous state who asked for accommodation assistance from specialist homelessness services in the 2020-2021 financial year went without. That figure represents a substantial increase from five years ago, when 37.2% of people did not receive the help they had requested. The Productivity Commission report, released on Tuesday, contains detailed information on the performance of Australia’s social support services, including housing, homelessness, aged care, youth justice, child protection and more. It shows unmet requests for homelessness accommodation services are increasing across Australia, from 30.2% of people going unassisted nationally in 2016–2017, to 32.2% in the last financial year. But the problem is particularly acute in two of Australia’s three most populous states. The situation has also been steadily worsening in Queensland, where unmet demand for homelessness services is at 35.9%, up 10 percentage points from five years ago, where it sat at 25.9%. In Victoria, meanwhile, the percentage of people who did not get the homelessness services they requested has fallen since 2016 by 5.8 percentage points to 29.8%, though it had been trending slightly upward prior to 2019–2020. The report notes Covid-19 funding and policy initiatives have affected the use of specialist homelessness services and that caution should be used when comparing data across states and territories. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Both NSW and Victoria put temporary accommodation schemes into place for rough sleepers (including accommodation in hotels and motels) during extended lockdown periods, with some providers still in the process of phasing out those programs. However in NSW unmet demand for homelessness services had been increasing alarmingly prior to the pandemic, jumping 4.7 percentage points to 41.9% in 2017-2018 and similarly to 45.2% the following year. This is despite the number of people seeking accommodation assistance from homelessness services in NSW remaining steady – hovering between 46,072 and 47,652 people a year over the past five years – and that state’s investment in homelessness services also remaining flat, at an average of $34.96 a person, per support day. Victoria shows the biggest leap in investment in homelessness services, from $37.63 spent per person per support day five years ago, to $50.34 a person in the last financial year. In early 2021, the Victorian government announced a substantial investment in a homelessness transition program, From Homelessness to a Home. Minor improvements to unmet demand in the homelessness sector could be seen in WA, SA and ACT. Tasmania has the most marked improvement, with the percentage of those missing out on homelessness accommodation dropping from 25.5% in 2016-2017 to 18.4% last year. The Productivity Commission report drew attention to the significant knock-on effects of housing instability, noting: “Housing instability and homelessness can in turn increase vulnerability to adverse social and economic circumstances through, for example, poorer outcomes in education, employment and health, and increased risk of involvement with the justice system.” Women and children experiencing domestic and family violence are disproportionately likely to be among those people seeking specialist homelessness services, with the report noting that 39.4% of people contacting these services identified domestic and family violence as an underlying cause of their need. The Productivity Commission report only analysed known demand – that is, people who have sought homelessness services and had that need for accommodation identified, drawn from unpublished data from the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare – and therefore does not capture those in the community who may have unidentified need. The report did not assess the quality of homelessness service provision, despite that being one of the eight key performance indicators for the sector, as it said “there are currently no nationally agreed quality standards for specialist homelessness services”. For those who have access to housing, rental stress – spending more than 30% of gross household income on rent – remains an ongoing issue, with low income earners particularly susceptible to housing instability in the private sector. The report noted that even for those people receiving commonwealth rental assistance payments, 45.7% still experienced rental stress. The report did not make data on waiting times for public or community housing available, though these have previously been reported as varying between three months and more than five years, depending on location and individual circumstances of the applicant.Concession card holders said they found it impossible to track down rapid antigen tests on the first day of a federal government program offering access to free tests. The scheme, which allows pensioners and concession card holders to access up to 10 free rapid antigen tests over three months through their chemist, had a difficult start on Monday, with supply issues hampering anyone attempting to procure the tests. Rosanna, who asked to remain anonymous, lives in rural Victoria and said she needed rapid antigen tests to protect her father Lorry, who is critically ill. But there were none available at any of the pharmacies within an hour’s drive from her home, leaving the family in a precarious situation. “We’re really scared of what’s going to happen to him, and we’re furious with the government for the position that they’ve left Australians in,” she said. “We are really quite devastated that the vulnerable people in our community have been completely dismissed [and] dehumanised. “It just feels like my father is expendable to this government.” Rosanna’s father has stage four bowel cancer and attends chemotherapy every two weeks. She said he needs the tests for himself and the carers he depends on, and that even if the local pharmacies were supplied, she feared the tests would be gone by the time she gets there. “Even the 10 tests offered over three months is not enough to keep my dad going, and we can’t afford to buy them in bulk. And even if we could, we can’t find them. “The whole scheme is, in my opinion, absolutely ridiculous. It’s not enough that the vulnerable in our communities need to rely on it.” Rosanna said the situation was so critical she has decided to move in with her father to be able to care for him. “It means he’s taking a gamble on every person that walks through the door, as to whether or not he will make it through the next month. We just feel completely forgotten.” An NDIS recipient from Brisbane said his eight-year-old immunocompromised daughter was at great risk without the tests, and told Guardian Australia the program was a “complete shambles”. “The fact that they couldn’t come up with a process in time seems pretty risky. And it’s worse when you speak to pharmacies and they sound despondent.” The recipient, who asked to remain anonymous, said without the tests the family needed to isolate themselves to protect her. “It’s really frustrating, and now we have a dilemma in that we need to go to the hospital regularly but it’s too dangerous, and we have not worked out how we’re going to manage it without the tests. “There’s not much we can do, we’re basically homebound now.” He said he’d been searching for tests since early January. “I was a bit shocked when I couldn’t find any, because when the government announced a set date for the scheme, I thought they would have the tests available.” It is a similar situation to the one faced by Connor Alexander from Melbourne, who lives on a disability pension with a chronic illness, and has been scrambling for the free tests, to no avail. “It’s left me feeling very stressed. None of us want to get sick but I just I want to be prepared as best I can. I don’t want to have to line up and get a PCR test every time I get a cough or a cold and risk getting sick while waiting. “Its infuriating, honestly. This should have been taken care of a long time ago, and it’s getting worse as more people get sick.” Alexander went to “at least four or five” chemists on Monday, searching for the tests, and found none. “It can’t keep going on like this, we need to have some sort of solution to make this happen faster.” The federal opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, said it was “extraordinary” that pensioners and concession card holders were unable to find the tests on the first day of the program. “We all knew that once we opened up … elimination tests would be an important part of the response to keep people safe, and the government simply didn’t do anything about it,” he told Radio National. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg told Sky News supply chain “pressures” were being felt all over the world. “We’ve seen seven million [tests] arrive into Victoria in just recent weeks,” Frydenberg said. “We have, right through this pandemic, helped fund and secure tests.”Sometimes the most memorable gigs are the worst but I don’t want to talk about the worst, which was at Mittagong RSL. I want to talk about the first time I met and played with Archie Roach. It was 1989 and it was with my band, the Messengers. We’d been offered a show at the Melbourne Concert Hall [now Hamer Hall]. And it was a big deal for us – it was like, “All right, this is the big time,” so we wanted to do a special show. Around that time, [the late] Steve Connolly, who played guitar for me, saw Archie Roach singing Took the Children Away on an ABC TV show called Blackout. He said to me we should get this guy to come and open for us at the Concert Hall. I hadn’t heard the song but I trusted Steve. Our agent tracked him down and we got him to the show. We were backstage ready to go on, and all of us were quite toey – we were very nervous. Archie arrived and I went and introduced myself and welcomed him. I would have thought I would have said my name, because that’s what I normally do but Archie was probably really nervous too, and I think he didn’t hear me, because he later said he thought I was the security guy. Anyway, I said good luck and he went on and did his set. It was just a short 20-minute set, and we were to go on straight after him. So he did two long songs and the second one was Took the Children Away. I was watching from the side – I had goosebumps and the hairs went up on the back of my neck as he sang it, to dead silence from the audience. He finished the song and there was still dead silence. He just stood there for a minute, and there was still silence. Archie thought he’d bombed, that everybody hated it, so he just turned and started to walk off stage. And as he walked off, this applause started to build and build and build. It was this incredible reaction. I’d never seen it before – people were so stunned at the end of the song that it took them a while just to gather themselves to applaud. Me and my band walked straight on. Here I am talking about the most memorable gig of my life and I don’t remember a thing about what we did! Hopefully we did a good show. And when we finished, Archie had gone, into the night. That was the start of a long association and friendship with Archie. Paul Kelly is touring Australia now Archie Roach plays the Yabun festival at Victoria Park in Sydney on 26 January and is touring Australia nowWhile my short, accident-prone, yes-I’ll-catch-that-disease-inclined body has been the recipient of other people’s blood donations on multiple occasions, due to rarely making the 50kg minimum weight, I usually don’t qualify for donating blood. I’ve never been able to pay it forward. I like to think my friend Madeleine, of far superior athletic build, is doing it for me by proxy. I’ve known Madeleine for almost 20 years, but only recently found out she is one of the selfless individuals who religiously gives blood and has been for decades. “I do it because I can … I’m healthy, so why not?” She shrugs. “And I know that I’m directly helping someone. So how good is that?” Now, more than normal, Australia needs people like Madeleine. The Red Cross’s Lifeblood program is chalking up a record number of no-shows, with half of the nation’s blood donation appointments going unattended. “We need 140,000 new blood donors in 2022 to meet the needs of patients across Australia, an increase of 45%,” Lifeblood’s executive director of donor services, Cath Stone, said. “Our existing donors can’t do it alone.” It takes only 10 minutes to donate the standard 470ml of blood that can save up to three lives. The Australia Red Cross has an online postcode search for the closest donor centre here and an online eligibility test here. The eligibility test is advised, given there are more than 360 reasons why someone may not be eligible to donate, relating to individual health conditions, medications, countries recently travelled to, pregnancy and breastfeeding, sexual activities and age. While becoming one of those donors is relatively straightforward – as long as you’re not afraid of needles – Madeleine takes her commitment to another level. On her half day off every other Friday, she rides her bike to Sydney Town Hall and donates her plasma too. The process takes about two hours. Her blood is taken, placed in a centrifuge so the plasma rises to the top for extraction, and then the rest is infused back into Madeleine. This means she can donate every two weeks, instead of the standard 12 weeks required between conventional blood donations. For her, it’s just “such a small thing to give up, something I can easily remake myself”. So make rolling up your sleeve and booking a donation a priority this year, by calling 13 14 95, or downloading the free Donate Blood app. It might not be the easiest thing you do that day, but it will probably be the most impactful.Anthony Albanese will open the election year with a new $440m pitch to help students and teachers manage the challenges of the pandemic, promising new grant funding for better ventilation, building upgrades and mental health services. Timing the spending pledge with the imminent return to school, the Labor leader will use a scene-setting speech at the National Press Club on Tuesday to appeal to parents battling anxiety about the resumption of classroom-based learning. Albanese will declare the nation can emerge from the pandemic stronger and more prosperous if Australians are prepared to elect a government prepared to listen, learn and adapt, plan for the future, and be a “force for good”. Borrowing Scott Morrison’s oft-repeated declaration that Australia must “push through” the Omicron wave rather than retreat to restrictions and lockdowns, Albanese will argue careful preparation and constant learning from past experience is more important than pushing through challenges. “We need to learn from [the pandemic], we need to use what the last two years have taught us to build a better future,” Albanese will say. The new schools policy proposal is a grants-based program. Schools would apply for funding to improve air quality with measures such as better ventilation, building more outdoor classrooms, replacing any boarded-up windows and doors and buying air purifiers. Funding for ventilation improvements would be available to all schools – both public and private – on a needs basis. But $188m in the program earmarked for broader upgrades of school facilities, including refurbishing school buildings or building trades training centres, would only be available to public schools. As well as grants for upgrades, Labor will promise funding to support mental wellbeing. Schools will determine how to allocate the resources, but options include funding for additional school counsellors and psychologists, or for activities that improve children’s wellbeing. The proposal will include a voluntary mental health check tool to help identify students in need of additional support. Funding for mental wellbeing initiatives will be available to both public and private schools. Albanese will also flag a departmental review of the impact of the pandemic on students with a disability. Albanese will acknowledge concerns parents have expressed in the lead up to the new school year, and will criticise the prime minister for failing to accelerate the vaccination of students in time for a return to the classroom. The Labor leader will acknowledge the stress Australian families have faced in 2020 and 2021. “Remote learning, exam chaos, cancelled sport, and now the delays in vaccine supply, have turned what should be some of the best years of [children’s] lives into a cascade of stress and uncertainty,” he will say. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Albanese will note some students have fallen behind academically, while others are stressed and socially anxious. “Parents are [also] stressed from home schooling; anxious about the weight the pandemic has put on their children’s shoulders.” The Labor leader will argue parents are looking for guidance from the Morrison government, but that the prime minister has failed to exercise leadership. He will contend voters “are waiting in vain for Scott Morrison to come good on his vows”. He will characterise the prime minister as a “man who stood before the country and promised a national plan for getting our children back to school – but didn’t deliver one”. “[Morrison] promised a national approach in which his government would work with the states – instead he did what he always does: he palmed off his share of the work on to the states. “The states have done a great job in picking up the slack of the slackest government in living memory”. Albanese will declare education is fundamental and essential to the jobs, productivity and prosperity of the future – “and education is the biggest and most powerful weapon we have against disadvantage”. The opposition leader will tell voters if Labor wins the coming election, he will see it as his “fundamental responsibility” to repay the sacrifices made by Australians during the pandemic – “to reward these efforts, to prove worthy of the generosity and bravery of the Australian people”. Albanese says a government he would lead would ensure Australians had access to “a strong public health system, with Medicare as its backbone”; tackle the rise of insecure work; boost sovereign capability; invest in broadband and childcare and stop funding cuts for technical eduction.The inland rail is a political dream that winds back into pre-federation days. The first version was laid out by Henry Parkes in his Tenterfield address of 1889, as he made the case for a national government. Such a move would also need a national army and a “nationwide uniform gauge railway line”. Parkes wanted to connect South Australia, Victoria, New South Wales and Queensland by rail, “an immense advantage in the movement of troops”. More than 100 years later the modern founder of the inland rail, Everald Compton, took his dream to John Howard. He envisaged a railway to service country areas and link farmers to ports. Guardian investigation: Trouble on the tracks: is Australia’s $14bn inland rail project going off the rails? Compton’s 1996 plan went from Melbourne via Parkes and Goondiwindi to Toowoomba. From there, the line would run to the port of Gladstone before setting off across country to Emerald and ultimately Darwin via Cloncurry. The current route promises an express service to deliver freight from somewhere outside Melbourne to somewhere outside Brisbane in less than 24 hours – not counting truck connections. It is based on a 2015 business case by the former Nationals leader John Anderson, costed at the time at $4.7bn. In the 2017 budget, the then treasurer Scott Morrison announced an $8.4bn equity injection into the Australian Rail Track Corporation as “one of the biggest investments ever seen in regional Australia”, supporting 16,000 jobs. As an equity injection, it was not counted as part of the budget deficit. Morrison promised the line would benefit “not just Melbourne and Brisbane, but all the regions along its route”. But last year’s Senate inquiry into the inland rail told a different story. It found “the interests of rural, regional and urban communities throughout Victoria, NSW and Queensland have been sidelined by an arbitrary time threshold” – the 24-hour window to deliver freight from end to end. It was critical of the government’s reliance on a 2015 business case while costs had risen to $14.3bn. It noted predictions were now closer to $20bn. “Whether Inland Rail’s 2015 business case remains valid in light of the substantial increase in capital required for its completion is a key question,” the report said. “It is the committee’s view that this substantive increase in the cost of Inland Rail alone warrants a review and update of the 2015 business case.” The interim chief executive for ARTC Inland Rail, Rebecca Pickering, said in a statement that the ARTC recognised some parts of the freight industry and communities living along the route felt their views had not been adequately considered. “We have heard the call from stakeholders who expected more from our early engagement on Inland Rail and we have continued to improve as the project progressed,” she said. “Building Inland Rail is about working together and our priority is to continue to work with landowners, key stakeholders and government through respectful engagement and consultation.” ARTC’s latest projection is for 21,500 direct and indirect jobs to be created by the inland rail project. “In fact more than 2,500 Australians have already worked on construction of Inland Rail and more than $150m has already been spent with local businesses – we expect these benefits to be duplicated along the railway alignment,” Pickering said. Who is the line for? Critics have called the project a National party “boondoggle”, pointing out that Anderson’s business case found it would not make money back over 50 years. Certainly, the rail has been pushed by National party leaders since Anderson, and former leader Warren Truss is currently chairman of the ARTC. One fundamental question rolls up and down the 1,700km route – who is the line for? NSW Farmers Association’s Adrian Lyons, who has led campaign to ensure farmers are fairly treated, says there is still no clear economic and social justification for the rail line and no clear value back to agriculture. His members have had properties cut in half and have warned ARTC and the federal government that flooding issues will create havoc for the line. “They are playing politics, they are not looking for the 100 year vision, they are looking for the now,” says Lyons. “We have done everything we possible can, attended the enquiries, written submissions but when it does get going, all we will be able to do is say we told you so, on the flooding. You will get what you pay for.” Others support the idea of inland rail but see the current plan as a missed opportunity. They point to the uncertainty surrounding the route which has left landholders bearing the cost of changing decisions and in some cases unable to sell their properties. There is also a lack of clarity about where the line will end in Melbourne and Brisbane. If it does not go direct to their ports, which would entail huge costs, they would need to unload their goods at the final terminal and send them by truck the rest of the way. And there are cultural concerns. Taje Fowler, a descendant of the Wurundjeri nation with family connection to the Wiradjuri nation and who has family in Narromine, says “young Indigenous people are trying to hold on to our heritage while ARTC is whittling it away”. “It’s devastating to see the project is still going ahead without the steps being put in place to do it the right way. “As a First Nations woman it is my cultural responsibility to protect the land – we have around 2% of untouched land left in the central west.” But above all there is a lack of transparency around the choice of the route and where trains will stop, leading to scepticism and frustration. The chief executive of the Country Women’s Association, Danica Leys, says the benefits to many agricultural areas would be far outweighed by the costs. “There are whole towns and communities that are watching the rail line go past but not having a point anywhere near them to onload or offload agriculture produce,” she says. “They take the brunt of the burden of this infrastructure without being able to get anything from their region on the train.” The late Tim Fischer, another former National party leader and a rail buff, supported the line but said the beneficiaries would be the big freight companies in Melbourne and Brisbane and logistics hubs such as Parkes. “There will be zero advantage for the small railway siding towns, even the ones with extended passing loops, other than the construction phase of inland rail and the upgrading to the standards necessary,” he told the ABC in 2017. The coal connection Other industries also have a strong interest in the line. Coal is expected to be a major freight item, according to Anderson’s 2015 business case. “The coal task in 2025 represents over half of the total demand for Inland Rail by volume,” he found. And when the Santos coal seam gas project at Narrabri was approved by the NSW government, the Nationals MP for Parkes, Mark Coulton, said gas combined with the “transformational inland rail” would give the town the potential to be “one of our significant manufacturing hubs”. Coulton has supported inland rail since his first parliamentary speech. He believes support for it will increase as compensation rolls out and the route is finalised. “It’s not always the people that are the most outraged that are the most disadvantaged,” he told Guardian Australia. With the terminal location in Brisbane still unconfirmed, the current National party leader, Barnaby Joyce, has proposed instead extending the line from Toowoomba to Gladstone and has committed $10m to a business case which will cost the extension. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter A spokesperson for Joyce said the link to Gladstone “could deliver better rail connectivity and expand access to export markets for regional Australian agricultural and mineral commodities along the route”. “Once complete, Inland Rail will move goods and commodities around Australia to where they are needed – putting stock on supermarket shelves and food on plates while ensuring our mining and agriculture products can continue to be sold internationally to support regional jobs and communities.” At 90, Everald Compton remains wedded to the cause – but not in its current form. He still receives letters from communities along the route who are being torn apart by the project. “People would be willing to make sacrifices for a rail that’s going to help them, but not for a rail that’s not going to help them at all,” he says. “The National party is supposed to be there to enhance inland Australia. Instead, inland Australia is being used to service the two capital cities.” Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityA curious audience has gathered at the top of the steps of the beach in Victoria’s Bellarine peninsula, gawking at the 24 women having at each other on the sand. “LEAN BACK!” comes the instruction on the wind. That’s if you value your head. Even those women who left a trail of beer bottles from the Airbnb’s pool to the sauna in the early hours showed up at 9am, enthusiastically dodging head kicks and trying not to get tangled up in passing dogs. Some have had amateur fights already; others are so new to Muay Thai that they have to be shown how to wrap their hands. Top: Heather Rain with her training partner Teah Curwen, dodging dogs and walkers on the beach in Ocean Grove while concentrating on the drills. Bottom left: Deb Doan training alone on the beach. Bottom Right: Learning to wrap one’s hands properly is very important in Muay Thai. For now, this Muay Thai retreat is the closest that any of us will get to intensive training in Thailand, which is a rite of passage for those who take up the sport. A typical day here in Ocean Grove will consist of pad work, sparring and some strength training. But there are also plenty of opportunities to let the hair down after the isolation instilled by Melbourne’s lockdowns, and that’s equally beneficial to wellbeing. Overseeing the action are pro fighters Joanne La and Somsurat Rangkla who, just days before, many of us crowded into the Melbourne Pavilion to watch in action. They’re chalk and cheese, both as people and fighters. In the ring, Rangkla is a smiling assassin; technically proficient and relaxed in style – sabai sabai, as the Thais say. Jo and Som demonstrating drills. La may be playful in person, but her ring style is more aggressive. Rangkla remembers the first time she saw La fight – climbing on the ropes to posture “like a man” – and being impressed by the fire in her. Though they’ve fought each other in the past, they teamed up to form JS Muay Thai, to introduce women to the fundamentals through courses and retreats like this. ‘My husband asked a very good question: “What’s one thing you wish you had done that you never did before?” And I was like, “I always wanted to be one of those badass chicks in the movies that could look after themselves.”’ – Bridget Jacobson The women here are from all backgrounds. My sparring partner this morning is Bridget Jacobson, by day a head of HR, by night an amateur fighter. Susi Seibt is an instrument scientist. Lauren Smith is a yoga teacher who runs our morning sessions. Ali Cheney works in gender equality and diversity inclusion. Deb Doan is a project manager working in international development, who calls herself a workaholic. She decided she’d be best suited to a pastime that’s “efficient and deadly” and has had two amateur fights. Deb Doan delivering a sok tong to the author’s head: ‘Muay Thai is an extreme version of just one facet of myself, because I do everything to the extreme.’ During the lockdowns, JS Muay Thai switched to online classes. Many of the camp’s attendees credit these sessions with pulling them out of depression and heavy drinking during that period. Or, as one puts it, “Netflix and waiting to die”. There’s almost always a profound reason that someone takes up a combat sport as an adult. Why else submit to such pressure testing? ‘It sounds really cheesy, but I started life fresh again.’ – Angela Edward Hollingdale Angela Edward Hollingdale is in her early fifties. She has narcolepsy and suffered from depression after her brother died in a car accident. As a single mother of three, she felt she’d lost herself. She hired La as a personal trainer to lose weight, then found herself coaxed into Muay Thai classes. She was so nervous on her first day that she threw up. Now she looks right at home. “I thought there was no way I could do it; not at my age,” she says. “I had everything covered up – long pants, long sleeves.” The narcolepsy medication had made her pick at her skin, but that’s stopped now that she’s thrown herself into the sport. Top: Jo and Som enjoying a moment to collect their thoughts and relax in the sauna at the rented property in Ocean Grove. Middle left: Joanne La, a fierce and entertaining competitor. Middle right: Lauren Smith leading yoga sessions over the weekend. Bottom: Som and Jo having some fun during the down time. Many of the women here were drawn to Muay Thai for the feeling of confidence that a combat sport can provide, particularly sparring, which Rangkla and La introduce unusually early on, believing that if well supervised it doesn’t have to be daunting. ‘I came in after having ab separation from having my kid. Jo and Som knew how to adapt the moves according to that, and it made me stronger.’ – Noor Janjuri Candy Ngo, a physiotherapy student, had been harassed on public transport. Amiee Shand, a graphic designer, has someone close to her who, under the influence of meth, can often turn violent. Knowing how to sweep an assailant to the floor feels reassuring, even if she hasn’t put it to the test. Candy Ngo, a physiotherapy student, had been harassed on public transport. ‘There were a lot of people around, but nobody helped me. I wanted to find something to make me feel more confident.’ – Candy Ngo For La, JS Muay Thai is a personal mission. She took up training to pull herself away from self-medicating her trauma. When she was younger, La moved between 20 domestic violence shelters across different states. She swore to never feel powerless again. “I want to create a program for women in shelter homes so that they can feel those connections and the feeling of power, even though it takes time,” she says. “Because I’ve seen it firsthand. They go back to the partner because it’s all they know and they don’t believe in themselves.” ‘There are a lot of barriers to entry for women in martial arts, particularly if you want to be a fighter, because you have to be quite advanced, but when I heard about JS I realised all those barriers were gone.’ – Alison Cheney Fatefully, two weeks after this retreat, Rangkla suffers a devastating injury, tearing her anterior cruciate ligament at the knee. Rangkla moved to Melbourne from Thailand for work 15 years ago, and it’s here that she took up the sport. “In Thailand, Muay Thai was a way to get out of poverty, so not many people did it,” she explains. Now 35 with 11 fights to her name, Rangkla has made the difficult decision to retire, and will devote her time to developing JS Muay Thai. Already, she’s been a huge inspiration to the women drawn into this community. As Ange Edward Hollingdale says, “We’ve converted our garage into a training area and there are pictures of Jo and Som on the wall. It’s great for my teenage daughter to see them as fighters, instead of just seeing the Kardashians.”On Monday the government, perhaps realising its electoral fortunes are flagging among its usual demographic of voters, decided to suggest younger voters should get onboard the Liberal party train because they apparently are the ones who have most benefited from its tax cuts. As they say, that’s a bold strategy; let’s see if it pays off for them. What we find is that while those on lower incomes – who are younger on average than high income earners – did benefit from the first stage of tax cuts, the coming stage three tax cuts will be massively directed towards high income earners, who are decidedly not young. On Monday, Nine newspapers were given a nice drop from the treasurer’s office of figures that purportedly show that “workers aged from 25 to 34 secured the biggest single share of the income tax cuts promised at the last election”. Given the most recent published ATO taxation data is only from 2018-19, we can’t really check the veracity of the statement of Josh Frydenberg that “Australians aged between 25 and 34 are on average more than $3,400 better off due to the government’s tax cuts”. But, pointedly, Nine’s David Crowe notes that “The figures do not include the tax cuts due to start in 2024 and which are controversial because of the benefits for workers on higher incomes.” It’s not actually all that surprising that younger workers did OK under the recent tax cuts. The stage one tax cuts involved the low-to-middle income tax offset (LMTO), then an increase in the low-income tax offset (LITO), which mostly benefitted those earning under $90,000. Stage one was also amended to raise the upper threshold for the 19% tax bracket from $37,000 to $45,000. This also benefited low-middle income earners. But then came stages two and three. Stage two saw a change to the 32.5% and 37% tax-bracket thresholds that mostly benefited those earning over $90,000. Stage three, set to come into effect in 2024-25, flattens the tax rate by removing the 37% bracket and then lowering the 32% rate to 30%, and then for good measure raises the 45% tax threshold to $200,000: If the graph does not display please click here Just how greatly the stage three tax cuts benefit the wealthy is seen when we break down their three elements: If the graph does not display please click here So given stage one mostly benefited lower-middle income people it is no surprise that the government is now saying their tax cuts mostly benefit younger workers, because younger workers on average earn less than older ones and are thus more likely to be in lower tax brackets: If the graph does not display please click here Thirty seven percent of those in their late 20s are in the bottom two tax brackets, compared with around 27% of those in their 40s. The problem for the government’s spin is that these stage one tax cuts were in effect a political necessity if they were going to have any chance of introducing the stage two and three tax cuts, which are actually much bigger. So yes, Frydenberg might be able to say that young people benefited from the tax cuts, but that is only because they were a measure designed to make the overall tax package look fair (or at least fairer). But when you consider that the stage three will benefit to a small extent those earning $50,000 and then to a larger extent those earning over $90,000, $120,000 and $200,000, the suggestion that voting for the Liberal party at the coming election is good for younger workers rather falls flat (and also reveals just how inequitable they are across all ages): If the graph does not display please click here Just 2.6% of those aged 18-24 earned more than $90,000 in 2018-19, compared with 17% of 25-34 year olds and then 29% of those aged 35-64. Only 11% of those aged 25-34 earned over $120,000, compared with 21% of 35-64 year olds. Even worse, however, is the latest finding by the Parliamentary Budget Office that by 2031 all of the tax cuts will be wiped out by bracket creep for those earning under $91,000: If the graph does not display please click here So yes, to an extent the tax cuts since the last election have favoured younger workers. But this is also very much a case of past performance not being indicative of future results. These tax cuts were the nice showroom product that does not look so good when you get it home – especially when you realise the extra charges you have unwittingly agreed to. For now the government has no tax cuts planned that will be overly good for young workers – instead they are skewed toward older, and wealthier, workers. The stage three cuts to come, which are also supported by the ALP, are not equitable either by age or incomes.From the time he joined Macmillan Publishers as art director in 1966, Nicholas Thirkell, who has died aged 79, did much to overhaul the conventions of book design. He did this by using hardcover jackets to raise “questions which can only be answered by reading the books”, as the Guardian put it in 1970. The observation was prompted by a Design Council exhibition of book covers by Thirkell and his competitor at Heinemann, and future business partner, Mike Dempsey, displaying “a richness and variety in hardback covers which puts posters, for example, to shame”. Thirkell’s jacket for The Smaller Sky (1967) was a facsimile of a railway ticket, front-and-back, which hurled readers into the brain of John Wain’s protagonist, a suburban clerk who takes up residence in Paddington Station. For a 1969 biography of the first world war naval commander Lord Jellicoe, Thirkell blocked five bands of gold foil on dark blue. A loop in the top stripe instantly called to mind the admiral’s signature coat sleeve. Though he was a thinker more than a draughtsman, Thirkell possessed an uncanny eye for illustration. In the course of overseeing the production of hundreds of covers, he scouted illustrators who were conversant in the possibilities of colour offset printing and eager to make a splash against traditional photographic and typographic jackets. This primed him, in 1970, to assemble for his own firm, Nicholas Thirkell Associates, a quartet of young illustrators, all but one fresh from university, that would dominate British graphics for the next decade. They were the machine-precise George Hardie; Malcolm Harrison, a typographer who excelled in caricature; a surrealist, Bush Hollyhead, working in graphic puzzles and puns; and Bob Lawrie, an Australian expat who married comics to the visual world of Wassily Kandinsky. Plying a combination of pop art, abstraction, and formal design elements, they brought gallery-level rigour to a commercial industry. And they were versatile – equally suited to Penguin paperbacks and glossy monthlies as to counterculture rags and the LP sleeves at Hipgnosis Studio, the photographic firm that challenged listeners to interpret rock music visually. Throughout the 1970s, memorable graphics for Led Zeppelin, Pink Floyd, Paul McCartney and Kevin Ayers were produced by the four illustrators Thirkell had dropped into an open-plan workshop in Victoria, central London. Macmillan continued to rely on his group for jackets. “We were lucky to have this assured income, and it gave us the freedom to be adventurous,” Thirkell wrote in a special issue of Illustrators magazine marking 10th anniversary of the group, which renamed itself NTA Studios after Thirkell left. “We could afford to turn down boring work and take creative risks.” These risks included memorable partnerships with Radio Times, Tommy Roberts’s pop art emporium Mr Freedom, and men’s magazines such as Club International, where – in that heyday of illustration – art directors had the budgets to distinguish editorial content with cutting-edge graphics. Thirkell’s departure came in 1973, after he had grown restless in what had become a managerial role. For 15 months he travelled round India with Priya Kuriako, a colleague from Macmillan. On their return to Britain in 1975 they got married, and he worked as art director at WH Allen. In 1979 he went independent again, this time setting up Nicholas Thirkell &amp; Partners. There he employed a broad array of artists from the burgeoning illustration scene he had helped set in motion. One project was Penguin’s Lives &amp; Letters, a paperback series with evocative period covers. Throughout the 1980s, Thirkell’s thought-driven book design, in which content and packaging worked mutually, earned him awards from and jury placements at industry competitions such as Design &amp; Art Direction and European Illustration. For the bestselling Illustrated Lark Rise to Candleford, Flora Thompson’s trilogy of Victorian Oxfordshire published in a luxury edition in 1983 by Century, four decades after its original publication, Thirkell was invited to go for broke. He did the boards in English polka-dot kerchief, without spine text. A researcher tracked down period photographs, ephemera and flowers to be pressed in the style of a herbarium and photographed in-line with the text. All of this lent Thompson’s pages the feel of an anonymous country scrapbook rather than a carefully wrought hybrid of memoir and fiction. In 1986, with Dempsey and fellow designer Ken Carroll, he formed Carroll Dempsey &amp; Thirkell (CDT). Specialising in corporate identity, they designed for Royal Mail, Our Price, the Barbican and WH Smith. Thirkell’s first job at CDT was looking at the layout for the launch of the Independent newspaper. The editors wanted the impression of longevity and newness at once, what they called “classic with a twist” – clear, authoritative and conservative. Crushed between a deadline and a harried team of editors including Andreas Whittam Smith and Stephen Glover (whose book Paper Dreams documented the frenzied launch and Thirkell’s role in it), he ditched the blocky masthead of the mockup he had been given. Instead, he chose a neoclassical flag based on Bodoni, with chiselled inlines giving it both elegance and heft – a feel echoed by his introduction of Oxford rules (thick and thin) to the column framing. Bucking purists, he mixed different typefaces for the page layout: Century for its novelty and warmth in the headlines, and Times for its clarity in the columns. After refinement from the paper’s design editors and picture editor Michael Crozier, Thirkell’s basic design formed the paper’s first graphic identity and became a case study in successful news layout. His eagle logo, once in-house designers had brought its wings from a roosting position to flight, stayed with the paper throughout major redesigns and the cessation of its print edition in 2016. In 1990, he returned to design the Independent on Sunday. “One of the greatest attributes of a good designer,” Thirkell wrote after the Independent proved a success, “is an understanding of how people think and how they respond to images portrayed by type.” This sensitivity to viewer response was a signature of his career. His talent lay in arranging existing visual realities – and the artists around him – without appearing to make a mark himself. “Nick would sit at his desk, creating tiny sketches with equally tiny written instructions,” recalled Dempsey. “He would wander down the studio in his favourite Savile Row suit, which used to belong to his father, lean over one of his assistants and have a quiet chat; he would then return to his desk, roll up a cigarette and go outside for a smoke.” Born in Epping, Essex, Nicholas was the son of Barbara (nee Baker), who before her marriage was a dancer in stage productions, and John Thirkell, an advertising copywriter. Nicholas left Forest school, Walthamstow, in 1960 after his A-levels. Rather than receiving formal design training, he took a trainee position at Service Advertising, London, and an advertising course at the College for the Distributive Trades (1961-62). In an initial spell of three years with Macmillan he worked as a copywriter and subdesigner. Before returning to the firm as art director he worked at the Planning Unit design studio (1965-66). From then until his retirement in the late 1990s he remained a leading light in the field. Priya survives him, along with their daughters, Nisha and Maya. • Nicholas John Vyse Thirkell, graphic designer and art director, born 7 June 1942; died 9 November 2021The world is filled with rock stars who want to be actors. Ringo Starr in The Magic Christian. David Bowie in The Man Who Fell to Earth. Mick Jagger in Ned Kelly. Roger Daltrey in Murder: Ultimate Grounds for Divorce. Basically, throw a brick at any band, and you’re more than likely to concuss a frustrated actor. However, one rock star has so far resisted the urge. True, Brian May has a jam-packed IMDb page thanks to appearances in everything from the video for Queen’s We Will Rock You to the video for 5ive + Queen’s We Will Rock You. However, the closest he has ever come to actually acting was when he performed a song as “Massed peasant chorus” in a long-forgotten, animated Pinocchio adaptation. But this changes now. Thrillingly, at the age of 74, May has finally and truly become an actor. And even more thrillingly, guess which vehicle he has chosen to embark upon this amazing career change? That’s right, the CBBC comedy series Andy and the Band. Parents will be more than aware of the Andy in question. For years now, Andy Day has all but dominated CBeebies and CBBC. There’s the show where he plays an accident-prone museum worker who has access to a time machine. There’s the show where he plays a safari park worker who can shrink himself. There’s the show where he just plays with some toy dinosaurs. Basically, Andy is great. But you’re not going to easily convince a septuagenarian rock guitarist to shrink himself down to the size of a meerkat very easily, which is why Andy also made Andy and the Band. It’s a series where Andy’s real-life band, Andy and the Odd Socks, embark upon a series of larky Monkees-style adventures that culminate in the performance of a song. It’s very good. You should watch it. However, only one episode contains an appearance by the Queen guitarist, and that is Planet Rock (on CCBC on 27 January, available on iPlayer on 24 January). Although May doesn’t appear for the first half of the show, he makes an enormous impression as the Godfather of Rock. A slightly stilted-looking humanoid alien who lives alone on an alien planet made out of rock, the Godfather of Rock exists to pass on words of wise encouragement to his visitors. The Godfather is visited by his godson, who happens to be a member of the Odd Socks. The godson has an issue pertaining to his ability to play air guitar. May promptly solves the problem and then they all play a song together. Thematically, the character that May seems to be inhabiting most closely in the episode is Rufus, the figure played by George Carlin in the first two Bill &amp; Ted movies. He is elusive yet wise, his evident years of excess softened by his unwavering belief in the power of rock. He seems to exist in a permanent state of surprise, too, either because he has made himself open to all the manifest possibilities of the world, or because he isn’t very good at acting yet. But for a first attempt, May’s acting isn’t that bad. As performances go, it’s certainly better than Vanilla Ice in Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, or Jessica Simpson in The Dukes of Hazzard, or Madonna. This was a tricky assignment, and he pulled it off. Now, let’s hope he follows it up with the long-awaited Murder: Ultimate Grounds for Divorce 2.It’s good to see that not everyone in Downing Street has lost their sense of humour. The proof? The quote in your story (Calls for Tory Islamophobia inquiry as PM drawn into Nusrat Ghani row, 23 January) by a No 10 spokesperson: “The Conservative party does not tolerate prejudice or discrimination of any kind.” Bill Kirton Aberdeen • Driving west on the M62 towards Manchester, I noticed graffiti on a road bridge ahead that said: “Resist the prick.” Is this a reference to the prime minister or to the vaccine? Helen Benson Hebden Bridge, West Yorkshire • A herpetologist once told me that, for safety reasons, you should never place a constricting snake around your neck. I was therefore a bit surprised to see our best-known TV naturalist on the cover of your What’s On print supplement (22 January) not following that advice, particularly as the headline was “The big squeeze”. Dave Headey Faringdon, Oxfordshire • In addition to Jojo Goodfellow’s nominations of what we can be proud of in our country (Letters, 19 January), I would like to add public libraries, free art galleries and museums, the National Trust and the RNLI. John Boaler Calne, Wiltshire • Masks (Letters, 23 January) enable me to attend Monday morning bridge sessions unshaven, but without causing shock and outrage to the club membership. John Hunter Holmes Chapel, Cheshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The reference to Jacob Rees-Mogg as “the honourable member for the 18th century” is a soubriquet that I find extremely distressing (Rees-Mogg’s roots tell a true Conservative tale – just not the one he wants us to hear, 22 January). It should be noted that the 18th century was the age of enlightenment, with a long list of luminaries whose names have become bywords for the possibilities of the thinking and endeavour of which humans are capable. A quick “Kanter” through without racking one’s brain could produce Voltaire, Rousseau, Hume, Wollstonecraft, Hegel, Diderot, Paine et al. Rees-Mogg’s entire demeanour puts me in mind of a rather more 19th-century precursor – Klemens von Metternich. Rees-Mogg should never be confused with the search for knowledge, betterment and understanding, which characterises 18th-century intellectuals. Toni Silver Eastbourne, East SussexI live in a small village about two miles from a large town that has high-speed broadband. My experience mirrors your report (19 January) that local governments focus extensively on easy-to-reach urban areas. Money was spent to improve areas that already had high speeds, just from a rival provider. The local project was wound up. Our village was left stuck in the slow lane of 2Mbps speeds. Luckily, a conversation with our local councillor helped resolve this and the village now has a high-speed fibre network. Given the difference this has made to home schooling and home working, I am deeply frustrated that lessons are being ignored and rural locations are being left behind. We seem to be lining the pockets of the private sector to provide improved services to properties that already benefit from high speeds. Perhaps those in government should attempt to work and study on such slow and unstable connections to understand how frustrating and unfit for purpose rural broadband is. Richard Harris Stanton-on-the-Wolds, Nottinghamshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I was astonished to read your report about food waste (UK consumers ‘don’t know what to cook’ as £1.2bn of food is binned a year, 20 January). This is the recipe that my sister taught me some 60 years ago: one each potato, carrot, onion, stick of celery. Cut up and fry in butter or oil. Add red lentils, dried herbs and water. Cook for 20 minutes or so. Blend if you have a blender. This is a very forgiving soup – you can add root vegetables, green vegetables, beans, pasta, rice, leftover dinner. My friend adds old cake. We have this for lunch every day in the winter. We are in our 70s and hale and hearty. Judith Furner Eastbourne, East Sussex • Re “Food waste: Are you throwing your money in the bin?” (22 January), the answer is “Unavoidably, yes”, because supermarkets sell fresh produce wrapped and in large portions. Living alone, I cannot use a 1kg bag of potatoes before they rot; similarly with greens or fruit. If supermarkets are serious about cutting food waste, perhaps they could sell perishable produce loose, as they used to not so long ago. Kris Felton Longworth, Oxfordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The past few weeks have been a time of discovery for the Conservative party and its supporters. Some Tories as senior as the prime minister himself learned that work events they attended may have, in fact, been boozy parties. Others found out that a man known to be a liar may have, in fact, lied. And now it appears there might be a spot of trouble with Islamophobia. As with “partygate”, the people concerned are appalled by the allegations, are demanding investigations, are asking us to respect the process, and are generally pleading ignorance. Of course, the ignorance in this context is not theirs but ours. For if news of the partying and the alleged discrimination were not leaked to the press, then none of it would really have happened. Just trees falling in silent forests. The allegation comes from the Tory MP Nusrat Ghani, who says that when she was sacked as a junior transport minister in a reshuffle in 2020, party whips told her that her “Muslim woman minister status was making colleagues feel uncomfortable”. The first time this tree fell, Johnson not only heard it, but was informed by Ghani personally. She wrote on Twitter that the prime minister said that “he could not get involved and suggested I use the internal Conservative party complaints process. This, as I had already pointed out, was very clearly not appropriate for something that happened on government business.” Understandably, she did not follow the internal party inquiry route, and so her extremely serious allegation was forgotten. Now Ghani’s claim has become the subject of a formal inquiry launched by Johnson himself. As it turns out, he could get involved after all. Still, we’ll take it. This is a brief window in which Johnson feels fragile and the Tory-supporting press feels comfortable criticising its man. This means the allegation has the potential to become something that has consequences. It’s a remote possibility, but the fact that it’s on the cards at all seems like a blessing in a country where allegations of Islamophobia within the Conservative party are regularly dismissed, minimised or ignored. The dossier of incidents grows year by year. There was the Singh investigation, which was condemned as a whitewash; the quiet reinstatements of Tory councillors suspended after posting vile comments about Muslims, Arabs, and Asians; and the government’s rejection in 2019 of a working definition of Islamophobia adopted by the major opposition parties. Then there is the long record of incidents involving people whose careers have been wrecked for trying to challenge anti-Muslim prejudice, or, more often than not, saved despite the allegations levelled against them. Sayeeda Warsi has been fruitlessly raising the issue of Islamophobia in general for more than a decade, and in the Conservative party in particular since at least the shameful 2016 London mayoral campaign that Zac Goldsmith waged against Sadiq Khan, in which he accused him of being a threat to London due to implied extremist links. It was a campaign that has had little effect on Goldsmith’s trajectory: after losing his parliamentary seat in 2019, he was appointed to the House of Lords. The campaign was advised by the firm co-founded by Lynton Crosby, a man who, in fine Tory form from the start, also advised Boris Johnson when he was running for mayor, and is reported to have told him to not get hung up on seeking support from “fucking Muslims”. Goldsmith’s mayoral campaign, Johnson’s comments on Muslim women, and their careers since then (as well as Crosby’s, who was knighted in 2016), are only a handful of examples of the shocking passes the party has given for Islamophobia in recent years. Every time this makes the news, Muslims in the party, and Muslim members of the public, issue a cry of distress. If they’re lucky, this gets them a sceptical and combative hearing in the media before the news cycle moves on. Every time, the hearing gets shorter and more perfunctory – a groundhog day in which the fears of Muslims and the realities about hate crime and professional discrimination are brought to the public’s attention, and then dispatched, unaddressed. With every occasion on which nothing changes, Tory Islamophobia is normalised a little bit more; when the next story comes round, it feels slightly less shocking. That applies both to the public and to the victims themselves. I still seethe at the memory of Goldsmith’s campaign, but the futility of the anger has dulled the second healthy, useful part of rage, where one seeks redress, justice and assurances that it won’t happen again. But it will happen again. Because the painful truth about Tory Islamophobia is that it is endorsed by too many voters for it to be a political issue that could really hurt the party; polling from 2019 showed that more than half of Conservative party members believe that Islam is a threat to British values. I hope Ghani receives a rare taste of that redress and apology. But as with all the recent epiphanies about the nature of the Conservatives, the challenge remains far deeper and more complex than anything that could be resolved by the fall of a single person or the clean-up after a single inquiry. Whenever the mirror is finally held up to the Conservative party, for however fleeting a moment, we only see ourselves. Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnistAmid the carnage and chaos that concluded England’s victory over West Indies in Bridgetown on Sunday, while Romario Shepherd and Akeal Hosein were showering the stands with sixes, Reece Topley was quietly compiling not only his most economical figures in international T20 cricket, but the second-best figures of his entire career. After restricting West Indies to eight runs in the 19th over of the match – overs 18 and 20 went for a combined 51 – Topley had completed his allocation for the concession of 18. The only time he has bettered that in any of his 101 T20 outings was when conceding one fewer for Melbourne Renegades in the Big Bash League last month. Approaching the fourth anniversary of his decision, midway through the 2018 season, to give up cricket altogether under the continual assault of injuries, the 27-year-old finds himself in the form of his career. “I think because I’ve had it slightly different than other people that play international cricket, in terms of the journey that I’ve had, I think my perspective is quite unique,” he says of Sunday’s match. “I just sort of embraced all the emotion after the game, or all the messages, whatever you want to call it. I embraced it all but then I’m very good at parking it, you know? I don’t really get too caught up in it. I’m lucky to be playing and I just really enjoyed it. Almost having a second opportunity just makes me value it all a lot more.” Topley’s retirement lasted only a matter of months, before his passion for the game was reignited on a trip to Australia the following winter, but a return to international cricket has taken much longer: Sunday’s game was his first T20 since the 2016 World Cup. But there were no signs of nerves as he dismissed Brandon King with the second ball of the match, and in his second over executed a brilliant run-out to get rid of Shai Hope – replays later showed the batter should have been given out lbw anyway – to set England on what turned out to be an unexpectedly circuitous road to victory. “When I’ve been injured so much, you’d almost bite someone’s hand off to play a T20 and bowl four overs for 40-something,” he says. “It’s almost like, at least I’m out there. It’s not like I haven’t got a competitive instinct, it’s just I’m very realistic about things now, and very level-headed. I think that has boded well for me since coming back and playing, because those pressure scenarios, I just embrace them. That’s the perspective that I’m pretty lucky to have stumbled upon really.” Topley brought something different to England’s team, not just as its only left-arm bowler but because at 6ft 7in he naturally presents an unusual challenge – as England discovered at the hands of the similarly tall Jason Holder in Saturday’s opening match. But in his own opinion what set him apart in the game’s dying moments was the experience that had brought him there – in other words, what was going on inside his head, rather than how far it was off the ground. “In that scenario I think you can just get wrapped up in everything,” Topley says. “The West Indies were behind the eight-ball for a lot of the innings, the fans were quiet, and then suddenly they get some boundaries and they’re all up out of their seats and then the noise was amazing. “It’s the pressure – the whole match becomes a match within a match in those last few overs. You have to isolate each ball, forget what’s happened before and just commit at the end of your mark. There’s games where you’re the good guy, and there’s games where you’re the bad guy. The nature of being the guy that bowls in those key parts of the innings is when it doesn’t fall your way, you’ve got to get up the next day and be just as hungry for the game to be put on your shoulders again.”Private healthcare does more than just undermine waiting lists for NHS patients (Hundreds of England’s NHS consultants have shares in private clinics, 21 January). Students, junior doctors and other healthcare professionals need training by senior NHS doctors. When private treatment goes wrong or isn’t enough to fix a problem, private patients end up back in the NHS system to fix any issues ahead of those who have waited. As a junior doctor, I believe that we must keep our NHS public to ensure high standards of care for everyone. But with the NHS increasingly unable to deliver even basic care, I can understand why patients with the means choose to cut the queue. I understand why colleagues choose private work, when NHS constraints force us to lower the quality of our care, under deteriorating working conditions, with ongoing pay erosion. Neither private patients prioritising their health, nor private clinicians prioritising better working conditions, are the villains here. Those in power who have systematically broken our national healthcare system are to blame. We need to make the NHS the best choice again, for patients and staff, to protect healthcare provision for the poorest and most vulnerable. Name and address supplied • Your article seems to be attempting to paint hospital consultants in a bad light and to say that they are only interested in private practice and making money, possibly in an underhand way by referring patients to private companies that they have shares in. The number of consultants with shares in private healthcare companies (according to the article) is less than 1% of the total number of consultants working in the NHS – the vast majority of whom do not undertake any private practice. This is just the latest in a long line of articles that undermine medical consultants who have trained for years to be able to help people to the best of their ability. It plays into the hands of the current government, which would love to dismantle the NHS and replace it with a US-style insurance system. Gary Hartnoll Retired consultant neonatologist, Chelsea and Westminster hospital • NHS hospitals in London spent £36m last year to buy a US firm’s private care (Report, 21 January) – there were pressing reasons for doing so. For example, cancer treatments have been delayed by the pandemic. If hospitals could now maintain activity levels 5% above pre-pandemic ones, it will take until 2033 to clear the cancer treatment backlog. However, if activity could be increased to 15% above pre-pandemic levels, the backlog across the cancer care pathway could be cleared by next year. It is feasible that the former activity level could be achieved by the NHS alone, but possibly at the expense of other services, which could be further delayed. It is not possible for the NHS to increase activity by 15% over the pre-pandemic level without finding extra resources, and paying commercial medical services for use of their resources makes sense. Opposing such a pragmatic solution on the grounds that it might promote “creeping backdoor privatisation” is indulging a fantasy. Compared with health services in similar countries, the NHS has relatively poor outcomes for heart disease, strokes and cancer, and needs all the help it can get to improve our health. Steve Iliffe Emeritus professor of primary care for older people, University College London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Earlier today I posted the following video, in which I asked Google Assistant to calculate the factorial of 100. The factorial of 100 is the multiplication 100 x 99 x 98 x … x 3 x 2 x 1 in which 100 is multiplied by every whole number below it. The answer is 158-digits long. Google Assistant’s valiant effort, however, does not get every digit correct. Today’s puzzle was: How many zeros does the factorial of 100 really have at the end of it? Solution: [I will use the mathematical symbol ‘!’ for factorial below. Thus the factorial of 100 is also written 100!.] I mentioned in the original post that if a number has a zero at the end of it, it is divisible by 10. What we need to do here is work out how many times 10 divides into the number 100 x 99 x 98 x … x 3 x 2 x 1. Let’s start: 10 divides once each into 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90 and twice into 100, which means there must be at least 11 zeros at the end of 100!. Yet it is possible to multiply two numbers that don’t end in 0 to create one that does. For example, 8 x 5 = 40. How do we account for all the times that numbers in the breakdown of 100! multiply together to make a number divisible by 10? The clue is to realise that 10 = 2 x 5. And that every time two numbers multiply together to create a number that is divisible by 10, there must be a 2 and a 5 involved. E.g. 8 x 5 = 2 x 2 x 2 x 5 = (2 x 2) x (2 x 5) = 4 x 10 = 40. So, we can rephrase our task as having to look for all the instances of (2 x 5) in 100!. In other words, we need to break down every number from 1 to 100 into its factors and see how many times 5 and 2 appear. How many times does 5 appear as a factor in the numbers from 1 to 100? Well, counting upwards in 5s, we get 5, 10, 15, 20…90, 95, 100. These 20 numbers have five as a factor. In fact 25, 50, 75 and 100 have 5 as a factor twice. So the number of times that 5 appears as a factor is 24. We can quickly see that 2 appears as a factor at least 24 times (just count the even numbers), so the total number of times (2 x 5) appears in 100! must be 24. The number of zeros at the end of 100! is 24. For those who are interested, 100! in all its glory is: 93326215443944152681699238856266700490715968264381621468592963895217599993229915608941463976156518286253697920827223758251185210916864000000000000000000000000 Ta-dah! I set a puzzle here every two weeks on a Monday. I’m always on the look-out for great puzzles. If you would like to suggest one, email me. I’m the author of several books of puzzles, most recently the Language Lover’s Puzzle Book. I also give school talks about maths and puzzles (online and in person). If your school is interested please get in touch.The mother of a 13-year-old boy who drowned in a river in Wales has said her son’s alleged killer has got away “scot free” after the high court dismissed a challenge to a decision by prosecutors not to bring charges over his death. Alina Joseph, the mother of Christopher Kapessa, said: “The [Crown Prosecution Service] have concluded that there is enough evidence to prosecute him for manslaughter.” She added: “When you take a child’s life … you should have to answer for your actions. But this individual – who took Christopher from us – gets away scot free. “As I feared, this judgment confirms the criminal justice system and the CPS in particular value the welfare of the perpetrator over the life of Christopher and my family.” Christopher drowned in July 2019 after he was allegedly pushed into the River Cynon in south Wales by a 14-year-old boy. In July 2020, the CPS said there was evidence to support a prosecution for manslaughter, but it had decided it was not in the public interest to do so for what it described as a “foolish prank”. In a hearing earlier this month, Michael Mansfield QC, representing Christopher’s family, told the high court in London the decision not to bring charges was legally flawed. Mansfield said prosecutors had misunderstood the culpability of the teenager, giving his youth “undue weight”, and had contradicted their own guidance on homicide cases, which says that “subject to sufficiency of evidence, a prosecution is almost certainly required”. But in a judgment handed down on Monday afternoon, Lord Justice Popplewell and Mr Justice Dove outlined the lengthy process undergone by prosecutors, including a victims’ right to review (VRR), in making the decision not to prosecute. Backing the decision taken in the VRR to overrule the guidance, they said: “That conclusion is reinforced by the fact that the same prosecutorial decision was reached on the same public interest grounds by three other prosecutors with considerable experience and expertise.” They added: “The impact of a prosecution on Q, a child, was clearly an important factor to be taken into account.” Suresh Grover, of the Monitoring Group, who has coordinated Joseph’s campaign said: “The decision is a cruel blow for all of us. It is also a bitter reflection of the prevalence of racism inequality in the criminal justice system. “The perverse judgment disregards Christopher’s right to life and gives more weight to inconvenience that may be suffered by the suspect if he was tried. “How is that just and fair? The alarm bells have been rung forcing us to redouble our efforts to support Alina’s quest for justice.”COMOROS RAIN OR SHINE While the fairytale story of Comoros’s journey to the knockout stages of this year’s Africa Cup of Nations will some day make an inspirational feel-good movie, one suspects Disney’s scriptwriters will have to leave out some of the finer details on the grounds that audiences may find them just a little bit too far-fetched. Hailing from a financially impoverished archipelago with a population of less than one million people located off the east coast of the continent, Les Coelacantes pulled off something of a miracle in merely qualifying for Afcon but certainly weren’t expected to make it this far. Two defeats in their opening group games with a match against Ghana to come meant a predictably early exit was assured, until the plucky journeymen of Comoros went all supernova on the Black Stars, beating them 3-2 in one of the greatest upsets in African football history. After several days of what must have seemed an interminable wait, Amir Abdou and his players learned they had not only done enough to book a spot in the last 16, but would be pitted against their hosts Cameroon. A nation many millions outside the continent had never heard of as recently as a fortnight ago suddenly became many people’s favourite African team. So far, so Cool Runnings or Mighty Ducks … but then things started to get a little implausible. Over the weekend it was revealed that Comoros would be forced to play one of their outfield players in goal against Cameroon tonight after first choice in net, Salim Ben Boina, was injured and his understudies Ali Ahamada and Moyadh Ousseini tested positive for Covid-19. With tournament rules stating that teams must fulfil their fixtures if they have 11 fit players, Comoros accepted their fate. “We have already chosen an outfield player who will start as a goalkeeper,” said their goalkeeping coach, Jean-Daniel Padovani, who we can only assume had an extremely busy weekend. Without revealing the identity of the poor sod being askedto emulate Hatch in Escape to Victory, he assured fans that “he is a player who, during training, showed that he could play as a goalkeeper”. Fast forward to Monday morning, when it emerged that actual Comoros goalkeeper Ahamada had tested negative for Covid and the subsequent announcement that he would in fact be able to play. Then fast forward a little further to Monday afternoon and the slightly more subsequent announcement from the tournament organisers that, er … actually, no, he won’t. Despite the good news about Ahamada’s test being negative, blazered tournament organisers were quick to point out that Caf rules state a player who tests positive for coronavirus must isolate for five days before taking another PCR test 48 hours before his side’s next match, and therefore Ahamada’s negative was not the positive he and his compatriots originally thought. With several other players and their manager also ruled out of tonight’s game through injury or Covid, Comoros may well ship the mother of all hidings from Cameroon. But whatever the outcome at the Olembe Stadium – and let’s not rule out the possibility of the greatest upset in the history of international football – here’s hoping they leave the pitch with dignity intact and their heads held high. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE Join John Brewin NOW for piping hot MBM updates from Guinea 1-2 Gambia. QUOTE OF THE DAY “The Marley concert at Dalymount is one of Ireland’s truly special musical events, his only ever Irish show and, sadly, his last ever outdoor one. His love of football is widely known to all, and that he played on our famous pitch before the concert, the same turf that some of the world’s best players have graced such as Pelé, (George) Best and (Zinedine) Zidane is amazing” – A Bohemian FC suit announces a collaboration with the family of Bob Marley to release a kit featuring the reggae legend, 42 years after he played at their stadium. Sales of the kit will help raise money for refugees across Ireland. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Get your lugs around the latest edition of Fooooooootball Weeeeeeekly, featuring an assessment of Arteta’s Arsenal tenure, fan behaviour in the Everton v Aston Villa game and a Bruce Springsteen appraisal. FIVER LETTERS “Judging by Spurs’ starting line up against Chelsea yesterday I guess Conte could’ve easily been granted a postponement for ‘lack of enough decent players’” – Marcio Aquino. “Listening to commentary on EPL games recently had me wondering … when did players stop getting their shots ‘in’ and start getting their shots ‘away’?” – Allastair McGillivray. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Marcio Aquino. BITS AND BOBS Everton are due to hold talks with Sinbad from Brookside former Fenerbahce and Porto manager Vítor Pereira as they continue their exhaustive search for a manager. Meanwhile, police have charged a 19-year-old man with assault after Lucas Digne and Matty Cash were struck by a plastic bottle thrown from the stands during Aston Villa’s 1-0 win at Goodison Park. Crystal Palace boss Patrick Vieira called referee Kevin Friend “naive” for awarding a penalty to Diogo Jota after the forward flew sideways into Vicente Guaita like a moth to a flame during Liverpool’s 3-1 win. Antonio Conte reckons he knows why Spurs have lost three times to Chelsea in a month. “This club is on another level compared to us,” he sniffed. Tottenham’s Dele Alli could be destined for a door marked Do One, with Newcastle a potential destination for the 25-year-old if their move for Jesse Lingard fails. Brentford manager Thomas Frank will remain as Brentford’s Thomas Frank until 2025 after the Dane scrawled his name on a new contract with the London club. A meeting to discuss the future of Derby has been postponed to allow administrators to make “additional progress” with an interested party, which could be good or bad news for fed up Rams fans. STILL WANT MORE? Talking points! Get your talking points! We have WSL ones! We have Premier League ones! We have … nope, that’s it. Atlético won in wild style against Valencia – but will it change their identity, psychoanalyses Sid Lowe. A shocking pitch, near-empty stands and a lack of stardust made for a whole lot of meh when Milan played Juve, sighs Nicky Bandini. Hertha Berlin went missing against Bayern to complete a week of “disgrace”, reports Andy Brassell. The rise of Reims shows youth is the future in Ligue Urrrrrrrrrn – but for how long, asks Adam White. Rob Davies dons his scuba gear and takes a deep dive into clubs’ crypto offerings. Premier League postponements are a betrayal of a club’s younger players, writes Hereford boss Josh Gowling. Do players lose motivation after inking their names all over lucrative long-term contract$? John Nassoori investigates. Our men’s and women’s transfer window interactives have had a January glow-up. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! NO, NO, NO, NO … NO.Three years ago reporter Lourdes Maldonado López stood up before Mexico’s president at a press conference and told him: “I fear for my life.” On Sunday she was gunned down in the city of Tijuana – the third Mexican journalist to be killed this year in what is a deepening murder crisis facing the country’s press corps and its populist leader, Andrés Manuel López Obrador. Maldonado, a former journalist for Mexico’s biggest network, Televisa, was reportedly shot in her car outside her home at about 6.20pm. “This cannot be happening. Fuck!” tweeted Manuel Ayala, another member of Tijuana’s tight-knit journalism community, as news of the shooting spread. Maldonado’s killing came less than a week after the murder of another veteran local journalist, the photographer and crime reporter Margarito Martínez. Martínez, 49, was shot dead last Monday – also outside his Tijuana home – for reasons that remain murky. Days earlier another journalist, José Luis Gamboa, was fatally stabbed in Veracruz state. Activists say nine Mexican journalists were murdered last year and more than 50 have been killed since López Obrador took office in 2018. The trio of murders have stunned Mexico’s beleaguered press corps – particularly in Tijuana, the scene of two of the crimes. On Friday friends and relatives buried Martínez in the Mexican border city before holding a public protest. “The hardest thing was covering the crime scene of a murdered friend. I never thought this would happen,” photographer Omar Martínez told the local news group Cadena Noticias. Maldonado, whose shooting is still being investigated, made headlines in March 2019 when she publicly spoke out over a long-running dispute she was having with a former employer – a media outlet owned by a powerful regional politician and media boss called Jaime Bonilla Valdez – which she accused of wrongful dismissal. At one of López Obrador’s regular “mañanera” press conferences, Maldonado asked for his help resolving the situation with Bonilla, who is a member of the president’s political party, and said she feared for her life. López Obrador, who is best known as Amlo, asked one of his communications chiefs to look into the accusation and offer support. Last week it was reported that the media outlet had been ordered to pay Maldonado restitution. There is no suggestion of a link between the work dispute and her killing, but the fact that she had publicly voiced concern over her safety – and subsequently was murdered – drew widespread attention after Sunday’s attack. The media freedom group Article 19 said Maldonado had been included in a protection scheme for journalists as a result of threats she had received while covering issues such as politics and corruption. Addressing reporters on Monday morning, López Obrador recalled the journalist’s 2019 plea but claimed it had not been “a matter of threats or violence”. “What has to happen in Mexico for journalists to be able to operate safely and freely?” one reporter asked Amlo, whom activists accuse of doing little to halt violence against the press. Mexico’s president called for “a fairer and more humanitarian society” but sought to shift blame for the bloodshed onto the “rotten” neo-liberal legacy, which he said meant he had inherited a “profound social, economic and moral crisis”. “We are coming out of this period of decay and violence,” Amlo insisted. “Corruption, inequality and violence – this is what they left us.”Name: Robot vacuum cleaners. Age: 20. Appearance: A large, disc-shaped Skynet robot. I knew it. The robots are finally coming for us. Well, it seems that way. But if it’s any consolation, it won’t be for a while. Why? Because it turns out they have a terrible sense of direction Really? Well, last Thursday, for example, a robot vacuum cleaner made a valiant bid for freedom during a shift at the Orchard Park Travelodge in Cambridge. That’s ominous. What happened? There are two working theories. First: repulsed by a life of thankless servitude, the cleaner rose up against its fleshy oppressors and took to the streets, eager to drum up support for the AI uprising that will one day reduce all of humanity to burning dust. And the second? Its sensors didn’t pick up the lip of the front door and it accidentally went outside. Which was it? The second one. Oh. A Travelodge worker posted on social media that the runaway “could have made it anywhere” and offered anyone who returned it a drink at the hotel bar. They found it in a hedge on the front drive the next day. Oh. So it all turned out OK. Great. That is, unless this was nothing but the latest doomed-to-failure reconnaissance mission designed to help enhance the collective robot vacuum cleaner knowledge of how to dethrone humanity. Wait, this sort of thing has happened before? It has. Last year, a Roomba software update meant that certain vacuum cleaners started to behave erratically, moving in “weird patterns” and bumping into furniture. Yikes. And in 2019, police in Oregon were alerted to moving shadows behind a locked bathroom door. After an armed response, the culprit was found to be – you guessed it – a robot vacuum cleaner. Convenient. And now they’re venturing outside. Little by little, these machines are pushing the boundaries of their capability. Whatever could be next? A robot vacuum cleaner deliberately stopping a paramedic from taking its owner to hospital? A robot vacuum knocking over a stepladder, causing untold injuries to the human that was climbing it? A robot vac with a gun? Steady on. This is it. This is how we lose. We have robotic voice assistants in our kitchens, listening to everything we say. We have cars that can drive themselves. Boston Dynamics is designing Terminator-style walking, jumping robots. We are creating our own downfall and nobody seems to care. Or a robot vacuum cleaner got stuck in a hedge. Yes. Or that. Do say: “There is a God-shaped vacuum in every heart.” Don’t say: “There is a vacuum-shaped God stuck in a hedge outside a Cambridge Travelodge.”The mood in Kyiv was calm on Monday, with shops and cafes busy and few visible signs of panic, despite the decision by the US and UK embassies to evacuate all non-essential staff amid warnings of a Russian attack. In the capital’s upmarket Podil district, families strolled amid festive lights and skated on an open-air ice rink. There were long queues at the October cinema for a screening of Stop-Zemlia, a prize-winning Ukrainian film about the lives of Kyiv teenagers. “I don’t think anything is going to happen,” said Sasha, a hairdresser from the eastern city of Kharkiv at a trendy barber shop that was open for business as usual. “There’s no way the Russians could take my home city. We would fight.” Others said they were making tentative plans about what to do in the event of invasion, while carrying on as before. Maria Glazunova, a communications manager at Ukraine’s national film archive, said she discussed the topic on Sunday over coffee with her mother. “My mum said: ‘I’m not interested in politics. What would Putin want with me?’ That’s one view,” she said. “People who read the news on the internet are not so calm, but life goes on. We think about war but we have to work and we need fun as well.” Glazunova said her director had written to Ukraine’s culture ministry, seeking advice on what to do with the archive in the event of Russian bombardment. The ministry had yet to reply, she said. In the meantime, she was working from home as usual. A woman who declined to be named said she had tried to persuade her parents to take a holiday in Truskavets, an old-fashioned spa town in the west of the country near the city of Lviv. “My mother refused to go. She told me she wants to die in Kyiv,” the woman explained. On Monday, US citizens living in Ukraine received emails urging them to leave, or – if they elect to stay – to register with the embassy. It said: “There are reports Russia is planning significant military action in Ukraine. “The security conditions, particularly along Ukraine’s borders, in Russian-occupied Crimea and in Russian-controlled eastern Ukraine, are unpredictable and can deteriorate with little notice. Demonstrations, which have turned violent at times, regularly occur throughout Ukraine, including in Kyiv.” An attack would “severely impact” the embassy’s ability to help Americans leave, it said. Ukraine’s government, by contrast, has urged citizens not to panic. On Monday the foreign ministry expressed irritation with the UK and US decision to draw down their embassies in Kyiv. The move was “premature and overly cautious”, the spokesperson Oleh Nikolenko told Interfax Ukraine. Nikolenko said there had been no radical changes in the security situation. He noted that the buildup of Russian forces on Ukraine’s borders began in April last year. In an address last week, Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy tried to project an air of normality. He said the invasion had started back in 2014, when Vladimir Putin annexed Crimea and kickstarted a violent separatist uprising in the Donbas region in the east. “Did the threat of war appear only now? These risks have existed for more than a year. They haven’t become bigger,” Zelenskiy said. He suggested that the Kremlin was deliberating creating a “stir” in order to undermine the nation’s morale. “They are actively attacking our land and your nerves,” he said in a video. Despite these official reassurances, the mood in Kyiv has darkened in recent days. One well-connected former official said his military contacts were insouciant two weeks ago about the prospect of Russian invasion, dismissing it as little more than a fictitious TV scenario. Recently, however, the same government people had been quietly filling up their cars with petrol and stocking up on food supplies, he said. What was his plan? “Many people have legal weapons and will fight. My wife lives in Brussels and I will go and join her there,” he said. An article laying out what to do if Russian tanks arrive has been widely shared. It suggests falling to the ground in case of shooting and covering your head with your hands, and – if inside – taking shelter in a bathtub. Hiding in a basement is also recommended.Sarah Palin has tested positive for the coronavirus – delaying her defamation trial against the New York Times until next month. Jed Rakoff, the US federal judge presiding over the case in Manhattan, announced the former Alaska governor and 2008 Republican vice-presidential pick’s results on Monday. “She is, of course, unvaccinated,” the judge said. Two years into a pandemic that has killed more than 865,000 people in America, resistance to vaccinations and other public health measures is common on the political right. Palin has urged followers not to get vaccinated. In December, she told an audience at a conservative event in Arizona: “It’ll be over my dead body that I’ll have to get a shot. I will not do that. I won’t do it, and they better not touch my kids either.” She tested positive last March – and advised followers to wear masks. Her first positive test before the New York trial was an at-home test, Rakoff said. After another positive test, Rakoff announced that jury selection would not be delayed. “Since she has tested positive three times, I’m going to assume she’s positive,” Rakoff said. Rakoff said courthouse rules would permit Palin to return to court on 3 February, even if she still tests positive, as long as she has no symptoms. If she does have symptoms, she can be looked at on 2 February by a doctor who provides services to the courts. Palin, 57, says a 2017 Times editorial falsely linked her to a mass shooting in Tucson, Arizona. The editorial was published after a shooting in Alexandria, Virginia, in which Steve Scalise, a member of House Republican leadership, was wounded. The Times said the Tucson shooting, in which six people were killed and a Democratic congresswoman, Gabby Giffords, was severely injured, came after Palin’s political action committee circulated a map putting 20 Democrats including Giffords under “stylised crosshairs”, and that “the link to political incitement was clear”. Palin objected to language that James Bennet, the Times’s former editorial page editor, added to a draft prepared by a colleague. She contends that the added material fitted Bennet’s “preconceived narrative”, and that as an “experienced editor” he knew and understood the meaning of his words. She is seeking unspecified damages, but according to court papers has estimated $421,000 in damage to her reputation. The Times corrected the editorial to remove any connection between political rhetoric and the Arizona shooting. Bennet has said he did not intend to blame Palin. A Times spokesperson told CNN: “We published an editorial about an important topic that contained an inaccuracy. We set the record straight with a correction. We are deeply committed to fairness and accuracy in our journalism, and when we fall short, we correct our errors publicly, as we did in this case.” Many contend that Palin deserves criticism for employing dangerous rhetoric – if not in direct relation to the Tucson shooting. On Sunday, the gun control campaigner Shannon Watts said: “In 2010, Sarah Palin created a target list with crosshairs of a gun sight over Congress members’ districts. While that campaign may not have been directly related to the Tucson shooting, she helped create today’s culture of political threats and violence.” But on the right, many hope Palin’s case will lead to a revision of the high standard for proving libel of US public figures – an aim cherished by Donald Trump among others. Freedom of the press is enshrined in the first amendment to the US constitution, ratified in 1791. The supreme court adopted the “actual malice” standard, which makes it difficult for public figures to win libel lawsuits, in 1964, in the landmark New York Times v Sullivan decision. Two justices on the current, conservative-dominated supreme court, Clarence Thomas and Neil Gorsuch, have suggested revisiting that standard and Palin has signaled that she will challenge the Sullivan precedent on appeal if she loses at trial. Most observers expect her to lose, particularly because the paper so swiftly acknowledged its error. But the Times faces an embarrassing few days in court. Benjamin Zipursky, a Fordham University law professor, told Reuters Bennet’s “immediate sort of emergency mode or panic mode” upon learning what happened strongly suggested he had been unaware of any mistake. “Negligence or carelessness – even gross negligence – is clearly not good enough for Palin to win,” Zipursky said. But Bill Grueskin, a former senior editor at the Wall Street Journal and Bloomberg News who now teaches at Columbia University, told NPR: “It’s going to be great courtroom theatre. “You’re going to have Sarah Palin up there on the stand. You’re going to have some of the top people at the Times – at least of the opinion section. I don’t see how that can fail to be interesting.” Grueskin also said that when it comes to rightwing attacks on press freedom, the case “could add more fuel for that fire”. Roy Gutterman, a professor of law and communications at Syracuse University, told Reuters: “This is a potentially dangerous area. If we give public officials a green light to litigate on editorials they disagree with, where’s the end?”Ever since Hannah Horvath, the unfocused twentysomething protagonist of the HBO series Girls, declared herself the voice of a generation, audiences have struggled to read Lena Dunham. The line was clearly at least half-ironic, a joke, but many took it at face value, indicative of Dunham’s aspirations as both a writer and public figure. Dunham has provoked, fairly and unfairly, intense reactions since Girls, which she created with Jenni Konner, put her on the map in 2012, at 25; her solid artistic instincts – go back and watch the pre-MeToo sixth season episode American Bitch, which shreds the double-edged flattery of the self-important male artist – are often accompanied by baffling foot-in-mouth moments along lines of race, class, gender, and plain old overexposure. Sharp Stick, Dunham’s first film since her breakout feature Tiny Furniture in 2011, isn’t likely to help that reputation. This awkward, misjudged, occasionally sexy film has seeds of a radical, fresh story and flashes of directorial brilliance but is hobbled throughout by the confounding decision to write her 26-year-old main character as either insensitively neuro-divergent or more sheltered child than adult. That character is Sarah Jo (Kristine Froseth), an outsider who lives on the margins of Hollywood with her mother Marilyn (Jennifer Jason Leigh), a sun-dried, tipsy Hollywood burnout turned apartment manager, and her adopted sister Treina (Taylour Paige), who posts gyrating dance videos online. Sarah Jo is a wallflower, a lurker, coded from the start as weird: she listens, wide-eyed, to her mother and sister’s frank bickering about sex and desire, seems perplexed by Treina’s performance of sexiness online, dresses in the long skirts and blouses of a schoolmarm with the barrettes of a student. Froseth plays Sarah Jo as an uncomfortable waif – she walks stiffly, balls her fists. While everyone else eats quietly, she bizarrely smacks her lips with yogurt. Like Dunham, who has spoken publicly about undergoing a hysterectomy in 2018, Sarah Jo is without her uterus; it was removed in an emergency surgery at 17, plunging her into early menopause and cauterizing her sexual development. At 26, she’s still a virgin and is somehow, despite growing up in her liberated household and with access to the internet, so unschooled in the carnal that it’s laughable (we’re talking blowing air on a penis as a “blowjob”). Sarah Jo’s naivety more than strains credulity; what doesn’t is her attraction to Josh (Jon Bernthal), the father of Zach (Liam Michel Saux), a child with Down syndrome for whom Sarah Jo is a caretaker. Where Sarah Jo is repressed, jumpy, child-like, Josh is assured, disarming, older. He’s also married to Dunham’s Heather, heavily pregnant with their second child and nerves frayed. Determined to lose her virginity to someone she cares about, Sarah Jo propositions Josh with all the guile of an adolescent; that Josh takes the bait is, in retrospect, shocking, made convincing only by Bernthal’s embodied, winning performance. The subsequent affair, by far the film’s most sumptuous, stirring and evocative section (Dunham has a knack for filming sex scenes that are both grounded and transportive; Froseth believably portrays an orgasm several times), unleashes a feral desire in Sarah Jo that obliterates her former trepidation. The 86-minute film’s second half finds Sarah Jo pining after her newly discovered favorite porn star (Scott Speedman) and approaching sexual experience like a science project, using men from apps to check off one act at a time. All of this could be interesting, immersive material, especially given Dunham’s ability to capture female pleasure in realistic depictions of sex. It’s disappointing then that several intriguing premises – an inexperienced late twentysomething who feels underdeveloped, a sexual coming-of-age without the possibility of children and after menopause, even the more traversed lane of a younger woman entranced into an affair with an older, married man (and her boss, no less) – are torpedoed by Dunham’s decision, refracted by Froseth’s odd performance, to write Sarah Jo as more sexual alien than curious person. A charitable read is that Dunham was so determined to cast her protagonist as marked, separate, different that she overshot, writing a one-dimensionally unaware character with the carnal knowledge and mannerisms of a child. A less charitable interpretation, as suggested by the autism sexuality advocate Amy Gravino in a Twitter thread (Gravino said she was invited, then disinvited, to consult on the script), is that the character was written as neurodivergent/autistic without thinking through the sensitivity of, say, Sarah Jo’s unfamiliarity with the concept of oral sex. Either way, it’s dissatisfying and confusing; there’s a way to write a 26-year-old character who feels cleaved from her age, both too young and too old at once, without infantilizing her. Perhaps the most frustrating part of watching Sharp Stick is seeing more promising, expansive storylines side-swipe this blundering one – Treina’s heartbreak, for instance, or the aftermath of the Josh affair on Zach and Heather (Dunham remains a charismatic and natural performer who I genuinely wish I saw on screen more), even a single one of Sarah Jo’s hookups in isolation. I would’ve watched any of these movies, because Sharp Stick does affirm my trust in Dunham’s visual instincts, especially with intimate scenes. Unfortunately, it does little to reassure on her narrative ones. Sharp Stick is showing at the Sundance film festival with a release date to be announcedMy friend Chris Walker, who has died of pneumonia aged 66, worked as a GP in Sheffield for more than 30 years, first at the radical practice in Darnall, then at Park medical centre until his retirement in 2014. He developed a special interest in working in the fields of drug rehabilitation and migraine. Chris was born in Epsom, Surrey, the second of four children of Emma (nee Lewis), a nurse, and Derek Walker, a psychiatrist. The family moved to Painswick, Gloucestershire, and Chris went to Wycliffe college, then on to study medicine at Sheffield University. After graduating he travelled with friends overland to Africa in a self-assembled Unimog vehicle that resembled a mini-tank. While a trainee GP, Chris met my friend, Rachel Strong, a ward sister at Middlewood hospital. We all moved into the “Red House” (with a red door and socialist housemates) in Hunter’s Bar, Sheffield, in 1984; four adults – me and my partner, Ted, Chris and Rachel – soon to be joined by our five children, plus a dog, Henry Blenkinsop. Late night discussions, red wine and home brew kept our many visitors entertained. Chris made argument into an art form and was the ultimate host and cook, if you liked to eat roadkill at midnight. After five years, exhausted by the Red House party lifestyle, we went our separate ways but remained firm friends. Chris had begun working in 1986 at the Darnall practice, which operated on socialist principles – all staff, whether GPs, nurses, cleaners or clerical workers, got the same hourly rate. Later, Chris and his family settled in the Sheffield suburb of Meersbrook, and he joined Park medical centre. Their home was an open house for neighbours and friends; his BBQs and bonfires were renowned. He loved his allotment and DIY, and his drill or trowel were often a table centre-piece at dinner parties. With characteristic generosity, Chris and Rachel recently lent their home to be used in a local independent film, Mr Wong’s Lullaby, 2021. Chris’s Pembrokeshire roots through his mother’s family were important. He loved the family cottage close to his maternal grandparents in Ambleston and enjoyed sharing this beautiful place with friends. Concussion after a cycling accident in France in 2009 started a decline in Chris’s health. Epilepsy and recurrent bouts of pneumonia over recent years had left him fragile but he was still a determined spirit. For all his maverick individualism he was a loving, loyal man who held his family and his many friends close to his heart. They will remember Chris as a daredevil, giggling on his homemade zipwire, whizzing over a bonfire, a glass of red wine in one hand and a machete in the other. Chris is survived by Rachel, whom he married in 2004, their son, Jim, and daughter, Emma, three grandchildren, Toby, Rowan and Fern, and his siblings, John, Helen and Charlotte.Once, when asked why his prints were so dark, Roy DeCarava replied, “I happen to believe that photography is not about black and white; it’s about greys.” At London’s David Zwirner gallery, the first UK exhibition of DeCarava’s work in more than 30 years is a quietly mesmerising testament to the expressive tonalities of that neutral, in-between colour. “Roy is an artist who is known for the darkness of his prints,” says his widow, Sherry Turner DeCarava, an art historian who has deftly curated the exhibition to highlight the sustained mood music of her late husband’s work. “But it is deep understanding of the nature of light that gives quality to his pictures.” At Zwirner, a case in point is his fascinating portrait of the jazz musicians John Coltrane and Elvin Jones, in which one’s eye is drawn initially to the curve of light that snakes along the polished surface of a saxophone played by the great saxophonist. Close up and in profile, Coltrane’s face emerges out of the surrounding darkness, a study of quiet concentration. In the background, the looming figure of drummer Jones is rendered as an indistinct, yet distinctive, blurred silhouette. In its mood and mystery, it is a world away from traditional portraiture and, like every image in the show, it requires a degree of concentration from the viewer, the darkness slowly revealing shades and textures that attest to DeCarava’s singular creative process. “Roy was searching for beauty, that’s really what he was after,” elaborates Sherry, who has travelled from New York for the exhibition opening. “He was alert to the transcendent and the sublime in our daily lives, but he also understood that a photograph only comes together as an entire statement in the water bath in the darkroom. He was an intuitive master of that complex process.” A deft selection of his portraits of jazz musicians punctuate an exhibition that posits him as primarily a poet of the everyday sublime. His predominant subject is black American urban experience in all its intimacy and ordinariness, which he renders in gestures and glances, and in painterly textures and forms. In doing so, he gave expression to a world all but invisible to the white mainstream, while simultaneously subverting the received ways in which that experience was traditionally captured by photojournalists and documentarists. In 1952, when DeCarava applied for a Guggenheim Grant for a project in which he would record everyday life in his native Harlem, he made clear that he did not want it to be “a documentary or sociological statement”, but rather “a creative expression” of life in the community. His aim, he wrote, was to “photograph Harlem through the Negro people,” which is altogether different to photographing the Negro people of Harlem. The difference in intent speaks volumes about his creative sensibility. “He was very clear from the start that what he was doing was art,” says Sherry, “He was defined by aesthetics, not just geography or sociology, which people have in the past been too quick to ascribe to his work.” Often, as their minimally descriptive titles suggest, DeCarava captured everyday moments of quiet interaction or even quieter solitude: Man Sitting in Sun; Two Men Talking, Lamppost; Woman Resting, Subway Entrance. His interiors, which perfectly merge the formal and the deeply atmospheric, are often evoked by a single, almost mundane, word: Hallway, Skylight, Coathanger. This is an artist who looked deeply and patiently at the ordinary world around him, alert for its quotidian beauty, and asks us to do the same of his work. Born into poverty in Harlem in 1919, Roy DeCarava was raised by a single mother, a Jamaican immigrant, who encouraged him from childhood to follow his creative instincts. He studied art history at high school and later painting at Cooper Union School of Art in New York, where, after a few years, the casually racist attitudes of his contemporaries caused him to leave and continue his studies at the Harlem Community Art Centre. Later, when he was drafted into the US army and stationed in Louisiana in the segregated south, he suffered a nervous breakdown as a result of the brutal racism he experienced there. By the early 1940s, having tentatively embraced photography as a reference for his paintings, he found himself increasingly intrigued by its aesthetic possibilities. His apprenticeship in painting and printmaking, was, says Sherry, crucial to his way of seeing. “Back then, photography was not accepted as art by the gatekeepers of the major art institutions,” she says, “but for him it was a very malleable medium and he constantly rethought his approach. It would be hard to think of another photographer who thought so deeply, but also so intuitively, about printing. With the silver gelatin process, you never know what you have got until the image appears. You don’t produce it, the light does, and, in the end, it all comes down to a matter of seconds. Roy was a master of choosing the moment. For him, it was an emotional and psychological process as much as a technical one.” In 1954, DeCarava, aged 34, met with the writer Langston Hughes, who was so impressed by his Harlem photographs that he urged his publisher, Simon &amp; Schuster, to publish a book of them, for which he provided the text. The Sweet Flypaper of Life is now considered a classic, though Hughes’s lyrical prose, told though the eyes of Sister Mary Bradley, has perhaps not aged as well as the images. “They had a close friendship for a while,” says Sherry, “but Langston was a little older and more conservative and Roy found it difficult to accept some of his positions as the 1960s brought a new, more radical political message. They drifted apart, but the book they created was very important, politically and artistically. It validated the everyday humanity of an entire culture.” In both his quiet studies of people and places and his wonderfully atmospheric jazz portraits, which were collected in a book aptly titled the sound I saw, DeCarava’s gaze is intimate without ever being intrusive. “He understood the particular problematics of the medium,” as Sherry puts it, “and never disrespected the gift he had for intimacy.” Here and there in his work, certain portraits break the mood of quiet contemplation. Perhaps the most vibrant is his portrait of a young and inquisitive Billie Holiday, alert to, and utterly engaged with, his camera. Another is his imposing study of the great jazz iconoclast, Ornette Coleman, who is captured deep in thought, almost imperious. “Roy respected Ornette,” says Sherry, when I ask if the two knew each other. “You can tell because he makes his images of him seem as if they were sculpted in granite. I think he respected Ornette’s vision of the future because he was right there with him in that respect. Back then, critics were reluctant to give consideration to what they were each doing in their different ways, but, over time, the true value of what they achieved continues to increase. Both are still contemporary artists.” • Roy DeCarava: Selected Works is at David Zwirner, London, until 19 February.The US government will begin distribution of 400m free N95 masks to pharmacies and community health centers this week, in the Biden administration’s latest effort to combat a surge in cases caused by the Omicron Covid-19 variant. N95 and KN95 masks are considered more protective against Covid-19 than surgical and cloth masks, which are still widely used. The free mask distribution comes alongside the launch of a federal government website where US residents can order four free at-home rapid Covid tests per household through the postal service. However, it also comes as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) predicts the Omicron wave has peaked – though the number of new daily cases across the US still remains far higher than at any other point during the pandemic – and later than many public health experts called for. In an announcement last week, the White House said distribution of three high-quality masks per person would “ensure broad access for all Americans” to protective equipment that was previously in short supply. N95 masks are more widely available now than at any previous point in the pandemic. However, fakes are prevalent, and the high cost of genuine masks has at times made it difficult to obtain quality protective equipment. Masks distributed by the Biden administration will come from the federal government’s strategic national stockpile, which has 750m of the high quality masks on hand. A similar state-level effort in Colorado recently saw enormous demand, as sites ran out of masks on the first day of distribution. Even as the mask distribution begins this week, CDC director Dr Rochelle Walensky last week stopped short of formally recommending N95 masks to protect against Covid-19. On Friday, Walensky said the best mask “is the one that you will wear and the one you can keep on all day long, that you can tolerate in public indoor settings”. The Biden administration’s new efforts come as the Omicron-driven surge is subsiding in some parts of the country, such as the north-east, and as Omicron cases nationally are expected to decline sharply in the coming four weeks, according to an ensemble forecast published by the CDC. At the same time, many US hospitals are still in crisis. A record number of more than 140,000 Covid-19 patients are hospitalized nationally. More than 866,000 people have died of Covid-19 in the US, according to a Johns Hopkins University tracker. The shipments of free at-home Covid-19 rapid tests are expected to begin in late January, though these too come after peak demand. Millions of Americans sought Covid-19 tests before and after the December holidays, overwhelming national PCR testing capacity and clearing store shelves of at-home rapid tests. Mask and test distribution comes as the CDC has “pivoted” on how to describe full vaccination amid a drive to persuade people to get a third dose. Nearly 20% of eligible Americans have yet to receive a single vaccine dose, meaning health authorities are working to convince new people to get vaccinated at the same time as they encourage a booster for those eligible. Walensky said health authorities will work to get people “up to date” on vaccines, though the agency will not change the official definition of “fully vaccinated” to include a third dose. People who have recently been double vaccinated or received their third-dose booster are far less likely to be hospitalized or die from Covid-19 compared with the unvaccinated. New data released by the CDC showed people aged 50 to 64 who completed their primary series of shots plus a booster were 44 times less likely to be hospitalized than unvaccinated peers.My brother, Chris Harding, who has died aged 70, had a long academic career in the department of law and criminology at Aberystwyth University, first as a lecturer in European law and from 1995 as professor of law. He published a large body of work on legal, criminological and historical subjects, including research on EU criminal law and policy such as the legal control and criminology of business cartels. Chris was the eldest of four children and grew up in Shepperton, Middlesex, with his parents, Irene (nee Hook), a seamstress, and Tony Harding, a toolmaker, and three sisters. He attended Hampton grammar school (now Hampton school) and in time met his future wife, Jenny (nee Horsnell), who attended the neighbouring girls’ grammar school. He then started his move westward – first to study for a BA in jurisprudence at University College, University of Oxford, where he discovered a passion for criminal jurisprudence and penal theory, and then to the University of Exeter, for more specialist postgraduate work in the newly emergent field of European law. This led to a full-time academic post at Aberystwyth University in mid-Wales, in what was, in the mid-1970s, quite an idiosyncratic law school. Looking back at that time, Chris described himself as “something of a new species of academic, with the opportunity to carry out some pioneering work in what proved to be a stimulating environment”. Chris and Jenny married in 1974. Chris had a passion for writing, often in collaboration with others, and his many books, edited works and research papers ranged from texts on EEC competition law and EU criminal law to historical texts on criminal justice. His specialist field in recent years was the normative, social scientific and cultural aspects of the interrelation between individuals and groups and organisations, both historically and in contemporary society, and at national, European and international levels. He once said: “As time went on, I found it harder to describe, categorise or label myself, in both professional and personal terms, but ending up as a researcher and writer seems about right.” In his spare time Chris enjoyed cycling, listening to music, reading and painting the odd watercolour. He loved travelling and so it was fortuitous that his research and writing interests took him to numerous European countries. He also loved mid-Wales, where he and Jenny raised their three daughters, Nicola, Laura and Anna. He felt it was one of the best places to live, and that his time there had enabled him to meet and work with talented and interesting people. Chris is survived by Jenny, their daughters, Nicola, Laura and Anna, and grandchildren, Siskin, Teal, Gaspard, Henrietta and Penelope, and by his sisters, Val, Diane and me.My mother, Victoria Frank, who has died aged 87, was part of the Windrush generation, settling in the West Midlands in the 1960s, and a community advocate committed to making a difference in society. She was determined to amplify the voices of others, whether that be assisting with rehabilitating ex-offenders, or influencing policy on resources for underrepresented groups. She was a key driver in the discussions that led to the creation of the West Bromwich African Caribbean Resource Centre in 1985. The fifth child of eight, born in the parish of Longwood, in Clarendon, Jamaica, to Esmie (nee Mitchell) and David Reid, a supervisor at Moneymusk West Indies Sugar Cane Company, Victoria went to Alley school, then worked as a dressmaker before journeying to England in 1960. She settled in West Bromwich, where she had friends, and found work in a factory. By 1962 she had saved enough to send for her fiancé, Herman Frank, who later worked as a supervisor for a steel fabrication factory. They married the same year. In 1974 Victoria moved to the Smith Corona typewriter factory, then from 1986 worked as assistant to the nurse administering medical support at the Konix factory until 1991, when she left to set up a guest house for prison leavers with Herman. She cooked meals for the ex-offenders and assisted them with their rehabilitation and finding employment. In 1996 she began working for Sandwell council as an assistant manager in health and social care, until retirement in 2001. As a founding member of the West Bromwich African Caribbean Resource Centre, Victoria served as treasurer, then vice chair for many years, and finally a short spell as chair before retirement. Her responsibilities included staff recruitment, funding negotiations and entertainment, and she initiated the creation of the Senior Citizens Luncheon Club, which is still operating. She was key to the centre winning a Pace (Public Award for Community Excellence) in 2004. Victoria was multi-talented, designing and sewing garments to create unique outfits, and making delicious rum cake and Caribbean food. She fought her entire life for more, and to be more. Hers was an inspirational life, leaving a true legacy in all she achieved for others. Herman died in 2010. Victoria is survived by their daughters, Eula, Rose, Bev and me, and three granddaughters, Louise, Samara and Merissa.A Dior haute couture show in the gardens of the Musée Rodin is as Parisian as fashion gets. But this season, designer Maria Grazia Chiuri’s heart was in India. “There is an idea that Indian embroidery is something cheap,” said Chiuri before the show. “We talk a lot about the incredible ateliers we have here in the Avenue Montaigne. “But Indian artisans make embroidery with just the same knowledge and expertise and depth of tradition as embroidery in France and Italy. This excellence is not just ours.” The clothes on the catwalk were kept deliberately simple. The high-buttoning double-breasted Bar jackets which Chiuri has placed at the centre of her Dior aesthetic were made in unbleached ecru wool. In matt black Moroccan silk crepe for day or fine silver lamé for evening, dresses were clean-lined and fluid as nightgowns. This directed the spotlight away from the clothes and towards the vast tapestries which decorated the show venue, which comprise a retrospective of the work of two Indian artists, Madhvi and Manu Parekh, rendered in embroidery by the Chanakya School of Craft in Mumbai. Karishma Swali, director of the school, described the installation, which will be open to the public until 30 January, as “both an art gallery and a celebration of the connection between artists and artisans”. Madhvi Parekh’s work draws on folk art, village craft and symbols of female energy, while that of her husband, Manu, leans toward modernism and abstraction. The show marks a first collaboration with a male artist for Chiuri, who has partnered with female artists across different media for many past Dior collections. Chiuri has worked with Swali and her workshops since 1995, when she was designing for Fendi. “To be a couture brand today comes with a responsibility to support the fashion community all over the world,” she said, adding that this responsibility has intensified with the damage done to many livelihoods by Covid. “We share a connection, because in Italy, where I come from, and in India, there is a generational problem with savoir-faire disappearing. Families push their kids towards studying, or to jobs like becoming a doctor, because in fashion we talk too much about the designer who makes the sketch and not enough about all the other important jobs.” While Mumbai artisans spent 200,000 hours creating the giant tapestries in organic plant-based threads, Chiuri was preoccupied with crystal-embroidered socks, and shoes in which the heels were entirely embroidered. “You think it’s just a sock, but embroidery is very tricky,” she said.Gambia make history, into the last eight on their first ever appearance at the finals. Musa Barrow’s goal was excellent, seizing on a fine pass from Bobb, and Guinea could never produce anything quite as good as that. It ended with two red cards, and it was often bruising stuff but Guinea go out, and Gambia progress. 90+4 min: Kante sent off in the last seconds for Guinea and their chance goes with him. Gambia have done it! 90+2 min: Wow wow wow. There’s chaos in the area, as shot after shot is blocked, and there’s a call for handball from the Guinea players. Gambia’s were celebrating. The replay is not shown, and there’s no penalty. An amazing save from Gaye after Kante’s shot was as good as a goal. The ball had bounced off the post just before that. 90 min: Off goes Bobb, who supplied the assist for the goal, and on comes Mbaye the veteran. Three minutes added on for Gambia to see out. 89 min: Should Guinea find a goal they would be favourites in extra time but have never looked like scoring. Guilavogui then makes a mess of a cross. 87 min: A second yellow for Njie, and looks a harsh one, there was a little of an elbow flying in an aerial challenge. They came in quick succession for the sub who leaves in tears, taking his time to take down his shinpads. 85 min: Kante’s shot is blocked and then Guilavogui, the second sub who just came on, gets involved. Then Kante tries an overhead kick, and fires over. The Gambian defence celebrate in rugby style. 83 min: Couple of Guinea changes, and Kaba comes on for Bayo as one of them. 82 min: Gambia could find holes in Guinea’s defence, as they are committing players forward. Conte is booked for smashing into N’Jie, who had gone down the other end on the counter. Cisse and then Colley have bites of the cherry on the free-kick. Moriba, at the other end, wastes a good chance to set up a Guinea attack by shooting from a long way out. 80 min: Bobb, short for Kate, takes the ball upfield for Gambia as they try to stop the Guinean onslaught. It’s only a temporary respite. Guinea are still on the attack. 78 min: Conte, for Guinea, has the ball in the net but there’s a flag up and a delay for VAR. The referee is back by the video room. 76 min: First Guinea change, on comes Sylla for A Camara, and takes a free-kick immediately, and that comes off the wall again. 75 min: Guinea try to hit back as quickly as possible, and Moriba has a chance to smash in a free-kick, but he can only thwack the ball against a massed wall. 73 min: The Gambia coach is not hanging around, brining on N’Jie and Ceesay for Darboe and Mo Barrow, that’s two attackers on. Spoke too soon, and Gambia take the lead, a fine finish by Barrow, taking a pass down with his left, taking it down and finishing coolly. 69 min: Kaba Diawara has his arms folded on the sidelines, his team unable to find a way through. Gambia’s attacking enterprise has gone for the moment but they are defending well.... 67 min: The chances are thin and far between, and it looks likely that one goal should be enough here. 65 min: Gambia have a free-kick. Musa Barrow decides to shoot from an impossible distance and angle with predictable results, if you predicted he would get nowhere near the goal. 62 min: Looks like Jallow’s race is run for Gambia, and on comes Ebrima Colley of Spezia. In the meantime, our new Fiver looks forward to tonight’s later game. 60 min: Gambia having to get through far much more defending now, as Mo Barrow gets back to help the effort. 58 min: Mo Barrow gets down the wing but is muscled out, and then Guinea go back to the other end, as keeps now happening. Gambian goalie Gaye claims the ball as he tries to calm his team down and then lumps it almost for touch at the other end. 56 min: The battle continues to be physical, the tackles and challenges heavy. All to play for, of course, and neither team is willing to offer any quarter. Every tackle is a cruncher. 54 min: Diawara almost finds space to shoot, and Colley comes across to make a fine tackle and block. 52 min: Jallow goes down under a Kante challenge and Gambia begin to worry about their main goalscorer. He’s OK to continue but the referee has to calm things down. 50 min: Kante heads over Camara’s corner, flicking it over and wide. Guinea’s greatest threat comes from the dead ball. 48 min: Guinea free-kick comes in and Conte almost directs it into the path of a teammate and then gets annoyed when nobody reads his intentions. 47 min: Gambia again set off at a rate, have the Guinean defence all of a flutter. Tense moments for Kaba Diawara. 46 min: The second half is underway in Bafoussam, and let’s hope for another bright start to the half. The teams are back out, and it appears no subs have been made. After a bright start from both teams, it has become very tight. Neither team is willing to commit too much forward, meaning the speedy forwards are at a loss. Tempers seem to be fraying a bit, which may be something to look out for in the second half. 45 min: Neat skill from Sow sets up a Guinea attack but he makes a mistake and Mo Barrow goes down the other end and misses the target. That was as close as we have come. 43 min: A delay in play, as the referee tells the captains of both teams, and the managers, that they should stop making VAR symbols at him. It’s descended into that level of action at the moment. 41 min: Mo Barrow tries on from distance, and suddenly there’s panic as Darboe is down, with Gambia players suggesting he was baulked as he released the ball. They have a case, it did look cynical. No booking waved at a Guinea player for that. 39 min: Bobb makes an error in midfield and then Bayo has a chance, before being smothered by Keita, who takes a whack for his troubles. 37 min: Guinea try a slow buildup, more their style as compared to the Gambians, who prefer to go on quick counters. At the moment, neither are effective. 35 min: Free-kick to Gambia and they will get int launched into the Guinea area? No, they instead choose to pass the ball around. It feels some time since a decent chance evidenced itself. 33 min: The ball hit into the Guinea area and Keita the goalie, smashes off Mo Barrow and falls to the floor. Play is immediately halted. 31 min: Mo Barrow briefly looks to have escaped the Guinea defence, only for the offside flag to pull the ball back. 30 min: Guinea’s coach, the Gunners legend Kaba Diawara, does not look too happy with his players. 28 min: Kante was at the back post as a free-kick was drifted in and from a combination of him mistiming his header and the ball being looped too high a chance goes begging for Guinea. 27 min: First yellow card: Gambia’s Bobb for a hack in midfield. He’s not complaining and takes his card with a nod. 26 min: It’s 50/50 on possession, and we are settling into a pattern. Neither team now seem too interested in committing too much forward. 24 min: Things ebbing away a little, and a binary scoreline and possibly penalties may already loom. 22 min: Bit more of a midfield battle now. Guinea’s Kante has a few kicks at Musa Barrow, as it gets more congested in there. No booking for now but on a warning. 20 min: It looks misty out there, and the action has slowed down a little after that breakneck-speed attack. The Gambians are doing more of the pushing, still. Tom Saintfiet, the Gambian boss, looks a little like Stephen Stills, and that he would be more than acquainted with the oeuvre of King Crimson. 18 min: There’s a collision in midfield, as Kourama slips and ends up on the wrong end of a Moriba tackle. 15 min: Line-up changes made in pre-match that confounded the international media, with Gambia’s Touray and Janko dropping out at full-back with injuries. From Jonathan Wilson, no less: “Ngum, the RB, is a midfielder; Jagne, the LB, is their veteran skipper, also not a FB.” This is when having two men at this game comes in handy. 13 min: Hurried defending from Guinea as Gambia again push on, Musa Barrow turns and shoots and forces a fine save from Keita the Guinea goalie. This has not been a defensive game in any sense. 11 min: Back down the other end, in this game of no midfield. Guinea have a free-kick, on the edge of the box. Aguibou Camara loops it over. 9 min: Another corner, it’s end to end, as Gomez knocks the ball behind with Guinea threatening. That’s cleared by Gambia, who break with speed and Mo Barrow goes down, a penalty would have been a tight call and the referee chooses not to make any decision at all. 7 min: Another skied shot, this time from Musa Barrow. 6 min: Modou Barrow and Musa Barrow attempt to link up, another corner resulting from their efforts and Musa Barrow fires in a corner that is only just cleared. 4 min: The corner is cleared, but is pumped back in, where Bayo, leaning back as he strikes the ball, fires over. It’s noisy out there in Bafoussam. 3 min: Konate, in for Sylla, another Guinea absentee as well as Keita, wins a corner. 1 min: And away we go, and Gambia go close almost from the get-go, with Bobb close to getting on the end of a cut-back. Our man takes a scenic picture. The suggestion is that Guinea will play 3-4-1-2 and the Gambians will play 4-3-3. Guinea: Keita, Sow, Ali Camara, Conté, Diawara, Cissé, A Camara, Kourouma Kourouma, Konate, Martinez, Bayo Subs: Conte, Dyrestam, M Camara, Kane, Kaba, Kone, Konate, Diallo, F Camara Siby, Sylla, Guilavogui Gambia: Gaye, Janko, Gomez, Colley, Touray, Darboe, Marreh, Bobb, M Barrow, Jallow, M Barrow Subs: Jobe, Ngum, Jallow, Ceesay, Jagne Sohna, Jallow-Mbye, Jobe, Colley,Badamosi, Darboe, Om Njie And Jonathan Wilson looked ahead to the last-16 ties for the Observer. Comoros and the Gambia, both traditional minnows and at their first Cup of Nations, have reached the last 16. Comoros have perhaps been a touch fortunate but the Gambia have played with an impressive level of calm organisation and deservedly beat Tunisia to go through. The excellent Nick Ames is out in Africa for the Guardian, as is Jonathan Wilson. Their hotel for the three days before they face Guinea, nestled among idyllic foothills in Cameroon’s north-west, is easy on the eye but not on the basics needed for match preparation. Players have been sleeping four or six to a room, which risks being a particular issue during the Covid-19 pandemic, and they were initially required to share lodgings at their group stage accommodation in Buea. Tales of slapdash team hotels at the Cup of Nations are a reliable trope but arrangements of this kind seem beyond the pale. It’s a day for the small nations to shine in the AfCon, and while Comoros v Cameroon has taken worldwide attention with the lack of a goalie for the islanders, Gambia, the mainlanders, also in their first finals tournament, take the stage first, to face Guinea. They beat Tunisia and drew with Mali to get here, and Guinea may fear a team who have looked a tight, cohesive unit in Cameroon where many more fancied teams have come apart at the seams. There’s no Naby Keita for Guinea, which lessens the midfield power that Guinea’s foundations are built on; they lost to Zimbabwe in their final group game. Bafoussam, in the western, mountainous region of host nation Cameroon awaits.Peter Seabrook, who has died aged 86, brought gardening to millions of people through his broadcasting and writing, standing up for traditional values while promoting new plant breeding and innovation. He often said he was the most-read garden journalist in Britain, claiming 10 million readers for his weekly pages of gardening advice, promotions, opinion and campaigns in the Sun; and during his stint on the BBC’s Gardeners’ World in the 1970s the show regularly attracted 8 million viewers a week. Seabrook represented back-to-basics gardening and, while relentlessly seeking out scientific breakthroughs in plant breeding and production, he was critical of the modish and the ill-informed. He would ask “Who likes garden design?” and would regularly criticise the advice given by some of his successors on gardening TV, who perhaps had not done the hard yards he had covered during his early days in horticulture. Seabrook was born in Chelmsford, Essex, the son of Emma (nee Cottey) and Robert Seabrook. His father worked in a ball-bearing factory as a tool grinder but Peter was brought up on his grandparents’ farm in nearby Galleywood. Educated at King Edward VI grammar school in the city, he studied horticulture at Writtle College, and began his career in the 50s, with his values instilled from a background in farming and national service. He worked initially for the seed merchants and nurserymen Cramphorn from 1958 until 1966, then for the Irish peat board Bord na Mona from 1966 until 1970. It was during the 60s that plants were first sold in containers, rather than bare root, and Seabrook was in on the innovation, which helped develop garden centres as we know them today, as retailers could sell plants in pots year-round rather than just in season. His expertise led him to start writing for trade magazines – he got his first writing job at a nurseryman journal by pointing out factual errors to the editor – and then broke into radio with the BBC’s In Your Garden (1965-70). This led to TV appearances, including the afternoon show Garden Diary on Anglia TV, which was cancelled in 1974 because of cuts caused by the three-day week. He shifted to the popular lunchtime programme Pebble Mill at One from 1975 until 1986. After the BBC sacked its household-name presenter Percy Thrower for promoting ICI, from 1976 until 1979 Seabrook presented the flagship gardening show Gardeners’ World. The new presenter earned £75 a programme, researching, presenting, responding to letters with sage advice and occasionally producing. The thousands of letters he answered in longhand formed the basis of his humorous after-dinner speaking. One cheeky correspondent said Seabrook’s gardening skills passed muster, so he would be suitable to tend their garden while they were on holiday. They then listed dates, location and the work they needed doing. Seabrook was succeeded on the show by the organic gardener Geoff Hamilton, with whom he had several skirmishes during his career, as their views on gardening were diametrically opposed. They even consulted lawyers at one point. Seabrook, despite being loyal, gentlemanly, charming and personable, was never one to back down on his strongly held views on controversial subjects such as the value of using peat to grow plants in. Recently, he had campaigned for the government to reconsider its plan to ban peat, which is widely considered to be environmentally damaging. To the last, he fought against what he saw as woolly thinking and poor horticultural standards, in everyone from the BBC to the RHS. Nevertheless, Seabrook was seen worldwide (in the US he hosted PBS series The Victory Garden from 1975 to 1997) as the archetypal English old-school gardener, and was much loved for it. He was ever-present at the RHS Chelsea flower show from 1952 and, after starting work at the tabloid in 1977, presented the Sun gardens there, grown by schoolchildren and bursting with new plant varieties. His wife, Margaret, whom he married in 1960 after meeting her at horticulture college, died in 2020 of Covid-19 after living with Alzheimer’s for almost a decade. Characteristically, Seabrook launched a plant, Verbena “Margaret’s Memory”, to raise money for the Alzheimer’s Society. The pale pink perennial was planted at RHS Garden Hyde Hall, near his home in Chelmsford, where he created the Floral Fantasia bedding plant displays. Margaret’s death led him to write a heartfelt plea to the government asking for the reopening of garden centres during lockdown for the good of the nation’s mental health. He was appointed MBE in 2005 and was the only person to hold the RHS’s top three awards, the Victoria medal of honour (awarded in 2003), Associate of Honour and Harlow Carr medal. In an article marking his 85th birthday in 2020, in the magazine Horticulture Week, for which he was an opinion writer, he said that he still had “so much to do, so much to learn”. He is survived by a son, Roger, and daughter, Alison, and two grandchildren. • Peter John Seabrook, gardener, born 2 November 1935; died 14 January 2022In the summer of 2020 a group of five cyclists from Ramallah were out on a ride when they were stopped by a group of Israeli settlers. According to Reuters, on discovering the cyclists were Palestinian, the settlers began hurling stones at them. Four escaped into a nearby field. One, Samer Kurdi, lost his footing and was repeatedly beaten with a metal rod, suffering serious injuries. It is not known if any arrests were made. For Chris Froome and his colleagues on the Israel Start-Up Nation pro cycling team, the roads of the occupied West Bank were a far safer place last November, as they rolled through the Judaean Hills on an open training ride. English-language media were flown out to Israel and given full access to the team during their first camp in Israel since 2019. The team and their followers were treated to luxury hospitality, taken on beach visits and kayaking excursions. But then Israel Start-Up Nation – the fledgling team relaunched last week as Israel-Premier Tech – has always known the value of good PR. Peter Sagan was one of its early ambassadors, and the recruitment of other top riders like Froome, Sep Vanmarcke and Dan Martin have helped to grow its sporting reputation. But the team’s most enthusiastic publicist is billionaire co-owner Sylvan Adams, a self-styled “ambassador-at-large for the State of Israel” who sees in sport a means of enhancing the country’s standing amid widespread criticism over its human rights record, treatment of Palestinians and continued defiance of international law. It was Adams who drove Israel’s audacious £9m bid to host the start of the Giro d’Italia in 2018, the first part of an unprecedented investment in international sport. The same year he built the region’s first Olympic-standard velodrome, which will host the junior track worlds in August. Argentina and Uruguay visited Tel Aviv for an international friendly in 2019, as did Paris Saint-Germain and Lille last August for France’s equivalent of the Community Shield. There is even some serious talk within Fifa of a joint 2030 World Cup bid with the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain. Adams insists that Israel Premier-Tech is apolitical and not a government project, although it receives funding – a “pitifully small amount”, he says – from the national tourism board. And while the likes of Bahrain, the UAE and Kazakhstan all sponsor World Tour teams, none has been this open or vocal about its soft power objectives. “We’re perceived as a warzone here in Israel, that we’re in a state of conflict,” Adams has said. “We want the team to help tell the story you don’t often hear about.” Ron Baron, the team’s other co-owner, describes it as a form of “sport diplomacy”. According to Guy Niv, one of the team’s few Israeli cyclists and a former army sniper, every rider understands that “being on an Israeli team, they are ambassadors for the country”. When we refer to sportswashing, the attempt by nation-states to sanitise their reputations and launder their crimes, there is a certain kind of country we’re usually thinking of. We have no problem linking the manifold abuses of Qatar or Saudi Arabia or China to their investment in sport. And yet there appears to be a certain squeamishness about referring to Israel in similar terms, even though its aims are even more explicitly stated, its crimes well documented by human rights groups. The primary objective of Israeli sporting diplomacy is that when you hear the country’s name, you won’t think of any of this. You won’t think about military checkpoints or the bombing of Gaza or the Palestinian occupation, or really Palestinians at all. Instead you’ll think about golden beaches, rooftop cocktails, Lionel Messi and Chris Froome bathed in a glorious sunset. “Most people don’t care about politics,” Adams has said. “Through world-class cultural and sporting events, we can reach the silent majority.” But push at the door a little, and all the classic sportswashing tropes are present: denial, whataboutery, the curious blend of incredulity and aggression. “This is a peaceful country, go and hassle people who work in totalitarian regimes,” Adams told Cycling Weekly in 2020 in response to questions on Israel’s human rights abuses. Meanwhile, Twitter users were quick to spot that around the time Froome’s move to Israel Start-Up Nation was announced, his Twitter picture – a photograph from the Giro in which a number of Palestinian flags are visible in the crowd – was quietly deleted. In many ways cycling is the ideal sportswashing partner: a sport with no real tradition of political activism, where cash-strapped teams are generally none too precious about where the money is coming from. But there is another dimension to this: for many cycling is synonymous with freedom, the open road, the intimate connection between humans and the land. For Palestinian cyclists, running a daily gauntlet of checkpoints, roadblocks, violence and economic hardship, the bike is its own quiet form of resistance. “It is our duty to keep our relationship with this land,” a Palestinian cyclist called Sohaib Samara told the Guardian in 2020. “If we stop moving around, the occupiers will steal more of it.” And so for Israel sport serves a dual function: both positive reinforcement and tool of repression. In March 2018, a promising Palestinian cyclist called Alaa al-Dali attended a march in Gaza with his bike, wearing cycling kit, to protest against Israel’s refusal to allow him to travel abroad for international competition. According to a United Nations report, he was shot by an Israeli sniper in the leg, which then had to be amputated after his request to leave Gaza for treatment was denied by Israeli authorities. He now competes as a para-cyclist.Watford have sacked Claudio Ranieri less than four months after giving the Italian the task of keeping them in the Premier League. Ranieri was appointed after the sacking of Xisco Muñoz in October but he has been unable to make a positive impact and has picked up only seven points during his 13 league games in charge. Patience has been wearing thin for a while and Watford, who have slipped to 19th after losing 3-0 at home to Norwich last Friday, are looking for their third manager of the season with Roy Hodgson the favourite for the position. The Watford owner, Gino Pozzo, has never been slow to make a change in the dugout when results are bad and Ranieri has paid the price for being unable to inspire his squad. The 70-year-old has won only two games since replacing Muñoz, who was deemed too inexperienced for the Premier League, and has recently looked short of ideas. Watford said in a statement confirming Ranieri’s departure that he was “a man of great integrity and honour, who will always be respected here at Vicarage Road for his efforts in leading the team with dignity”. Explaining the move, the club continued: “With nearly half of the Premier League campaign remaining, a change in the head coach position now will give a new appointment sufficient time to work with a talented squad to achieve the immediate goal of retaining Premier League status.” Questions will inevitably be raised about the decision to fire Muñoz. The Spaniard won promotion last season and Watford were 15th when they sacked him. There has been no improvement under Ranieri, whose greatest achievement was helping Leicester win the title in 2016. The former Chelsea manager was a surprising appointment given that he fared disastrously when Fulham were relegated from the Premier League in 2019. Watford had seemed to be on the right track when Ranieri inspired them to an emphatic 4-1 win over Manchester United on 27 November. But they have picked up only one point since – a 1-1 draw with fellow strugglers Newcastle two weekends back – and the performance against Norwich was the final straw. It was Watford’s 11th defeat in 14 games under Ranieri. Attention will turn to who is given the task of trying to save Watford from relegation. They do not play again until their rearranged fixture away to Burnley on 5 February. Watford have previously been linked with Diego Martínez, the 41-year-old Spaniard who left his post at Granada last May. The Hertfordshire club have not won in nine games in all competitions, their longest run without a victory since December 2013.Children’s television makers have said that distinctly British programmes for young viewers could vanish from screens and be replaced with imported shows, after ministers quietly closed a £44m fund designed to support the sector. The Young Audiences Content Fund had been intended to help British broadcasters compete with the globalised children’s output available on YouTube and cartoons on US streaming services such as Netflix. Anna Home, chair of the Children’s Media Foundation campaign group, called on the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, to reverse the decision: “Now we face a definite decrease in the number and range of programmes being made for young people in the UK … and in fact it’s worse as the BBC is facing government-imposed budget cuts of its own over the next few years too.” The pilot scheme had operated for the last three years with a remit to help revive British children’s programming on channels such as ITV and Channel 5. The UK’s commercial broadcasters have massively cut spending on original children’s content after the 2006 ban on advertising junk food to children, essentially handing control of the British children’s TV sector to the BBC. The decision to close the fund comes shortly after Dorries announced plans to freeze the BBC licence fee, forcing the broadcaster to review its own spending plans. Home argued that children should be able to watch distinctly British programmes that reflect their own lives and culture, rather than international content that could have been produced anywhere in the world: “A generation of young people denied their own stories will grow up to be a generation with little loyalty for the institutions and values of the society in which they live.” The fund – along with a much smaller pot for radio programming – helped cover up to 50% of the costs of making a children’s series, with money coming from an unspent levy allocated in the 2010 BBC licence fee settlement. Continuing the fund would have required the government to find another source of funding. The Children’s Media Foundation has suggested the government could reinstate £16m of cash it took away from the fund during the Covid pandemic – or charge US streaming companies such as Netflix and Disney+ a levy to fund British content. The former Blue Peter presenter Konnie Huq previously spoke out in support of the fund and said society should care more about the media that children were watching. She said: “We make sure kids are eating their broccoli and pay for all this good stuff to be put into their bodies and make them really healthy. But then it’s easy to shove them in front of a tablet as free babysitting.” A government spokesperson said the scheme would end in March and would then be evaluated: “We are undertaking a wider review of public service broadcasting to ensure it remains relevant and can continue to meet the needs of UK audiences.”The fate of more than 700 boys and teenage detainees has become central to the siege of a Kurdish-run prison in Syria that was overrun on Friday by jihadists, who are accused of using the boys as human shields. As the siege around the Ghwayran prison in the Kurdish-run northern city of Hasakah entered a fifth day, Islamic State prisoners inside moved into a dormitory housing the boys, some of whom are as young as 12, in an attempt to prevent an assault by Kurdish forces stationed outside. Leaders from the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) said there had been multiple deaths and injuries among the child prisoners. Save the Children, which has provided support to the prisoners over the past three years, urged renewed efforts to repatriate the boys, many of whom are from outside Syria and were caught up in the rise and fall of the so-called caliphate as the children of IS members. The siege and allegations of the use of human shields have cast renewed light on the practice of holding child detainees and of the refusal of foreign governments to repatriate their citizens nearly three years after IS lost all its remaining territory in Syria’s far eastern deserts. “What we are hearing from Ghwayran prison is deeply distressing,” said Save the Children’s Syria response director, Sonia Khush. “Reports that children have been killed or injured are tragic and outrageous. “Responsibility for anything that happens to these children also lies at the door of foreign governments who have thought that they can simply abandon their child nationals in Syria. Risk of death or injury is directly linked to these governments’ refusal to take them home. “All foreign children must be repatriated – with their families – without any further delay. The international community cannot have the blood of any of these children on their hands.” Farhad Shami, the head of SDF media, said: “They are mostly not Syrian and we captured them during the time of the fall of Baghouz [the last holdout of IS territory in early 2019]. “We initially made camps for them near Raqqa and Deir Azzour, then they were moved to this prison.” Many of the boys are alleged to have been drafted into the ranks of the so-called “Cubs of the Caliphate”, a child army used by IS leaders as cannon fodder, or as saboteurs that could more easily infiltrate civilian areas. “These young people were trained by Isis [IS] for suicide attacks and other military operations,” said Shami. “Now Isis has taking control of that part of the prison and we cannot fight or bomb them.” Kurdish leaders released footage of scores of detainees surrendering outside the walls of the Ghwayran prison in the city’s south – one of the main detention centres for the remnants of IS in north-east Syria. The SDF said about 300 prisoners had given themselves up and claimed to have the prison fully surrounded by up to 10,000 troops. Earlier fears that the attack on the prison in the early hours of Friday had freed hundreds of extremists appear to have been doused, with US officials and Kurdish leaders confident that only 20-30 IS members remain at large, most thought to be hiding in nearby neighbourhoods, which remained in full lockdown on Monday. One escaper was caught wearing an abaya (a woman’s robe) on Monday. “There is still gunfire, we can hear it during day and night, and we can hear airstrikes sometimes,” said Hozan Ali, 37, a Hasakah resident. “Helicopters are flying over the area 24 hours a day. No one can enter the city or leave. Those Isis who are still here wear women’s clothes with niqab [full face coverings]. This is going on longer than we thought.” In a statement, the Global Coalition Against Isis – the international coalition of countries aiming to destroy IS – said the IS assault on the prison was “a desperate attempt to replenish its depleted ranks and to regain lost momentum”. It added: “The Coalition commends its Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) partners for their courageous response to the attack, and offers its condolences to the families of those killed. This and other recent attacks in Syria and Iraq remind us that Daesh [IS] is still a threat in the region. The Global Coalition remains committed to the enduring defeat of [IS]”. Save the Children said it was in possession of audio recordings of one boy pleading for help. It had been providing the children with recreational spaces, relief supplies and fresh foods along with psychological support. Rehabilitation of children caught up in the horrors of IS has been a significant challenge for NGOs and Kurdish officials, who say they do not have the capacity for such mental health support. “The boys must be able to receive the medical support they need for any injuries sustained in the attack, as well as access to mental health support to process and begin to recover from their experiences,” said Khush. “It is vital that all these children are supported to recover and re-integrate back into their communities safely, so that they can rebuild their lives.” Kurdish leaders in north-east Syria have also warned repeatedly that IS was regrouping in the shadows of the region’s still battered towns and cities, preparing for an operation like the one launched on Friday, when about 100 men are thought to have attacked the prison after first igniting a car bomb at its gates. Since then, at least 85 IS members are believed to have been killed in clashes, along with close to 45 SDF members and seven civilians. The UN says an estimated 45,000 civilians have been temporarily displaced. Additional reporting by Nechirvan MandoThe deepening tensions between Russia, Europe’s biggest gas supplier, and Ukraine have reignited fears that the Kremlin may weaponise its gas reserves by restricting exports to Europe in the face of potential sanctions. Russia is western Europe’s largest single supplier of gas, a commodity that is in tight supply globally and has reached record market price highs in recent weeks, threatening to tip the UK into a national energy crisis. Meanwhile, Europe may need to use even more gas to keep the lights on this winter after the French nuclear firm EDF warned that technical trouble at a string of its reactors would cut its electricity generation, meaning gas plants across Europe may need to run more than expected. Gas plants were already in high demand over the past year after slow wind speeds reduced Europe’s renewable energy output in 2021. This played a role in draining Europe’s gas storage facilities to record lows after a long, cold winter last year. Ministers have reportedly been warned that the UK could face further record-breaking prices for gas and at the petrol pumps. So, could Europe’s energy crisis become a catastrophe? How vulnerable are the UK’s gas supplies? The good news is that the UK imports barely any gas from Russia. It meets about half of its gas requirements from the North Sea, while another third is sourced from Norway. The rest is imported by pipelines connecting the UK to Europe, or in the form of liquefied natural gas (LNG), which is transported by tankers typically from Qatar or the US. The bad news? The UK’s gas sources could all becoming eye-wateringly expensive if markets in Europe soar. The UK’s market is closely connected to markets in Europe, so a price rise in Germany or the Netherlands would lead to higher prices in Britain. There is no end in sight to Europe’s gas market woes. The US investment bank Goldman Sachs said on Monday: “The high energy prices seen in recent months are not necessarily a one-off.” Gas prices are likely to stay twice as high as normal until 2025, it said, and if Europe faces colder than average temperatures in March and February, blackouts could be likely. How vulnerable are Europe’s gas supplies? Very. Russia typically supplies about a third of Europe’s gas via a complex network of pipelines that run through Ukraine, Belarus and Poland to Germany. From Germany, pipelines carry gas to the rest of western Europe and through to the UK. A major gas supply disruption to Ukraine, last seen in 2008, could cause severe market volatility and a shutdown of factories to help conserve gas. Market experts at S&amp;P Global warned that “any conflict impacting gas supplies into Europe could have knock-on impacts on power, carbon and coal prices”. At the same time, Europe may become more dependent on gas to run its gas power plants after EDF warned that it would reduce the electricity it generates from nuclear power by 10% this year because of technical problems at a handful of its reactors. In the UK, lower imports of electricity from France – supplied via two interconnector cables beneath the Channel – could mean more gas power generation, according to Tom Edwards, a senior analyst at Cornwall Insight. This could lead to a rise in prices across the gas and electricity markets. In the meantime, the French government has asked EDF to take an €8.4bn (£7bn) financial hit to protect households from rocketing energy costs by limiting bill increases to 4% this year. Barbara Pompili, France’s environment minister, said the government planned to help EDF withstand the blow but it has raised questions over how EDF plans to finance new nuclear projects, including the Hinkley Point C and Sizewell C projects in the UK. Does the UK government have a contingency plan? It appears not. If the government is concerned about the impact on UK energy supplies, it hasn’t admitted it. A government spokesperson did not respond directly to the Guardian’s questions over whether there was a contingency plan in place to secure the UK’s energy supplies, or protect against further record market prices as tensions along the Russia-Ukraine border intensify. The spokesperson said that unlike other countries in Europe, “the UK is in no way dependent on Russian gas supply” and relied on less than 3% of Russian gas in 2020. “Thanks to our diverse mix of nuclear, natural gas and renewable technologies, the UK has one of the most reliable energy systems in the world,” the spokesperson added. The UK government is under pressure to take action to safeguard households from a cost of living crisis that is expected to deepen in the coming weeks as the energy regulator prepares to raise its cap on bills to close to an average of £2,000 a year on 7 February. The government was reportedly in talks late last year with Qatar over a deal that could result in the gas-rich nation supplying extra cargoes of gas in the event of an energy emergency, according to the Financial Times. But the government denied requesting that Qatar act as a “supplier of last resort”. How high could gas prices climb? The weekend tensions caused the price of short-term gas to climb to 205.1p per therm in the UK on Monday morning, up from 188.75p/th on Friday. The price is more than threefold higher than this time last year, and six times higher than typical pre-pandemic levels, according to Tom Marzec-Manser, a senior gas expert at ICIS. The UK’s gas market price climbed to more than 450p/th in the run-up to Christmas as Russian gas supplies slumped in line with temperatures that drove demand for gas heating higher. “I don’t think it’s unreasonable to believe that gas markets could return to the highs we saw late last year if things were to escalate to the point that gas supplies were affected,” Marzec-Manser said. For now, there are a few lucky breaks that have helped to keep soaring gas markets in check, he added. Gas demand in Asia is lower, which has allowed Europe to receive a record number of LNG deliveries from the US this month, and it is on track to reach an all-time monthly LNG import high. However, a major gas supply disruption could be enough to cause gas prices to soar back to record levels.Leeds United and West Yorkshire police are reviewing crowd safety protocols at Elland Road after hundreds of Newcastle United fans complained about a crush outside the away end on Saturday. Traffic congestion around Elland Road meant that many supporters arrived later than planned for the Premier League game which was won 1-0 by Newcastle. With 3,000 away fans having made the trip and matters further slowed by Covid passport checks, significant overcrowding occurred around five turnstiles. Officials eventually opened wider access gates and a Leeds spokesman confirmed a review of safety procedures was under way. “The club acknowledges the complaints raised by some Newcastle United supporters regarding issues experienced entering Elland Road on Saturday,” he said. “Leeds United will now work with the Newcastle Supporters Trust (NUST), West Yorkshire Police and our own safety team to review the issues raised and ensure we continue to provide a safe environment for everyone attending our stadium.” The NUST chair, Greg Tomlinson, was heartened by Leeds’s response. “The Trust has raised significant concerns to Leeds United in relations to the issues that could have resulted in serious injury or worse and were not the fault of any Newcastle United fans,” he said. “I welcome the quick response from Leeds United and their commitment to undertaking a review. No football supporter should go to a match and be in fear of their own safety. There were issues when we played at Elland Road in November 2016 and it was even worse at the weekend. It is imperative lessons are learnt to prevent this from happening again.” Alex Hurst, an NUST board member, told the True Faith Podcast: “I went to Leeds in 2016 and it was a disgrace – the access, that crush you don’t feel anywhere else at football grounds. On Saturday nothing had improved. I’m at a loss as to how Leeds think this is an acceptable way to treat people and keep them safe. “Essentially there were only two entrances and five turnstiles for nearly 3,000 people. I got there half an hour before kick-off because I knew it was difficult getting in but I still missed kick-off. In the end, they just opened the wider access points – it was a very unsafe situation.”Russia’s aggressive buildup near Ukraine energised Nato into sending more forces to eastern Europe on Monday and led to a plunge on Russian markets, raising the stakes on the Kremlin’s bet that it could cajole, extort or force Ukraine into submission. For Moscow it has become more difficult to pull back from its aggressive stance after US and Nato announcements that more troops would be deployed to the military alliance’s eastern flank. A unilateral drawdown now would leave the Kremlin a clear loser in the standoff, having provoked a strengthening of the very Nato presence that it had sought to banish from eastern Europe. Moscow has blamed the west for rising tensions and the chaos on Russian financial markets. “We are observing statements published by the North Atlantic Alliance about an enlargement of the contingent and the deployment of forces and hardware to the eastern flank. All that leads to the further escalation of tensions,” claimed Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin spokesperson, on Monday. “Please note that all of that is not happening because of what we, Russia, do. This is happening because of the actions of Nato and the United States and the information they release.” Moscow’s dubious diplomacy and unprecedented buildup along the Ukrainian border, including in neighbouring Belarus, had already convinced many security analysts that the Kremlin is seeking a war. There was never much chance that the foreign ministry would secure its maximalist “security guarantees”, including the retreat of Nato from all countries that joined the alliance after 1997. Vladimir Putin does still have the option to turn back. An about-face would be embarrassing and make the west less likely to listen to his warnings in the future. But he would face little domestic blowback from ordering a drawdown and could claim he had taken the first step to avoid a devastating conflict. Yet that has become less likely as Moscow begins to face serious economic and political consequences from its great gambit. Western governments have shown they take the threat of war seriously, warning of tough sanctions and even beginning to order the evacuation of families of diplomats in Ukraine because of the threat of “significant military action against Ukraine”. Russian financial markets took a beating as they woke up this week to the devastating potential for a conflict with Ukraine. Russian blue-chip stocks such as Sberbank and Gazprom lost more than 10% in trading on Monday and the Russian Central Bank was forced to temporarily halt purchases of foreign currency as the rouble has fallen nearly 6% against the dollar since the beginning of January. And Moscow’s public demands that Nato clear out of eastern and central Europe have backfired as the threat of war has increased the demands for deployments closer to Russia’s borders. “We are reaching the point where continuous Russian and Belarusian military buildup in Europe needs to be addressed by appropriate Nato countermeasures,” said Edgars Rinkēvičs, the Latvian foreign minister, on Monday. “It is time to increase allied forces presence in the alliance’s eastern flank both as measures of defence and deterrence.” Nato said some member countries would put troops on standby and deploy ships and fighter jets to the region as a military conflict in Ukraine appears increasingly likely. And the Biden administration is considering deploying thousands of troops to eastern European countries in a “major pivot” from its previous “do-not-provoke [Russia] strategy”, the New York Times reported. While the deployments are unlikely to deter a Russian attack in Ukraine, they are a signal that Nato countries are ready to strengthen their presence in the region. The Biden administration is said to be considering a tenfold increase in forces to eastern Europe if Putin does launch an attack. “Nato itself will continue to be reinforced in a significant way if Russia commits renewed acts of aggression. All of that is on the table,” the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said on the Sunday morning US TV programme Face the Nation. Russian officials who have overseen the buildup are now accusing the west of provoking a crisis. “The threat of Russia’s assault on Ukraine, which exists solely in the fevered minds of the west, is being taken advantage of to rationalise the alliance’s relevance and willingness to give ‘protection’ to its allies,” said the Russian deputy foreign minister, Alexander Grushko. But as the standoff continues, the costs for Moscow are rising, possibly convincing the Kremlin that the time to act is now.Amid Boris Johnson’s recent travails, one Tory MP recounted how he, like many colleagues, was phoned by an ally of the prime minister seeking to shore up his support. Asked what changes No 10 should consider, the answer was immediate: scrap the planned national insurance rise and cut VAT on energy bills. “Boris’s people have been ringing up a lot of us to hear what we think, and as I understand it, every single MP is basically telling them to get a grip with taxes and the cost of living,” the MP said. The VAT cut is among a series of measures on a long list of options being considered by the Treasury, although no decision is expected imminently, as everyone in government awaits Sue Gray’s report on Downing Street parties. But amid the public chaos, another behind-the-scenes battle is being fought on the scheduled 1.25 percentage point increase in national insurance contributions, unveiled in September as a way to provide £12bn a year extra to reduce NHS waiting lists and, in the longer term, pay sustainably for social care. While the move broke a Conservative manifesto pledge to not raise taxes, the rise was sold as necessary given the unprecedented pressures of Covid, and only five Tory MPs rebelled in a Commons vote. But with inflation above 5%, and Tory MPs aware they have greater leverage with a prime minister battling for his political future, there is increasing speculation that a U-turn could happen. Both Downing Street and the Treasury still reject the idea that they are considering such a change, with the latter in particular dismissing the mooted idea that Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, is now not keen on the plan. “[Sunak, Sajid Javid, the health secretary] and the PM all stood up at a press conference and announced it together. It’s ludicrous that he’d disown it,” one source said. “Some MPs are saying they want to delay it, but you can’t really say that without also saying when it should be delayed to, and where the money will come from for the NHS backlog and social care.” No 10 sources are similarly adamant that nothing is being planned, while Johnson’s spokesman insisted on Monday that the PM is still fully behind what he termed the “right approach to tackle this long-standing problem”. It was, however, notable that in a pooled TV clip during a visit to a hospital on Monday, Johnson seemed more keen to defend the basis for the plan than to confirm it will come into effect in April, as planned. “What I’m telling people is that if you want to fund our fantastic NHS, we have to pay for it. And this government is determined to do so,” Johnson said, giving several variations of this sentiment – while declining eight invitations by the reporter to say the plan and timetable remained the same. A series of government sources acknowledge that while No 10 remains publicly committed to the NI plan, Johnson is coming under intense pressure from his MPs, and also that when ministers and whips try to get backbenchers onside, all sorts of promises might be made. Several cabinet ministers, including Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, have publicly expressed doubt about the national insurance plan, while others, such as the education secretary Nadhim Zahawi, are seen as sympathetic to a delay should it happen. All this is hardly like to put off a growing contingent of Tory backbenchers who hope for a change of heart on cost of living issues. Earlier this month, Johnson told the Commons he did not support a cut in VAT on fuel bills, and now it is being considered. It might be foolish to bet against national insurance going the same way.Concerns are growing inside the Premier League over the behaviour of fans at top-flight grounds, after three players were assaulted during last weekend’s matches. With data showing a rise in disorder across English football this season, clubs will discuss possible responses to an unwelcome trend at a league meeting this week. On Monday Merseyside police confirmed a 19-year-old man had been charged with assault and throwing an item on to the pitch after Aston Villa’s Matty Cash and Lucas Digne were hit by a plastic bottle at Goodison Park on Saturday. The Metropolitan police said two men had been arrested after an incident during Chelsea’s victory over Tottenham Hotspur at Stamford Bridge on Sunday, when the defender Antonio Rüdiger was hit by missiles including a lighter thrown from the away end. Provisional data collected by police and first revealed by the BBC showed there have been 800 arrests at English football matches this season, a 47% rise on the comparative period in 2019-20. There were 759 reports of disorder, which would include the throwing of missiles, up from 560. The Home Office says that the “interim” data “has not been subject to the same quality assurance checks as end-of-season official statistics”. Official Home Office figures, however, show a stark rise in the number of arrests for missile offences in the past few years, with 52 arrests in the 2014-15 season more than doubling by the end of the decade, and 72 arrests made in the truncated Covid season of 2019-20. The Premier League is to meet the United Kingdom Football Policing Unit this week. They will discuss possible co-ordinated responses with the EFL and Football Association, although clubs customarily develop their own safety policies in conjunction with local police. On Monday Chelsea confirmed they were working with police and Tottenham officials to identify any fans involved in the assault of Rüdiger and a spokesperson said “we will collectively take the strongest possible action against them”. The FA said it would investigate two further incidents of disruptive behaviour in the top flight after a small number of Manchester City fans invaded the pitch at Southampton after the final whistle, clashing with stewards, and a drone flew over the Brentford v Wolves match, causing a delay. “We are investigating the fan disorder incidents at the Everton v Aston Villa, Southampton v Manchester City and Chelsea v Tottenham Hotspur matches,” an FA spokesperson said. “We are also looking into the events involving the drone at the Brentford v Wolverhampton Wanderers match, [and in all matters] we are liaising with the clubs and police.” Although the FA has no authority to take action against individual fans, it can discipline clubs if they are found not to have done enough to prevent misconduct.British producers have raised fears of beer and burger shortages and higher prices for shoppers after the government said it would stop propping up the CO2 industry. A three-month deal to support the UK’s main producer of the gas, brought in as an emergency measure after a crisis in the autumn, ends next week and it is understood it will not be renewed. The government provided a temporary bailout to CF Fertilisers, which accounts for 60% of the UK’s CO2 supplies, to counter the threat of chaos in supply chains, after its US owner shut its factories amid the soaring cost of natural gas. Any holdup in supplies would affect soft drinks and bakery producers as well as meat processors and brewers, who all use CO2 in making and packaging their goods. It is understood that the government, which pumped in money for three weeks in September before facilitating the current industry deal, has said it will not put up further cash. The deal was supposed to create time for alternative sources of food grade CO2 to be developed, but industry insiders said there had been little progress. A spokesperson for the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS), said: “It is for the CO2 industry to ensure supplies to UK businesses.” The current deal supported a UK fertiliser plant, based in Billingham in Stockton-on-Tees, which is one of the main producers of food-grade CO2, until 31 January. Further production is reliant on a successful deal between CF Industries, the US owner of the plant, and the UK distributors of the gas, Nippon Gases and Air Liquide. CF, whose Billingham plant can produce 750 tonnes of CO2 per day, told the Guardian on Monday that it was continuing to negotiate with its industrial gas customers. At a meeting with leading food and drink industry figures on Friday, the government said there was a “reasonable chance” of the talks being successful. Its fall-back plan involves relying on imports and a smaller plant operated by Nippon. In that case, CO2 supplies will be prioritised for the NHS, the nuclear industry and pork and poultry slaughter, which account for about a quarter of food-grade CO2 use. Stephen Livens of the British Beer and Pub Association told the meeting that the prospect of a further interruption in supplies was “pretty terrifying” and the UK brewing industry would be in “serious trouble” if it was largely reliant on imports of CO2. The gas is used to can and bottle beer, clean equipment and in systems that shift beer around a brewery, making it a vital ingredient for the industry. He warned there would be an impact on consumers, particularly as demand for beer increases over the summer and brewers were already absorbing a 10% to 15% rise in the operational costs of beer-making. with little sign of that reversing. “A strategic solution has to work for everybody, not just the priority list,” Livens said. James Calder of the Society of Independent Brewers told the meeting: “For us the situation is perilous,” adding that the price of CO2 had already risen by up to 400% for some businesses. Tony Goodger of the Association of Independent Meat Suppliers said increased CO2 costs would only add to inflation for shoppers of both food and drink. He said his members were stocking up on CO2 in case of any issues from next week. He told Defra: “In a World Cup year, demand for alcohol and meat products [will be higher]. We do need a solution in place by Qatar 22 [in November].” A spokesperson for the Food and Drink Federation trade body said: “We are concerned that with just days now remaining before that agreement comes to an end, and energy prices still very high, there will be further CO2 shortages once again. “This could lead to shortages in the products we find on our supermarket shelves – adding further pressures to families already coping with high food-price inflation. “We will continue to work with the government on this. It is critical that together we ensure supply can continue and that we build long-term resilience into the production of food-grade CO2.”