Booming electric car sales were a bright spot in a tough car market last year amid disruption to global supply chains hitting manufacturers, according to fresh data. In its annual sales snapshot for 2021, the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT) said carmakers sold 190,000 battery electric cars across the country last year, accounting for about 11.6% of total sales. Reflecting growing appetite for greener vehicles, sales rose from 108,000 in 2020, when battery-powered cars accounted for just 6.6% of new cars bought in Britain. In December 2021 alone, electric cars made up 26% of sales, a record for a single month when physical dealerships were allowed to open during the Covid pandemic. Against a backdrop of global supply chain disruption and shortages of crucial semiconductor chips, overall UK car industry sales for the year were up just 1% from 2020 levels to 1.65m, and remained almost a third below total sales in 2019. However, sales of battery electric vehicles were a bright spot for the industry, the SMMT said, as Britons bought more electric cars in 2021 than in the previous five years combined. Mike Hawes, the SMMT’s chief executive, said thelack of microchips used in everything from windscreen wipers to in-car entertainment systems would continue to serve as a drag on the car industry during 2022. “[It] will undermine the market for the rest of the year,” he said. “We think demand is still there, demand is still strong,” Hawes told reporters. “The challenge is how to supply to customers.” Some manufacturers have managed to cope with the disruption better than others. Tesla was the standout electric performer, with its Model 3 becoming the first electric car to rank among the top 10 marques for overall sales. After reporting record deliveries this week, Tesla’s market value has surged in recent days to $1.2tn (£883bn) – more than the next 10 carmakers combined, according to data company Sentieo. The Model 3 was beaten to the UK top spot by Vauxhall’s Corsa, which also meant that Ford’s Fiesta lost its title as the bestseller for the first time in 12 years. Hawes said the rise of the electric car share meant that there was a “significant reduction” in the average emissions of cars sold in the UK for the second year in a row, following three years of rising emissions associated with bulky sports utility vehicles (SUVs). Although the industry lobby group has not yet completed analysis of the sales data, Hawes suggested it may be in the order of 10% or more. Reflecting the fallout from the pandemic, overall UK sales in 2020 and 2021 were the lowest since 1992. The industry is hoping for a recovery in the coming months given signs of elevated demand such as used cars costing more than newer models. Before the emergence of the Omicron variant, the SMMT forecast that car companies would recover to sell 1.96m cars in 2022. However, Hawes said the industry remained worried by signals from the UK government as ministers push for electric cars to go from one in every 100 on Britain’s roads to one in three by 2030, when sales of new cars with traditional internal combustion engines will be banned. He criticised two cuts to grants for electric cars during 2021, patchy investment in on-street chargers, and a delay on plans to force car parks to install a charger first revealed by the Guardian. “It’s a confusing message,” Hawes said. “If you’re going to achieve this it’s a massive ambition to get the entire market to move to net zero by 2030/2035, so you need to use every lever at your disposal and have a clear message to the consumer that this is the right thing to do and something that will work for the consumer. “Anything that brings into doubt that commitment doesn’t help the consumer that might be wavering.” Top 10 cars overall Vauxhall Corsa Tesla Model 3 Mini Mini Mercedes-Benz A-class Volkswagen Polo Volkswagen Golf Nissan Qashqai Ford Puma Kia Sportage Toyota Yaris Top 10 battery electric vehicles Tesla Model 3 Kia Niro Volkswagen ID3 Nissan Leaf Audi e-tron Hyundai Kona Mini Mini Renault Zoe Vauxhall Corsa MG ZSBedroom-pop singer, songwriter and producer PinkPantheress has topped the BBC’s annual Sound of … poll for hotly tipped new musical talent. The 20-year-old from Bath, who moved to London to study film, first built buzz on TikTok, where she now has 1.1m followers, uploading tracks that span UK garage, jungle and pop. Her tracks Pain and Just for Me – the latter was covered by Coldplay – broke into the UK Top 40 in 2020. Her debut full-length project, the mixtape To Hell With It, reached No 20. “Music has been the same for so long. It’s like: please, can we get something else?” she told the Guardian in an October interview, explaining her genre-mixing approach. “I hope people start to feel more free to break the boundaries of what is acceptable, or the most sonically appealing to everyone.” Runners-up in the poll, voted on by a panel of dozens of industry figures and musicians including Billie Eilish and Ed Sheeran, are Isle of Wight indie duo Wet Leg, whose debut single Chaise Longue became a cult hit in 2020. Rounding out the Top 5 are emotive pop balladeer Mimi Webb, who reached the Top 10 with single Good Without; Lola Young, who broke through to a wider audience by appearing on John Lewis’s Christmas advert with a cover of Together in Electric Dreams, and Central Cee, the drill rapper whose stardom is already well established with two Top 10 hits and three nominations at this year’s Brit awards. Previous winners of the poll include Adele, Michael Kiwanuka and Sam Smith. Last year’s winner was Coventry rapper Pa Salieu; 2020 winner Celeste went on to have a No 1 album with her debut Not Your Muse.Stronger safeguards are needed to protect the millions of UK shoppers who use “buy now, pay later” deals because many people do not realise they are taking on debt, a consumer body has warned. Buy now, pay later (BNPL) lets shoppers delay payment for an item with no interest or charges – unless you fail to pay it back on time, at which point some firms impose late fees. The three main BNPL firms are Klarna, Clearpay and Laybuy, and this form of unregulated interest-free credit has enjoyed explosive growth during the coronavirus pandemic, particularly among the under-30s and those with tight finances. In response to concerns, the government announced last February that BNPL would be regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority, though the rules are unlikely to take effect until later this year or in 2023. A Treasury consultation, which closes on Thursday (6 January), will be followed by an FCA consultation. In the meantime, stronger safeguards – such as affordability checks and making small print more accessible – are needed now, according to the consumer organisation Which? It said many of the BNPL users it had interviewed did not think of these deals as a form of credit – instead, they described them as a “way to pay” or a “money management tool”. This meant they could unwittingly be exposing themselves to a range of potential problems if they failed to pay back on time, such as late fees, black marks on their credit report or having their case referred to a debt collector. Though BNPL is a form of credit, it works differently to more traditional methods of borrowing such as credit cards. For example, not all BNPL schemes run “hard” credit checks, whereby a full search of someone’s credit report is carried out. Rocio Concha, the director of policy and advocacy at Which?, said: “BNPL schemes can offer speed and convenience at the checkout, but our research shows that many users do not realise they are taking on debt or consider the prospect of missing payments.” The consumer body said that, “given the immediate risk,” BNPL firms should make their terms and conditions more accessible now. It added that affordability assessments should be carried out for all transactions before regulation is introduced.Novak Djokovic’s hopes of returning to the Australian Open and competing for a record 21st grand slam title and a shot at tennis immortality crashed in astonishing fashion on Thursday as he was denied entrance into Melbourne, Victoria at the airport and his visa was cancelled due to insufficient evidence to support a medical exemption. His journey to that moment reveals much about him. Towards the end of last year, as thoughts shifted to the season ahead, and players considered their participation at Melbourne Park, Djokovic gave an interview to Serbian publication Blic. He described questions about his vaccination status as “inappropriate” and he bemoaned the role of the media. He was pointedly direct: “Your editors can take what I have just said and turn it into a scandal,” he said. “I do not want to be a part of that storm.” During the first week of the Australian tennis summer, the storm arrived when Djokovic announced on social media that he had received an “exemption permission” to travel to Australia without being vaccinated. Over the past few months, the vaccination requirements for players wishing to compete at the Australian Open have left a profound mark on the professional tours. Uptake of Covid vaccines in tennis had been extremely slow, but once the Victoria state government rules were confirmed, the rate of vaccination rose. It only made the world No 1’s unresolved status more conspicuous. While Djokovic never explicitly revealed his vaccination status, he has offered numerous indications of his stance. Long before vaccines were available, he stated his concern about having to be vaccinated in order to travel. He has often stressed the importance of embracing “natural” solutions; early in the pandemic he held Instagram live conversations in which he spoke of how the power of gratitude could “turn the most toxic food, or maybe most polluted water into the most healing water.” After having surgery on his right elbow in 2018, a procedure that has allowed him to win nine grand slam titles since, he said that he cried for three days. His belief in alternative medicine is complemented by his commitment to alternative history. He frequently retreats to Visoko, in the hills of Bosnia and Herzegovina, where he meets up with the businessman Semir Osmanagic – whose claims that there are ancient man-made structures with magical healing powers, refuted by scientists, have turned the hills into a lucrative tourist destination. Djokovic has also expressed his support for the ultranationalist alternative historian Jovan Deretic, whose writings claim, among other things, that numerous European cultures, including ancient Greeks, Celts and Etruscans, are descended from Serbs. Djokovic is unyielding in his commitment to his beliefs away from the court, however questionable they are, and that single-mindedness is also visible in his faith in the methods that have led to his on-court success. Since the criteria for the Australian Open became clear, it always appeared that Djokovic intended to find a way to compete at the tournament, but only without compromising those beliefs. Last year, one of the defining images of the chaotic Australian Open was the continued presence of the tournament director, Craig Tiley, on television as he managed the sudden lockdown that prevented crowds attending much of the event. After Djokovic’s announcement, Tiley returned to a similar role yesterday as he stressed there had been no favourable treatment for Djokovic and reinforced the strength of the medical exemption process. The exemption applications were reviewed by two independent panels of experts, one assembled by Tennis Australia and another by the Victorian government, which Tiley described as a more rigorous process than for regular citizens. But further obstacles emerged on Tuesday, when Australia’s home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, said it was the federal government that would “enforce our requirements at the Australian border”, whatever Tennis Australia and the Victorian government might have decided about a non-vaccinated player taking part in the tournament. Djokovic is popular with a considerable group of players due to the concern he has expressed for the lower-ranked members of the ATP Tour but, as the world No 1, he is also a clear beneficiary of the privileges afforded to top players. The cynicism that some have was reflected in comments from Jamie Murray, who suggested he does not believe he would have received an exemption, and Alex de Minaur who subtly described the subject as “interesting” and hoped that other applicants received the same treatment. In the end, he was sharply dealt with. The clear and simple solution for the world No 1 would have been to arrive in Australia vaccinated and without issue, but the federal government, Victoria state and Tennis Australia also shoulder significant blame for their contributions in allowing a player to travel for a full day before rejecting him at the border. If Djokovic’s application was tenuous enough to be denied on arrival, the medical exemption process that was defended so stringently by Victoria State and Tennis Australia was a monumental blunder. As Djokovic was turned away and forced to grapple with his shattered dreams, one reality was difficult to escape. In this storm, everybody had lost something.This blog is closing down now - you can continue to follow our live coverage here on a fresh blog. Thanks for reading. A doctor specialising in acute medicine in the north of England explains how Omicron is straining his hospital’s capacity. “The numbers of patients we are treating now – both Covid and non-Covid – is quite incredible,” writes Nick Scriven: Good morning, this is Helen Livingstone bringing you the day’s pandemic news from Sydney. To start with, this year’s Grammy awards has been postponed as a result of the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic. A statement confirms that the ceremony has been postponed indefinitely with no new date yet announced. The awards were set to take place on 31 January at the Crypto.com center in Los Angeles and while sporting events have still been taking place there, sources claim that artists and executives have expressed concern over attending this year’s Grammys ceremony. “The health and safety of those in our music community, the live audience and the hundreds of people who work tirelessly to produce our show remains our top priority,” the statement read. “Given the uncertainty surrounding the Omicron variant, holding the show on January 31st simply contains too many risks. We look forward to celebrating music’s biggest night on a future date, which will be announced soon.” Here’s more from our correspondent Benjamin Lee: Here’s a roundup of the key developments from the day: Novak Djokovic’s attempts to compete at the Australian Open this month are over after the No 1-ranked male tennis player was told his visa has been rejected. He is due to be flown out of Melbourne on Thursday amid a spiralling outcry over his controversial “medical exemption” agreed by the tournament’s organisers. Record rises in daily Covid cases were reported in at least seven countries on Wednesday as the Omicron variant continues to spread. They were: France - 332,252; Portugal - 39,570; Turkey - 66,467; Italy - 189,109; Sweden - 17,320; the Netherlands - 24,000 and Israel - 11,978. The government in Italy is set to make Covid vaccination mandatory for the over 50s, according to a draft decree. The obligation will be effective until 15 June 15. The French parliament suspended debate on a new Covid law as opposition lawmakers demanded explanations from President Emmanuel Macron about comments in which he said he wanted to “piss off” unvaccinated people. Germany is considering shortening self-isolation periods over fears that critical services could grind to a halt, according to health ministry plan. Workers in critical sectors, such as hospitals or electricity suppliers, would be able to end their isolation after five days, provided they get a negative PCR test, under the draft proposals. The Czech government has shortened the quarantine period for Covid positive people from seven days to five. The government also approved blanket testing in companies, effective from 17 January. The president of Poland has tested positive for coronavirus for a second time, after several people around him were infected. Andrzej Duda previously caught Covid in October 2020. Mozambique president Filipe Nyusi’s PCR results came back negative for Covid-19 after Nyusi and his wife Isaura tested positive via rapid tests days earlier, the president’s office said on Wednesday. Pre-departure tests for people travelling to England are to be been scrapped. Boris Johnson announced that the requirement would be lifted from 4am on Friday, along with the need for travellers to self-isolate on arrival until they receive a negative PCR test result. The president of Israel, Isaac Herzog, has become the first world leader to get a fourth Covid jab. On Monday Israel became the first country in the world to embark on a fourth Covid-19 vaccination campaign starting with those over 60. I’m handing this blog over to my colleague Helen Livingstone in Australia now. Thanks so much for joining me over the last few hours. Millions of patients in England will suffer worsening quality of care unless ministers take immediate action to alleviate the staffing crisis engulfing the NHS, health chiefs have warned. The NHS Confederation, which represents the whole healthcare system, is tonight calling for a range of new measures to be implemented in the NHS in England to help overstretched hospitals and struggling ambulance, mental health, community, GP and social care services cope with “widespread” shortages of medics and health workers. Tens of thousands of medical students should be deployed on to wards and other healthcare settings, NHS and social care staff must be granted priority access to lateral flow and PCR tests, and the self-isolation period should be reviewed to see if it can be slashed from 10 days to five, as has happened in the US and France, it said. The call came as growing numbers of operations are being cancelled, with more than 20 NHS trusts declaring an “internal critical incident” in recent days as they struggle to cope with the intense Covid pressure. It emerged on Wednesday that at least four more NHS trusts have taken that step, the highest form of alert any hospital can issue, as had the entire NHS in Norfolk. NHS staff absences have now spiralled to double what they normally would be at this time of year, and 17,276 people are in hospital in the UK with Covid – up 58% in a week – as Omicron continues to put “enormous strain” on every part of the health service, the NHS Confederation added. The absence of tens of thousands of staff is already having a “detrimental” impact on the ability of the NHS to provide healthcare, it warned, and said that, without further measures, the staffing crisis “threatens the quality of patient care”. Given the worsening situation, there should also be “explicit acknowledgment” from the national regulators that clinical tasks “might need to be allocated in ways which would not normally be recognised as best practice”, the NHS Confederation said. Read more from my colleagues Andrew Gregory, Denis Campbell, Rowena Mason and Josh Halliday here: Novak Djokovic’s attempts to compete at the Australian Open this month are over after the No 1-ranked male tennis player was told his visa has been rejected. He is due to be flown out of Melbourne on Thursday amid a spiralling outcry over his controversial “medical exemption” agreed by the tournament’s organisers. The reigning Australian Open champion was held up at passport control on Wednesday night at Tullamarine airport in Melbourne, the host city of the tournament, for several hours late at night as he was questioned. The Australian Border Force confirmed on Thursday morning he would not be allowed to remain in the country. A statement read: The ABF will continue to ensure that those who arrive at our border comply with our laws and entry requirements. The ABF can confirm that Mr Djokovic failed to provide appropriate evidence to meet the entry requirements to Australia, and his visa has been subsequently cancelled. Non-citizens who do not hold a valid visa on entry or who have had their visa cancelled will be detained and removed from Australia. The ABF can confirm Mr Djokovic had access to his phone. There are reports Djokovic’s lawyers will challenge the decision. Djokovic’s father Srdjan said the player was moved to a room alone, separated from his team, and without a mobile phone. More than five hours after they arrived in Melbourne, Goran Ivanisevic, Djokovic’s coach, posted a selfie on Instagram from the airport at 5am captioned “not the most usual trip Down Under”. Read the full story here: Two major cruise lines have cancelled sailings amid rising fears of Omicron-related coronavirus infections that have dampened the nascent recovery of the pandemic-ravaged cruise industry. Both Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd and Norwegian Cruise Line both made the decision as the Omicron variant continues to rise across the globe. Royal Caribbean called off its Spectrum of the Seas cruise for 6 January after nine guests on its 2 January trip were identified as close contacts to a local Hong Kong Covid-19 case. The contacts have tested negative but the cruise ship will return to Kai Tak Cruise Terminal in Hong Kong on 5 January to test all guests and crew who must take a second test on 8 January, the company said. A similar decision to cancel trips by Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings Ltd was made against the backdrop of the US reporting the highest daily tally of any country for new coronavirus infections on Monday. The 17-ship strong cruise operator said: Due to ongoing travel restrictions, we’ve had to modify a few sailings and unfortunately have had to cancel. The cruise line, which requires everyone on board to be vaccinated, has also had to cut short a 12-day round trip from Miami on its Norwegian Pearl ship, citing “Covid related circumstances.” The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention had last week advised people to avoid cruise travel after launching investigations into onboard cases on more than 90 ships. The health agency starts a scrutiny if at least 0.1% of the guests test positive. Norwegian Cruise said guests, who were supposed to embark on the canceled sailings on the eight ships, will receive full refunds and bonus credits for future bookings. The Omicron-led travel uncertainty is also causing guests on other sailings to cancel their bookings as a few ships have also had to skip ports due to onboard infections. Holly Bromley, a consulting arborist, who canceled her booking on Norwegian Epic said: We booked the cruise last March and assumed that things would be getting back to normal... by mid-December, I was mentally prepared for a change of plans. Meanwhile, bigger rival Carnival Corp said it has not cancelled any upcoming voyages, but its shares fell on Wednesday to close down 2.6%. Royal Caribbean lost 2.1% and Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings 3.6%. Mozambique president Filipe Nyusi’s PCR results came back negative for Covid-19 after Nyusi and his wife Isaura tested positive via rapid tests days earlier, the president’s office said on Wednesday. Nyusi wrote in a post on his official Facebook page that he would continue to isolate in line with national health protocols “until my wife’s health situation stabilises,” but neither the post nor a statement from Nyusi’s office said what Isaura Nyusi’s PCR test results showed. A spokesman for Nyusi was not immediately available to elaborate. Mozambique’s coronavirus infections are close to their peak, according to a Reuters tally. The southern African country has recorded over 2,000 coronavirus-related deaths and 196,000 infections during the pandemic. Two entrepreneurs with no apparent background in healthcare have made £20m – and could make tens of millions more – after landing roles as middlemen between the UK government and a US firm that won £3.7bn of contracts to supply lateral flow tests. Charles Palmer, whose background is in property, and Kim Thonger, a former shoe retailer, are the co-owners of Disruptive Nanotechnology, a business that had just £85 in the bank and debts of £3,592 at the end of 2019. Accounts filed at Companies House last month show that the firm’s net assets soared to £20.5m during the year to 31 December 2020, including the first nine months of the coronavirus pandemic. Disruptive Nanotechnology, trading as Tried&amp;Tested, describes itself as the exclusive UK and EU distributor for rapid antigen and antibody tests made by California-based Innova Medical Group. Palmer’s wife, Dr Rachel Limbrey, is the chief medical adviser at Tried&amp;Tested, as well as working as a respiratory consultant at University Hospital Southampton. Innova has won nine contracts worth a combined £3.7bn to provide tests, thanks in part to Operation Moonshot, the plan by Boris Johnson’s former adviser Dominic Cummings to roll out mass daily testing to reduce the need for strict Covid restrictions. Read the full story here: France has more details on its record number of new daily cases. The final number of new cases stood at 332,252 - slightly below an earlier indication given to the French parliament from Health Minister Olivier Veran. The number of COVID-19 deaths in hospitals rose by 246 in the last 24 hours, taking the total since the pandemic began to 97,670. The number of Covid patients in hospital intensive care units (ICUs) stood at 3,695 and there were over 20,000 Covid patients in hospital in total, the highest number since late May. France is backing on ramping up its Covid-19 vaccination programme to avoid having to take any drastic new restrictions to curb the spread of the virus. French President Emmanuel Macron had said earlier that he wanted to “piss off” unvaccinated people by making their lives so complicated they would end up getting jabbed. He was speaking in an interview with Le Parisien newspaper in which he also called unvaccinated people irresponsible and unworthy of being considered citizens. Record rises in daily Covid cases were reported in at least seven countries on Wednesday as the Omicron variant continues to spread. They were: France - 332,252; Portugal - 39,570; Turkey - 66,467; Italy - 189,109; Sweden - 17,320; the Netherlands - 24,000 and Israel - 11,978. The government in Italy is set to make Covid vaccination mandatory for the over 50s, according to a draft decree. The obligation will be effective until 15 June 15. Novak Djokovic’s attempts to compete at the Australian Open have been thrown into fresh doubt amid a spiralling outcry over his controversial “medical exemption” agreed by the tournament’s organisers. It was reported that the visa with which he attempted to enter Australia does not allow for exemptions for unvaccinated applicants. The French parliament suspended debate on a new Covid law as opposition lawmakers demanded explanations from President Emmanuel Macron about comments in which he said he wanted to “piss off” unvaccinated people. Germany is considering shortening self-isolation periods over fears that critical services could grind to a halt, according to health ministry plan. Workers in critical sectors, such as hospitals or electricity suppliers, would be able to end their isolation after five days, provided they get a negative PCR test, under the draft proposals. The Czech government has shortened the quarantine period for Covid positive people from seven days to five. The government also approved blanket testing in companies, effective from 17 January. The president of Poland has tested positive for coronavirus for a second time, after several people around him were infected. Andrzej Duda previously caught Covid in October 2020. Pre-departure tests for people travelling to England are to be been scrapped. Boris Johnson announced that the requirement would be lifted from 4am on Friday, along with the need for travellers to self-isolate on arrival until they receive a negative PCR test result. The president of Israel, Isaac Herzog, has become the first world leader to get a fourth Covid jab. On Monday Israel became the first country in the world to embark on a fourth Covid-19 vaccination campaign starting with those over 60. The government in Italy is set to make Covid vaccination mandatory for the over 50s, according to a draft decree seen by Reuters. The obligation will be effective until June 15, the draft decree said as the Italian cabinet discussed the new curbs. Novak Djokovic’s attempts to compete at the Australian Open this month were thrown into fresh doubt on Wednesday amid a spiralling outcry over his controversial “medical exemption” agreed by the tournament’s organisers. The whereabouts of the world No 1 and reigning Australian champion were in doubt after he was held up at passport control at Tullamarine airport in Melbourne, the host city of the tournament, for several hours late at night. The Victoria state government said it had refused to formally support Djokovic’s visa application and it was reported that the visa with which he attempted to enter Australia does not allow for exemptions for unvaccinated applicants. Read the full story here: Germany is also considering shortening self-isolation periods over fears that critical services could grind to a halt as Omicron spreads, according to health ministry plan, Reuters reports. Workers in critical sectors, such as hospitals or electricity suppliers, would be able to end their isolation after five days, provided they get a negative PCR test, under the draft proposals being sent to regional leaders. The current isolation period is 14 days for everyone. For the general population, the isolation period would be reduced to seven days with a negative PCR test, according to the draft document prepared for the leaders, who will meet Chancellor Olaf Scholz on Friday to discuss how to respond to the spread of the Omicron variant. People who show no symptoms after 10 days of isolation will be allowed to leave their homes without a test, under the plan. Daily infections were declining in December after Germany introduced measures such as demanding proof of vaccination for many indoor activities, but started rising again a week ago. The Robert Koch Institute for infectious diseases reported 58,912 new infections on Wednesday, up 47% from the same day a week ago. The country recorded another 346 deaths, taking the pandemic total to 112,925. The health ministry said the Omicron variant was causing a quarter of all new cases in Germany and was likely to become the dominant variant in a matter of days. Unvaccinated residents on Italy’s small islands risk being cast into “forced exile” by new coronavirus rules, a representative of the islands has warned, AFP reports. Measures requiring proof of recent vaccination or recovery to use public transport come into effect on Monday as Italy battles record new infections. But in a letter to the government, Francesco Del Deo, head of the National Association of Municipalities of Small Islands (ANCIM), pointed out that boats and planes are the only means of getting off and on the islands. The new rules risk “condemning to forced exile residents who for different reasons are not vaccinated”, he warned. ANCIM represents 35 municipalities covering 87 small islands with a combined population of around 240,000, Capri and Ischia among them. It wants an exception to the new rules to allow unvaccinated residents to show a negative Covid test to take public transport if they have to travel for reasons of health, education or work. The health issue is particularly important as medical facilities are often rudimentary or non-existent, with some islands served only by a doctor who visits for a few hours once or twice a week. “It’s a complicated situation,” Del Deo, mayor of a municipality on Ischia, off the coast of Naples, said. While he backed vaccination, “in a democracy, the rights of the minority must be protected”. One solution could be the creation of special areas in ferries for the unvaccinated who could show a negative test, to avoid potential complaints from other passengers, he suggested. From Monday, a so-called Super Green Pass requiring proof of recent vaccination or recovery from coronavirus will be required for most indoor public venues and on public transport. Previously, such venues and services were accessible with the normal Green Pass, which could also be obtained with a recent negative Covid test. The budget airline, Ryanair has announced a 7% fall in passenger traffic last month as the Omicron variant triggered restrictions that hit the key Christmas travel season, AFP reports. Ryanair said the number of passengers it flew dropped to 9.5 million in December, down from 10.2 million in November. It was the lowest level since July. Ryanair warned last month that Omicron would have a strong impact on its financial performance as it more than doubled the forecast for its annual loss and cut back flights. But in a boost for the Irish no-frills carrier and its peers, Boris Johnson announced changes to Covid rules for travel to England, scrapping the need for pre-departure tests and quarantine on arrival until the traveller has tested negative. Tim Alderslade, chief executive of industry body Airlines UK, welcomed the move. “Today marks an important step towards learning to live alongside the virus, helping passengers and the travel sector look ahead to what will be an all-important spring and summer season.” A “vaccination doubt line” set up by doctors in the Netherlands is receiving up to 1,000 calls a day from people who are still unsure whether or not they should get jabbed against the coronavirus. The helpline, originally launched as a local service in November by Robin Peeters, an endocrinologist at the Erasmus medical centre in Rotterdam, and Shakib Sana, a GP, was given a national number last month and has been inundated with inquiries. Staffed mainly by volunteer medical students from rooms made available in the university hospitals of Utrecht, Amsterdam, Nijmegen, Maastricht and Rotterdam, the service has met “an extraordinary response”, Peeters said. Read the full story here: Portugal’s government has said isolation rules may need to ease before the general election on 30 January as it become the latest European country to report a record total of new cases, Reuters reports. There were 39,570 new infections on Wednesday, But with one of world’s highest vaccination rates, Portugal hospital admissions and mortality remain well below levels seen in the previous peak of the disease in early 2021. After a meeting with health experts, President Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa told reporters the government wanted to ensure that everyone, including those having to isolate because of the virus, can exercise their right to vote. He said the administration, which retains full powers despite the upcoming early election, had requested a legal evaluation by the prosecutors’ office on “whether it is possible to exercise the right to vote in safe conditions despite isolation...That is, suspending isolation for that purpose.” Some experts have estimated that around 400,000 people could be in isolation by the time of the election in a country where voter turnout has been in decline for years. The health authority has already reduced the mandatory isolation period for those infected experiencing no or only mild symptoms to seven days from 10. It registered 14 fatalities from Covid slightly down from Tuesday’s 15, and far lower than the over 300 daily deaths in Portugal’s deadliest wave of the pandemic last January. The French health minister, Olivier Veran, told parliament that new cases stood at around 335,000, marking a new daily record in France. France also reported a further 246 Covid deaths in hospitals in the last 24 hours. And a further 3,695 people in intensive care units with the virus. Record rises in Covid cases have also been reported today in Turkey, Italy, Sweden, the Netherlands, and Israel. Turkey has become the latest country to report a record rise in daily cases, with 66,467 new infections in the last 24 hours. It also recorded 143 deaths over the coronavirus in the same period. Cases in Turkey have more than doubled in just over a week as the Omicron variant became dominant in the country. “Despite the rise in infections due to the Omicron variant, there is no worrying rise in hospitalisation,” Health Minister Fahrettin Koca said on Twitter. The president of Israel, Isaac Herzog, has become the first world leader to get a fourth Covid jab. Earlier this week Israel became the first country in the world to embark on a fourth Covid-19 vaccination campaign. People over the age of 60 and healthcare workers who received their third shot more than four months ago became eligible for a second booster of Pfizer-BioNTech on Monday. As Herzog is 61 he became eligible for the jab before the prime minister, Naftali Bennett, who is 49. Italy has reported record daily number of new cases for a second day in a row. Its latest total is 189,109 cases compared to Tuesday’s total of 170,844. The daily tally of coronavirus-related deaths fell to 231 from 259. Italy has registered 138,276 deaths linked to the virus since its outbreak emerged in February 2020, and has reported 6.76 million cases to date. Patients in hospital with Covid - not including those in intensive care - stood at 13,364 on Wednesday, up from 12,912 a day earlier. There were 132 new admissions to intensive care units, against 153 on Tuesday. The total number of intensive care patients increased to 1,428 from a previous 1,392. (This is Matthew Weaver taking over from Damien Gayle, so he can concentrate on the aftermath of the Colston verdict.) Twenty-two people in Austria are under investigation for allegedly forging vaccine certificates, weeks before vaccines become mandatory in the country. The arrests came as police swooped on two dozen homes on Wednesday, seizing “numerous vaccine certificates, mobile phones and computers” in an investigation aided by Interpol. A unit specialising in tracking forged Covid-19 documents was tipped off by the suspects discussing their business on social media, said a police statement. “Organised trade and use of forged vaccine certificates is no trivial matter, but a criminal offence,” said the interior minister, Gerhard Karner. In November, Austria became the first – and so far the only – country in Europe to announce that Covid-19 vaccines would become mandatory for all eligible residents. About 30% of the population remain unvaccinated – among the highest level in western Europe. They are subject to a selective lockdown imposed by authorities, with police checking about 30,000 vaccine passes a day. Tens of thousands of people have taken to the streets each week to protest against the mandate. Nightclub and church capacities are to be restricted in Cyprus as part of a raft of new controls on social gatherings aimed at tackling the world’s worst rate of Covid-19 infections. As Cypriots prepared to celebrate Epiphany – a key date in the Greek Orthodox church – ministers met at a cabinet meeting to impose the new restrictions. According to Agence France-Presse figures, Cyprus recorded the world’s highest Covid infection rate per 100,000 inhabitants last week. Home visits will be limited to 10 people – half the number previously permitted – while church attendance will be restricted to a maximum of 200 people. From next week, hospitality venues, nightclubs, weddings and other entertainment facilities will also be restricted to 200 customers. The new school term will begin next Monday as planned, but under tighter testing rules, and companies will have to ensure that 50% of their staff work remotely, up from 40%. The new measures come after the Republic of Cyprus registered another record high of 5,457 daily infections and five deaths on Tuesday, from a population of around one million. “Doctors and scientists alone cannot defeat the pandemic … it can only be defeated by ordinary citizens following the instructions of the scientific and medical community,” the health minister, Michalis Hadjipantelas, said. A hospital director in Guadeloupe said he was punched and one of his deputies splashed with urine after anti-vaccine mandate protesters laid siege to their offices. Police in the French overseas territory had to rescue Gérard Cotellon and his deputies after protesters angry at a mandate for health staff surrounded their hospital administration building. “I was evacuated after receiving a punch in the ribs and a huge blow to the head. I think I was unconscious for 10 seconds,” Cotellon told AFP. His deputy, Cédric Zolezzi, said his shirt was torn and he was splashed with urine while rushing towards a police vehicle. The experience was “shocking”, he said. Nobody was arrested during Tuesday’s incident, which looked like a “rugby scrum”, according to a police source. A health worker union representative, Gaby Clavier, told AFP that the protesters were demanding “the money we are owed”, after the salaries of health workers who refuse to be vaccinated were frozen. On Wednesday, the French government declared a “state of health emergency” in Guadeloupe and several other overseas territories, because of a rise in coronavirus cases combined with a low vaccination rate there. Public health authorities in Sweden have advised restaurants, cultural venues and leisure centres to begin asking customers to show digital proof of vaccination against the coronavirus. The measure is part of voluntary guidance for businesses from Sweden’s public health agency, rather than a legal requirement. Currently, the passes are used only for public gatherings and indoor events of more than 100 people. According to the new guidance, locations can introduce certificates as entry requirements “in more activities where the risk of spreading of the infection is great,” said Lena Hallengren, the social affairs minister. “The spread of Covid-19 is increasing in Sweden. We need to be prepared to quickly introduce more accurate infection-control measures,” Hallengren was quoted as saying by the Associated Press. Sweden reported a record-breaking 17,320 new daily cases on Wednesday. Ireland’s government has agreed to fund the purchase of Covid antiviral drugs from GlaxoSmithKline, Pfizer and Merck. Ireland plans to purchase the drugs through the European Union’s procurement process and by dealing directly with the companies, the health ministry said in a statement. Local media reported that ministers had agreed to set aside €90m for the treatments, which countries around the world are scrambling to secure. The health ministry did not say how many courses it would seek to purchase. “This will be an additional tool to the range we currently have at our disposal to deal with Covid-19. The primary one of course remains the vaccines,” prime minister Micheal Martin told a news conference. The Netherlands on Wednesday registered more than 24,000 new Covid infections in 24 hours, a record high, official data showed. The figure came as the Omicron variant of the coronavirus became dominant in the country during a strict lockdown. Covid-19 hospitalizations among children in the US are soaring, fuelled by the Omicron variant and the holidays, and adding pressure to already-strained health systems and schools. An average of 672 children were being hospitaliaed every day in the US, as of 2 January – more than double the average just a week before. And the rate is rapidly increasing. Cases are also rising. There were more than 325,000 new cases among kids in the week ending 23 December, a 64% increase from the previous week and nearly double the cases two weeks earlier, the American Academy of Pediatrics reported on Monday. Experts are urging the use of every possible precaution, including tests, masks, vaccinations and even temporary delays in reopening schools to curb both cases and staff shortages. Hundreds of UK care homes are closing their doors to new admissions because of the rapid spread of Omicron, increasing pressure on embattled hospitals that are unable to discharge patients into the community. Of the homes operated by MHA, one of the largest not-for-profit care providers in the UK, 70% have now shut their doors to new residents because of Covid outbreaks and staff shortages. At Four Seasons Healthcare, one of the largest private operators, 40% of homes it operates have recorded two or more cases, which means, under government guidance, they should not accept new arrivals. On Wednesday, Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said temporary settings may need to be set up to get people out of hospitals, many of which have declared critical incidents amid a staff absence rate of 10% on average across England. “This issue of staff absence is not just in the hospitals; it is in primary care and community care and of course in social care,” Taylor said. “If you have people in hospital who don’t need to be there, that adds another pressure to an already challenging situation.” The Czech government has shortened the quarantine period for Covid positive people from seven days to five as it prepares for Omicron, which experts estimate will be the dominant variant in the country around mid-January. The government also approved blanket testing in companies, effective from 17 January, in addition to mandatory tests at schools which reopened this week. The country of 10.7 million people reported its daily count of new infections dropping sharply in recent weeks from a peak recorded in late November, and hospitalisations stand at roughly a third of the record numbers seen last March. However, Omicron has already been detected in dozens of people and examples from countries like the US or Britain show that the spread is lightning-fast. Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, has tested positive for Covid but has no serious symptoms, an aide said Wednesday. The aide, Paweł Szrot, said on Twitter that Duda was under medical observation but feels well. Duda, 49, has been vaccinated against the coronavirus and received a booster shot last month, Szrot said. The president got tested this week because of cases among employees in his office. Duda previously tested positive in October 2020 and was reported at the time not to have experienced significant illness. As reported on this blog earlier today, people who test positive for Covid on rapid lateral flow tests but aren’t displaying symptoms won’t need to confirm their results with a follow-up PCR test, the UK Health Security Agency has confirmed. Britain is reporting record daily case numbers, and the guidance echoes a move during last winter’s Covid wave, where the requirement for confirmatory PCR tests was suspended until March. Ireland will drop its requirement for vaccinated arrivals to have proof of a negative Covid test and return to seeking a proof of vaccination or recent infection upon entry, local media reported on Wednesday. Ireland introduced the measure a month ago to slow the spread of the new Omicron coronavirus variant. Omicron now accounts for all Irish infections, which have rocketed to record levels in the last two weeks. Limits could be placed on large gatherings and the sale of alcohol could be banned in Thailand, as the south-east Asian county considers measures to avert a new wave of Covid infections, a public health official has said. The country reported 3,899 cases on Wednesday, up from an average of 2,600 daily cases towards the end of last year, and the Omicron variant itself has tripled from last month’s holiday period, government data showed. Responding to the latest data, Sumanee Watcharasin, a spokeswoman for the country’s coronavirus taskforce, said that if measures like wearing masks and regular testing were not followed, infections could reach the “tens of thousands in the next two weeks”. The government will decide on new curbs on Friday and also review the suspended “Test &amp; Go” scheme that allowed vaccinated arrivals to skip quarantine, Reuters quoted her as saying. Since the pandemic began, Thailand has had a total of 2.2 million infections and nearly 22,000 coronavirus-related fatalities. Nearly 13 million people in Zhengzhou, China, have been ordered to take Covid tests after a handful of cases were detected in the city. Everyone in Zhengzhou, which has been placed under a partial lockdown, must be tested to “thoroughly uncover infections hidden among the public”, the city’s government said in a statement Wednesday, according to AFP. China, still pursuing a zero-Covid strategy, is aiming to stamp out any virus clusters ahead of the Winter Olympics in Beijing. Eleven cases were detected in Zhengzhou in recent days. The president of Poland has tested positive for coronavirus for a second time, after several people around him were infected. Andrzej Duda previously caught Covid in October 2020. Paweł Szrot, one of Duda’s most senior aides, said in a tweet seen by Reuters: “The president feels good, is not seriously ill and is under constant medical supervision.” Szrot added that the president was in isolation. Joe Biden’s vaccine mandates for large businesses and healthcare workers are to be tested in the US Supreme Court, after challenges were brought by business groups, religious groups and Republican-led states. Reuters reports that the court will hear in-person arguments on Friday on emergency requests in two separate cases. The challengers maintain that Biden’s administration has overstepped its authority. The court’s 6-3 conservative majority in the past has shown skepticism toward sweeping actions by federal agencies. Friday’s cases are the first tests of the federal government’s authority to issue its own vaccine mandates. One mandate, issued by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), requires workers at businesses with at least 100 employees to be vaccinated or be tested weekly. It affects around 80 million workers. A second mandate applies to a majority of the estimated 10.3 million Americans who work in clinics and hospitals funded by the federal government’s Medicaid and Medicare programmes. In both cases, the challengers argued that the federal government overstepped its authority by acting beyond the powers given to it by Congress. Both vaccine mandates are of sufficient economic and political significance to require a “clear statement” from Congress, according to the challengers. Some legal experts suspect the healthcare worker mandate has a better chance of surviving Supreme Court review because the regulation covers just facilities that decide to accept patients covered by Medicaid and Medicare. Weekly registered deaths involving coronavirus in England and Wales fell in the week leading up to Christmas, according to the latest figures from the Office for National Statistics. In the week ending 24 December, 591 deaths registered mentioned Covid-19 on the death certificate, the statistics agency said. Following the sixth consecutive weekly fall, it was the lowest number of deaths since the week to 20 August, when the total was 570. Coronavirus accounted for 4.5% of all deaths registered in England and Wales in the latest week, down from 6.1% a week earlier. A total of 174,961 deaths have occurred in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate, the ONS said. Deaths have remained at a low level throughout the latest wave of cases, but according to the PA Media news agency it is too early to tell if the surge in cases caused by the Omicron variant is affecting the number of Covid-19 deaths. This is due to the typical two- to three-week delay between infection, hospital admission and death. This is Damien Gayle taking the reins of the live blog now. I’ll be with you for most of the afternoon and early evening. Here is a round-up of the day’s top Covid stories so far: Israel has recorded its highest-ever number of new coronavirus infections – driven by the ultra-contagious Omicron variant – despite restrictions on travel and required quarantines, the government reported on Wednesday. Hong Kong has announced a two-week ban on incoming flights from eight countries and tightened local Covid restrictions as authorities feared a fifth wave of coronavirus in the city. In England, millions of people who test positive with lateral flow devices could be told they do not need to take follow-up PCR tests, according to reports. The French parliament suspended debate on a new Covid law early on Wednesday as opposition lawmakers demanded explanations from President Emmanuel Macron about comments in which he said he wanted to “piss off” unvaccinated people. India has reported its first Covid death linked to the fast-spreading Omicron variant in the western state of Rajasthan, a federal health ministry official said. Ukraine is reporting another 4,571 new coronavirus cases and 273 deaths, according to a recently released statement from the ministry of health. Germany needs to offer booster shots to an additional 15 million people to slow the spread of Omicron and avoid a rush on intensive care units, its health minister said. Three central Chinese cities have imposed varying degrees of curbs after sporadic cases. Xi’an has been in lockdown for two weeks and the city of Yuzhou ordered its 1.1 million residents not to leave town. Infections are surging across several Gulf Arab states, with the daily number of cases more than doubling in Saudi Arabia over two days to more than 2,500 and crossing the 1,000-level in Qatar and Kuwait. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, on the global Covid live blog for today. My colleague Damien Gayle will be along shortly so stay tuned for all the latest coronavirus news from around the world. Goodbye. In Japan, Tokyo authorities may ask Japan’s government to reinstate emergency measures as a rise in Covid cases spurs concern that the capital is experiencing a sixth wave of infections, the Sankei newspaper reported. Tokyo metropolitan government officials are preparing to make the request for a declaration of what are known in Japan as quasi-emergency measures, the paper reported on Wednesday, citing unidentified sources. Such measures, which include restrictions on restaurant and bar opening hours, were lifted across Japan in September. The French parliament suspended debate on a new Covid law early on Wednesday as opposition lawmakers demanded explanations from President Emmanuel Macron about comments in which he said he wanted to “piss off” unvaccinated people. Macron made the remark in an interview with Le Parisien newspaper published late on Tuesday. He also said unvaccinated people were “irresponsible” and that he planned to make their lives so complicated that they would end up having a vaccine. The interview was published shortly before lawmakers were to resume a debate over the new legislation, which will make it mandatory for people to show proof of Covid vaccination to enter a restaurant or cinema, or take the train. The session was rapidly taken over by discussion of his comments. “A president cannot say such things,” lawmaker Christian Jacob, who chairs the opposition, conservative Les Republicans party, told parliament. “I’m in favour of the vaccine pass but I cannot back a text whose objective is to ‘piss off’ the French.” “Is that your objective, yes or no? We cannot keep debating without having a clear answer on that.” Gen Máximo Gómez, a key figure in Cuba’s 19th-century wars of independence against Spain, once said: “Cubans either don’t meet the mark – or go way past it.” A century and a half later, the aphorism rings true. This downtrodden island struggles to keep the lights on, but has vaccinated more of its citizens against Covid-19 than any of the world’s major nations. More than 90% of the population has been vaccinated with at least one dose of Cuba’s homegrown vaccines, while 83% have been fully inoculated. Of countries with populations of over a million, only the United Arab Emirates has a stronger vaccination record. “Cuba is a victim of magical realism,” said John Kirk, professor emeritus of Latin American studies at Dalhousie University, Canada. “The idea that Cuba, with only 11 million people, and limited income, could be a biotech power, might be incomprehensible for someone working at Pfizer, but for Cuba it is possible.” Philippine authorities have cancelled an annual procession, which normally draws millions of Catholic devotees accompanying a black wooden statue of Jesus Christ through the streets of Manila, for a second year due to coronavirus concerns. The government’s coronavirus taskforce cancelled the “Black Nazerene” procession, which is one of the country’s largest religious festivals, before celebrations related to the 9 January procession, were due to start on Friday because of rising Covid infections. Unlike last year, there will be no in-person masses in the church housing the centuries-old statue, and police will discourage people from gathering outside the building, authorities said. “We understand (the cancellation) for our safety and health reasons,” Father Douglas Badong, Parochial Vicar of Quiapo church, told a news conference. He said physical masses will take place in other provinces and online masses for devotees in the capital. A 60-year-old man has been charged following reports of an anti-vaccine protest outside the health secretary’s London home. A video posted online appears to show a person delivering a letter with an anti-Covid vaccine message to what they claimed was Sajid Javid’s home in Fulham, south-west London. In the footage, a man stands outside the property and addresses the camera for several minutes, claiming the letter is putting the minister “personally on notice” for “harming” people in Britain with vaccines. The video then shows the man being restrained in handcuffs by police officers. The Metropolitan police said Geza Tarjanyi, 60, of Leyland, Lancashire, was arrested in Fulham on Monday. The force said Tarjanyi was due to appear in custody at Westminster magistrates court on Tuesday charged with having an article with intent to destroy or damage property. He was bailed to appear at Isleworth crown court on 1 February. The UK travel industry is calling on ministers to remove all remaining Covid testing requirements for international travellers, arguing they are damaging the travel sector and will not affect the spread of the Omicron variant. Manchester Airports Group (MAG) and the trade body Airlines UK said in a joint statement that research they commissioned into travel restrictions supported the position that the removal of travel testing requirements would not affect overall cases rates and hospitalisations in the UK. The two organisations said the research showed that domestic rather than international restrictions would be the only way to reduce Omicron’s spread within the country. Ministers introduced additional testing requirements in late November and early December because of fears about the spread of the newly identified variant. All passengers arriving in the UK have to take a pre-departure Covid test, taken no more than 48 hours before setting off for the UK. In addition, travellers are required to take a PCR test within the first two days after their arrival. Hong Kong has announced a two-week ban on incoming flights from eight countries and tightened local Covid restrictions as authorities feared a fifth wave of coronavirus in the city. The restrictions were announced as health authorities scoured the city for the contacts of a Covid patient, some of whom had been onboard a Royal Caribbean ship that was ordered to cut short its “cruise to nowhere” and return to port. Incoming flights from Australia, Canada, France, India, Pakistan, Philippines, Britain and the US, including interchanges, would be banned from 8-21 January, Hong Kong leader Carrie Lam told reporters on Wednesday. Lam said the government would ban indoor dining after 6pm from Friday, and close swimming pools, sports centres, bars and clubs, museums, and other venues for at least two weeks. Future cruise journeys would be cancelled. “We’re yet to see a fifth wave yet, but we’re on the verge,” Lam said. In the UK, millions of people who test positive with lateral flow devices could be told they do not need to take follow-up PCR tests, according to reports. Sky News is reporting that the change will be announced later on Wednesday. Anyone who tests positive after using lateral flow tests will still need to isolate for at least seven days, with health minister Gillian Keegan saying people will need to register their positive lateral flow results. Government sources have described lateral flow tests as “highly effective” and said that testing capacity should be prioritised. It comes as prime minister Boris Johnson said on Tuesday that key workers across several industries will be required to take Covid tests every day. Hungary reported 5,270 new Covid cases on Wednesday, a sharp rise from the 3,005 recorded a week ago, amid the spread of the Omicron variant. Omicron accounted for more than 11% of new cases, the government said. Israel has recorded its highest-ever number of new coronavirus infections — driven by the ultra-contagious Omicron variant — despite restrictions on travel and required quarantines, the government reported on Wednesday. The record of 11,978 cases diagnosed on Tuesday marks the most new infections reported in a single day since the start of the pandemic. The previous record was set on 2 September with 11,345 new infections logged during the delta variant’s wave. Omicron, first detected in South Africa, is apparently more contagious but causes less cases of severe illness and death — especially among vaccinated people. India has reported its first Covid death linked to the fast-spreading Omicron variant in the western state of Rajasthan, a federal health ministry official said. Omicron cases in the country have now risen to 2,135, the official told a small group of reporters in New Delhi. The UK health minister Gillian Keegan said she has asked NHS England to look into reports that friends or family are being asked to transport potential heart attack or stroke sufferers to hospital by one ambulance trust due to being overstretched. The advice is said to have been given out at North East Ambulance Service NHS Foundation Trust, the Health Service Journal reported. Ms Keegan told Sky News: That is not what we have put in place at all. We have more ambulance crews in operation than we have ever had, we also gave £55 million extra just for this period to cover staff and make sure we had increases in staff and staffing levels. I’ve actually asked NHS England to look at that particular case because that doesn’t sound to me like that’s an acceptable approach - people should be able to get an ambulance if they have a heart attack and that’s why we’ve put that extra funding in place, and why we’ve been building up our ambulance service over the last couple of years. Ms Keegan said critical incidents, which have been triggered by some NHS trusts in response to rising Covid admissions, were “part of the local contingency planning” which “happens every winter, these are tried and tested plans”, adding: “We know this winter, they are going to be under extreme pressure, we know that.” Hello, I’m Tom Ambrose and will be bringing you all the latest coronavirus news from around the world over the next few hours. We start with the news that China has reported a major drop in local Covid infections in the northern city of Xi’an, which has been under a tight lockdown for the past two weeks. With the Beijing Olympics beginning 4 February, China is doubling down on measures to prevent any new outbreak that could affect proceedings, the Associated Press reported. People are being told to travel in and out of Beijing only if they absolutely need to and hotels have largely stopped taking new reservations. Athletes, officials and journalists are entering an “anti-pandemic” bubble as soon as they arrive and will remain within it until the Winter Games are over. No fans from outside China are permitted and most of the spectators are expected to be drawn from schools, government offices and the military rather than the general public. Underscoring the importance of the event, Chinese President and Communist Party leader Xi Jinping visited Olympic sites around the capital on Tuesday, including the main media center. “Staging major international sporting events such as the Winter Olympics will be an opportunity to enhance the influence of Chinese culture, the reach of news reporting and the nation’s soft power,” Xi was cited as saying by the official Xinhua News Agency. The National Health Commission on Wednesday announced just 35 new cases in Xi’an, home to the famed Terracotta Warriors statues along with major industries, down from 95 the day before. Ukraine is reporting another 4,571 new coronavirus cases and 273 deaths, according to a recently released statement from the ministry of health. If you’ve just joined us, here’s a rundown of all the latest Covid developments from the past day: Europe: Care operators in England are facing acute staffing shortages caused by Omicron with more than 90 declaring a “red” alert, which means staffing ratios have been breached. Germany needs to offer booster shots to an additional 15 million people to slow the spread of Omicron and avoid a rush on intensive care units, its health minister said. The German government does not want to impose another lockdown even as Covid cases rise again, finance minister Christian Lindner said on Wednesday. Greece reported a record 50,126 infections, breaking a previous high of 40,560 registered on 31 December. Sweden’s King Carl XVI Gustaf and Queen Silvia have tested positive for Covid-19, the palace said in a statement on Tuesday. France registered 271,686 daily infections on Tuesday, the highest recorded tally, confirming France’s position as Europe’s worst-affecte country. French president Emmanuel Macron said his government’s vaccination strategy is to “piss off” people who have not had coronavirus jabs by continuing to make daily life more and more difficult for them. US: The US’s global record of nearly 1 million new infections mark an almost doubling from its previous peak seen a week ago. The US doubled its order for Pfizer’s oral Covid-19 antiviral treatment, the company and the White House said on Tuesday. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said people seeking to end their Covid-19 isolation at five days can opt for a rapid antigen test, but stopped short of mandating the test despite pressure by health experts. Asia: Three central Chinese cities have imposed varying degrees of curbs after sporadic cases. Xi’an has been in lockdown for two weeks and the city of Yuzhou ordered its 1.1 million residents not to leave town. China says the Covid outbreak in the locked-down northern city of Xi’an is under control but other cities may face restrictions. India is in the midst of a Covid third wave, according to officials, as the spread of Omicron has led to a fourfold rise in cases in recent days and curfews are being imposed on cities across the country. India reported 58,097 new cases, twice the number seen only four days ago, with authorities in the capital city of Delhi and the technology hub of Bengaluru ordering people to stay home over coming weekends. Thousands of passengers were held on a cruise ship in Hong Kong for coronavirus testing on Wednesday after health authorities said nine passengers were linked to a recent Omicron cluster and ordered the ship to turn back. Cases on Japan’s Okinawa more than doubled on Wednesday from the previous day, as officials consider imposing emergency steps to contain it. Australia’s daily cases hit a record high for a third consecutive day on Wednesday, further straining hospital resources and testing facilities as public anger grows over the handling of the Omicron outbreak. The head of Tennis Australia and the acting Victorian sports minister have called on Novak Djokovic to explain why he was given a medical exemption to play in the Australian Open. Middle East: Infections are surging across several Gulf Arab states, with the daily number of cases more than doubling in Saudi Arabia over two days to more than 2,500 and crossing the 1,000-level in Qatar and Kuwait. The German government does not want to impose another lockdown even as Covid cases rise again as the Omicron variant takes hold, finance minister Christian Lindner said on Wednesday. Lindner told the Stuttgarter Nachrichten daily and the Neue Berliner Redaktionsgesellschaft: We want to avoid blanket and area-wide closures in the future. Our goal remains to maintain social life as far as possible and to avoid social damage as far as possible.” Lindner has called for Germany to be in a position to vaccinate the entire population within a month in the event of future waves of the pandemic. Germany has a relatively low rate of vaccination compared with other western European countries: 71.3% of the population is fully vaccinated and 39.3% have received a booster shot. An additional 58,912 new infections were reported on Wednesday, a rise of 47% compared with a week ago. The country also recorded a further 346 deaths, taking the total to 112,925. Care operators in England are facing acute staffing shortages caused by Omicron with more than 90 declaring a “red” alert, which means staffing ratios have been breached. More than 11,000 care home workers are off for Covid reasons, according to internal health system staffing data seen by the Guardian. One of the UK’s largest private operators, Barchester, is dealing with outbreaks in 105 of its 250 homes. It said that rules meaning homes with Covid cannot accept hospital discharges will cause backlogs in the already struggling NHS. Across England, 9.4% of care home staff are off work, according to government live data, with close to 3% absent because of Covid. The figures, which may be an underestimate because of the festive break, are drawn from submissions by thousands of care providers. The worst affected areas appear to be in the north-east, north-west and parts of London, where combined Covid and non-Covid absence rates ranged from 16% to 22%. Experts said care standards could suffer as absences rose and councils were braced to redeploy staff from services such as libraries to help backfill threadbare rotas. Vic Rayner, the chief executive of the National Care Forum, said: The spread of Omicron across the country will bring more care homes into outbreak, put huge pressure on the already compromised staff group and mean those who need care do not get it.” Many care operators said delays in getting PCR test results back were a key frustration, meaning workers who may not be infected were isolating longer than necessary. Read the full story here. India is in the midst of a Covid third wave, according to officials, as the spread of Omicron has led to a fourfold rise in cases in recent days and curfews are being imposed on cities across the country. Dr N K Arora, chairman of the Covid-19 working group of the National Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation, said that the “galloping increase” of cases seen over the past week was evidence of a third wave hitting India. India is clearly in the third wave of Covid-19, and the whole thing seems driven by Omicron.” Officially, India has detected 1,892 omicron cases but Arora said that Omicron likely now accounted for around 50% of the new Covid cases in urban areas, overtaking Delta as the dominant variant. In Delhi, 84% of sequenced cases were found to be the Omicron variant. The highest concentration of Omicron cases are in Delhi and Mumbai and the mayor of Mumbai, Kishori Pednekar, said the city was preparing for a “tsunami” of cases. So far, the metropolis has registered almost 11,000 new cases and Pednekar warned that if it hit 20,000, they would likely impose a lockdown. Read the full story here. Thailand reported another 3,899 confirmed coronavirus cases on Wednesday, according to recently uploaded government data. Another 19 deaths were also reported. Thousands of passengers were held on a cruise ship in Hong Kong for coronavirus testing on Wednesday after health authorities said nine passengers were linked to a recent Omicron cluster and ordered the ship to turn back. Authorities forced the Royal Caribbean’s Spectrum of the Seas ship, which began sailing on Sunday on a “cruise to nowhere,” to return a day early on Wednesday, according to a government statement. The ship was ordered to return after nine passengers were identified as close contacts of an infected patient who was linked to a new Omicron cluster, Reuters reports. The ship returned to Hong Kong on Wednesday morning and passengers were being held onboard while they awaited testing. Royal Caribbean said in a statement that the nine guests were immediately isolated and had all tested negative, and that the company was working closely with authorities to comply with epidemic prevention policies and regulations. The head of Tennis Australia and the acting Victorian sports minister have called on Novak Djokovic to explain why he was given a medical exemption to play in the Australian Open. The tennis player has refused to reveal his vaccination status. Tennis Australia boss Craig Tiley said legally they cannot reveal Djokovic’s medical history or the reason behind the exemption. The state’s acting sports minister Jaala Pulford said the world No.1 men’s player had not been given special treatment and the process to gain an exemption was rigorous. Watch the video of Craig Tiley speaking to reporters below. India is reporting 58,097 new Covid cases, twice the number seen only four days ago, according to health ministry data. Wednesday’s figure takes the cumulative total to more than 35 million. Deaths also rose by 534, including the southern state of Kerala’s updated death toll of 423, lifting the national total to 482,551. South Korea is reporting another 4,444 confirmed coronavirus cases and 57 deaths for the past 24 hours. The Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says 953 people are currently in critical condition while hospitals saw 526 new admissions. Japan’s government is poised to declare a quasi-state of emergency on the southern island of Okinawa, media reports say, after a Covid-19 outbreak traced to US military bases spread to the civilian population. The prime minister, Fumio Kishida, could announce the measures this week, the Mainichi newspaper said, after Okinawa officials reported 225 new cases on Tuesday, including 47 of the Omicron strain. Tokyo, by comparison, registered 151 new infections. The Okinawa figures do not include 164 new infections discovered at US bases on the island, bringing the total of American military infections in the latest outbreak to more than 1,000. The governor of Okinawa, Denny Tamaki, has publicly criticised US forces for failing to contain an outbreak at a base last month that quickly spread to other military facilities on the island. The first Omicron case among civilians has been traced to a local man who is employed at a US base. Read the full story from Guardian reporter Justin McCurry here. China says the Covid outbreak in the locked-down northern city of Xi’an is now under control but other cities may face restrictions. Covid cases in Xi’an fell to their lowest in weeks on Wednesday, as officials said an outbreak there had been largely “brought under control” after two weeks of a stay-at-home order, Agence France-Presse reports. But other urban hubs where clusters have been detected face restrictions including a new partial lockdown in the city of Zhengzhou which recorded two cases and nine asymptomatic infections in recent days. Provincial health officials said they were finally getting the spread of the virus under control and have curbed the rapid rise in cases after a strict lockdown and rounds of mass testing for the city’s 13 million inhabitants. “Although the case number has been high for many days, the rapid rise in Covid spread at community level has been brought under control compared with the early stages of the outbreak,” said Ma Guanghui, deputy director of Shaanxi health commission at a press conference. On Monday night a million people in Yuzhou city - also in Henan - were put under lockdown after three asymptomatic cases. Local authorities deemed to have failed in preventing virus outbreaks are often fired or punished, and two senior Communist Party officials in Xi’an have been removed from their posts over their “insufficient rigour in preventing and controlling the outbreak”. Germany is reporting another 58,912 new daily coronavirus cases and 346 deaths, according to recently released figures from the Robert Koch Institute. The numbers are a significant increase on Tuesday’s 30,561 reported cases. Although there was a slight drop in daily recorded deaths from the 356 reported on Tuesday. Germany recently relaxed restrictions on travel from the UK, South Africa and seven other southern African countries that were imposed following the emergence of the Omicron variant. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has said Americans seeking to end their Covid-19 isolation at five days can opt for a rapid antigen test, but stopped short of mandating the test despite pressure by health experts. “If an individual has access to a test and wants to test, the best approach is to use an antigen test towards the end of the 5-day isolation period,” the agency said. The agency had been pressured by health experts to institute a test requirement after it cut in half its guidance last week for people to isolate after a Covid-19 infection to 5 days from 10. It said the move was based on science around transmission of the virus. On Tuesday, the CDC added an explanation on its website, saying that a review of 113 studies from 17 countries showed that most transmission occurs early in the course of infection. It said the average period of infectiousness and risk of transmission was “between 2-3 days before and 8 days after symptom onset.” Dr Anthony Fauci, the nation’s top infectious disease official and President Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser, in television interviews on Sunday said officials were considering asking people to get tested after a five-day quarantine period. The isolation period should be followed by strict mask use for an additional five days, the CDC said last week and again on Tuesday. However, if an individual tests positive after 5 days, they should isolate for the full 10 days, it said. Covid case counts may be losing importance amid Omicron, some experts say. Though coronavirus case counts are increasing at an explosive rate across the world, they may yield a less useful picture of the pandemic amid the spread of Omicron, which is causing lots of infections but so far does not appear to be as severe in its effects. Some, such as US Chief Medical Advisor Dr Anthony Fauci, believe the focus should instead be on Covid-19 hospital admissions. Fauci said on Sunday: It is much more relevant to focus on the hospitalisations as opposed to the total number of cases.” Daily case counts and their ups and downs have been one of the most closely watched barometers during the outbreak but they have long been considered an imperfect measure, in part because they consist primarily of laboratory-confirmed cases of Covid-19, not the actual number of infections out there, which is almost certainly many times higher. Dr Wafaa El-Sadr, director of ICAP, a global health centre at Columbia University, said we should be “shifting our focus, especially in an era of vaccination, to really focus on preventing illness, disability and death, and therefore counting those.” Case counts have lost relevance, said Andrew Noymer, a public health professor at the University of California, Irvine. Hospitalisations are where the rubber meets the road. It’s a more objective measure. If I had to choose one metric, I would choose the hospitalisation data.” Still, health experts are not prepared to do away with case counts. “We should not abandon looking at case numbers,” said Dr Eric Topol, head of the Scripps Research Translational Institute, “but it is important to acknowledge we’re seeing only a portion of the actual number of cases.” French president Emmanuel Macron has prompted a furore after saying that his government’s vaccination strategy is to “piss off” people who have not had coronavirus jabs by continuing to make daily life more and more difficult for them. Macron told Le Parisien in an interview on Tuesday: I am not about pissing off the French people. But as for the non-vaccinated, I really want to piss them off. And we will continue to do this, to the end. This is the strategy. In a democracy, the worst enemies are lies and stupidity. We are putting pressure on the unvaccinated by limiting, as much as possible, their access to activities in social life.” The remarks come as the French parliament debates new legislation that, if passed, will mean only the fully vaccinated – and no longer those with a negative Covid test – will qualify for the country’s health pass from next month. The pass, introduced this summer, is required in France for access to indoor public places such as cafes, restaurants, cinemas, museums, concert venues and sports centres, as well as to board long-distance trains and planes. Read the full story from Guardian reporter Jon Henley here. Rio de Janeiro has cancelled its street parades and parties during its world-famous Carnival for a second year due to an increase in Covid cases and the threat from the arrival of the Omicron coronavirus variant, the city’s mayor said on Tuesday. However, the spectacular parade by Rio’s samba schools, which the public watches from the stands of the city’s Marques de Sapucai Sambadrome, will go ahead, unlike last year, with health precautions to prevent spreading the virus. Rio mayor Eduardo Paes made the announcement after a meeting with health authorities that the city would call off the event that draws hundreds of thousands of Carnival revellers each year. “The street carnival, by its very nature, due to the democratic aspect it has, makes it impossible to exercise any kind of inspection,” Paes said in a live internet broadcast. Other Brazilian capitals are also cancelling their Carnival parades. Last week, the northeastern city of Salvador announced it would not celebrate the event. Belo Horizonte, the capital of Minas Gerais state, also decided it will not sponsor or invest in street parades this year, local media reported. Sao Paulo is planning to transfer its street parade to the city’s Interlagos Formula One race track, the Folha de Sao Paulo newspaper reported. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog. French president Emmanuel Macron has prompted a furore after saying that his government’s vaccination strategy is to “piss off” people who have not had coronavirus jabs by continuing to make daily life more and more difficult for them. “I am not about pissing off the French people,” he said in an interview with Le Parisien on Tuesday. “But as for the non-vaccinated, I really want to piss them off. And we will continue to do this, to the end. This is the strategy.” The remarks come as the French parliament debates new legislation that, if passed, will mean only the fully vaccinated – and no longer those with a negative Covid test – will qualify for the country’s health pass from next month. Authorities in India’s capital Delhi on Tuesday ordered people to stay home over coming weekends as Covid cases quadrupled in a week. Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia told a media briefing that Delhi’s 19 million residents would be required to stay indoors on Saturdays and Sundays. On weekdays, most offices will need to ensure that half their employees work from home, he added. Here is a comprehensive rundown of all the latest Covid developments from across the world: A fourth dose of Covid vaccine boosts antibodies five-fold a week after the shot is administered, the Israeli prime minister, Naftali Bennett, said on Tuesday, citing preliminary findings of an Israeli study. More evidence is emerging that the Omicron coronavirus variant is causing milder symptoms than previous variants and resulting in a “decoupling” in some places between soaring case numbers and low death rates, a World Health Organization official said on Tuesday. Confirmed daily Covid cases in the UK have hit another record high, with 218,724 reported in the past 24 hours. Italy reported a record 170,844 new Covid cases on Tuesday, compared with 68,052 the day before, the health ministry said, while the daily tally of coronavirus-related deaths rose to 259 from 140. Greece reported a record 50,126 Covid-related infections on Tuesday, breaking a previous high of 40,560 registered on 31 December. France reported a record-breaking 271,686 new coronavirus cases on Tuesday, as Omicron infections continue to burden hospital staff and threaten disruption to services across the country. Sweden’s King Carl XVI Gustaf and Queen Silvia have tested positive for Covid, the palace said in a statement on Tuesday. Sweden set a new daily record for Covid cases, registering 11,507 cases on 30 December, health agency data showed on Tuesday as a fourth wave of the virus spread across the country. Tennis star Novak Djokovic looks set to play in the Australian Open after revealing he is heading to the country under a medical exemption. Germany has relaxed restrictions on travel from the UK, South Africa and seven other southern African countries that were imposed following the emergence of the Omicron coronavirus variant. Reinfections should be included in Covid figures for the UK as soon as possible, scientists have said, amid warnings that up to 15% of Omicron cases could be people who have had coronavirus before. Authorities in Greece have introduced new price limits for Covid testing following a surge in demand due to a steep rise in infections blamed on the Omicron variant. Students at Spanish schools and universities will return to class in-person when the new term begins on 10 January, the country’s health minister said on Tuesday. Puerto Rico has imposed new measures to fight a surge in Covid cases that has overwhelmed medical staff in the US territory and led to temporary shortages of testing kits. India’s capital Delhi will impose a weekend curfew to try to curb the spread of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus as cases have risen rapidly in the past few days, its deputy chief minister Manish Sisodia told a news conference on Tuesday. A South Korean court ordered that private educational facilities, including cram schools, should be temporarily excluded from government Covid vaccine pass mandates, the health ministry said on Tuesday. Police in Germany have reported sporadic violence at demonstrations against the country’s pandemic restrictions, with one protester in the eastern town of Lichtenstein biting an officer and another attempting to steal a service weapon. Taiwan president Tsai Ing-wen on Tuesday urged vigilance against the spread of Covid after the island detected its first cases of the Omicron variant spreading in the community. The number of new Covid-19 infections in Japan rose above 1,000 on Tuesday for the first time in three months, the Jiji news agency reported. The city of Yuzhou in China’s Henan province entered lockdown Monday night after three asymptomatic Covid cases were detected on Sunday, local media reports.It will be like a real-life Frayed, I joked to friends. We’ll appear, slightly disoriented, in Sydney’s southern, faded beach-side suburbs, a place I thought I’d long since left behind. I’ll even wear the dresses. After 18 years of living in the UK, returning to Australia with a small family in tow was always going to be an adventure/insane, especially in the middle of a pandemic. But my head was only filled with the good stuff: the smell of eucalyptus, glimmering green ocean pools, the warm embrace of family and friends, and sweet non-Covid freedom. The reality, as always, was something else. Because moving home meant moving back in – at least temporarily – with my parents, and to the house I grew up in. “It won’t be for long,” I assured my husband, who looked a bit pale every time we went over the plans involving his in-laws. “It might even be nice? Anyway, we’ll find our own place really quickly.” But I was wrong. Naively, I thought the heart-stopping lead up to escaping plague island would be the worst of it. Negotiating what to do if the sudden cut to arrivals caps meant we got bumped off our flight at the last minute, job interviews at ungodly hours in a half-packed up house, keeping the kids isolated for the last week as Delta tore through our village, saying goodbye without actually going inside anyone’s house – surely these were the hardest moments? Quarantine, we foolishly reasoned, would be a breeze in comparison. After arriving on a ridiculously empty plane (12 passengers) and being ushered into our confines, it was clear that once again, we were mistaken. You don’t truly know the meaning of panic until you spend two weeks in an apartment with a balcony 30 floors up and a fearless, outdoor-loving three-year-old. On our penultimate day in the high-rise prison and after four Covid tests, a doctor, soldier, policeman and a nurse knocked on the door. It sounded like a bad joke. “Well you’ve tested negative,” the doctor said, as all four of us lined up in front of them. “But now we are just going to … um, look at you.” We stared back – pasty white, full of two weeks’ worth of quarantine food and stale air. “Yep, you look healthy,” he said. The truth, though, is that we looked like shit. Our day of release into the Australian wilds came. An hour after scrambling into my dad’s car we were at the beach, diving into the cool, clear water as Australians in winter coats looked on in horror. And suddenly we were back. Back in my old bedroom, an achingly bad Smashing Pumpkins inspired mural staring at me from above the cupboard doors (what is it that compels parents to only preserve the embarrassing things?). Back around the dining table I spent my childhood at, squabbling with siblings. Back at my old primary school, so that I could enrol my son, while wondering what kind of life choices we were making. Back in my old neighbourhood, despite, many many moons ago, gleefully joining a FB page “I left the shire”. Back in a country where Covid, unlike in the disease-ridden nation we’d just left, seemed like a relatively new phenomenon. Our conversations on the pandemic were thrust 18 months in the past. “Well you don’t understand, we haven’t had Covid here, until now!” “But you don’t understand how many lockdowns we’ve lived through!” Perhaps a bit more unexpectedly, other facets of Australian life made us feel we’d flown into the past. “Is it electric?” My three -year-old would always ask when he saw other people drive to the house (but obviously, not enter). Eight years since being wed, I found myself reunited with my maiden name when authorities refused to recognise my British marriage certificate. “But it’s the same head of state!” I wailed at various uninterested call centres. Waiting days for bank transfers, not being able to buy booze in the supermarket, a government that won’t address the realities of climate change (guys, even Boris Johnson talks about it) – the time warp was everywhere. Some things had changed though – mainly the horrifically bloated house prices and impenetrable rental market, meaning our stay at casa parental appeared infinite. In the first few days, some rules were laid down. Mainly for the kids … I think. There was the hot water limit, no sand in the washing machine, and a special area the two boys were forbidden to enter, where my dad kept a prized clarinet. It didn’t take us long to break them. The next day, I spied my youngest, crouching silently in the no-go zone, concentrating, his sweaty hands fingering the keys. There was also work to negotiate in this topsy-turvy world. I walked into my first day at the Guardian, not by prancing into a bustling newsroom, but by stepping into the fibro granny flat, where my nan once lived, to sit at a rickety camping table upon which I tried to steady my laptop and monitor. Oddly, my dreams of our new life had not included my mother bursting into work meetings holding a kilo of raw chicken and launching into a raft of complicated cooking options, or my dad rushing past to use the spare fridge as I attempted to look vaguely professional on a Zoom call. Salvation did come though. Three months after setting foot on Sydney soil/sand, we escaped to our own place. A day after moving out we nipped back for some leftover bits. “I miss you!” my mum exclaimed as I entered the hallway. I looked at her, quizzically. “Are you sure?” I ask, while scanning the house, which now looks clean and calm. No screaming children flying through the kitchen or pouring all the bath water onto the floor or eating all the Tim Tams. “Yes” she says, with meaning. And in a moment, I remember why, despite everything, coming back was also the best.Joe Biden plans to highlight “the singular responsibility of President Trump for the chaos and carnage that we saw” in remarks tomorrow, on the anniversary of the 6 January insurrection. Trump memorably referred to “American carnage” to paint a dystopian picture of the land in his first speech as president, at his inauguration on 20 January 2017. Attorney general Merrick Garland provided an update on the justice department’s investigation into the 6 January attack. He said that though the department has filed charges against 725 defendants in nearly all 50 states and the District of Columbia, “the actions we have taken thus far will not be our last”. More than 40% of Americans still do not believe that Joe Biden legitimately won the 2020 presidential election despite no evidence of widespread voter fraud, according to a new Axios-Momentive poll. The poll, released on the eve of the first anniversary of the attack on the Capitol by a pro-Trump mob, found that 55% of those surveyed believe Biden won the election. That figure has barely changed since Axios’s poll from 2020, published shortly before the insurrection. Advisers to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) have voted to recommend Covid-19 vaccine booster shots for children aged 12-17. The CDC’s director Rochelle Walensky is expected to make the recommendation official policy, clearing the way for adolescents to receive their boosters immediately. The panel voted 13-1, recommending boosters for all children 12-17 who received their last dose at least five months back. – Guardian staff More than 40% in US do not believe Biden legitimately won election. Maya Yang reports: More than 40% of Americans still do not believe that Joe Biden legitimately won the 2020 presidential election despite no evidence of widespread voter fraud, according to a new Axios-Momentive poll. The poll, released on the eve of the first anniversary of the attack on the Capitol by a pro-Trump mob, found that 55% of those surveyed believe Biden won the election. That figure has barely changed since Axios’s poll from 2020, published shortly before the insurrection. That poll, published in 2020, found 58% said that they accepted Biden as the legitimate winner of the presidential election. Despite Biden’s inauguration, the attack on the Capitol and the multiple investigations that have debunked the lies pushed by the former president that the election was stolen, the poll suggests that the same level of doubt persists. “It’s dispiriting to see that this shocking thing we all witnessed last year hasn’t changed people’s perceptions,” Laura Wronski, senior manager for research science at Momentive, told Axios. A majority of Americans also said they are expecting a repeat of the deadly 6 January attack in the next few years. The polls, conducted from 1 to 5 January of this year, surveyed nearly 2,700 adults, and found nearly 57% – about half of Republicans and seven in 10 Democrats – believe that events similar to the attack are likely to occur again. In addition, nearly two-thirds or 63% said that the 6 January attack has at least temporarily changed the way they think about their democratic government. A third said that those changes are temporary. Nearly as many, 31%, said that those changes are permanent. About 37% of those surveyed said they had lost faith in American democracy, while 10% said they had never had faith in the system. Another 49% said they do have faith. Among those surveyed who said they have lost faith, 47% said they were Republicans while 28% were Democrats. Fifty-eight percent of Americans said they supported the investigative work of the House select committee investigating the riot. Among those, 88% are Democrats, 58% are independents and 32% are Republicans. Just slightly more than half of American adults, 51%, said individuals associated with the insurrection should face criminal penalties if they refuse to comply with subpoenas. Read more: Advisers to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) have voted to recommend Covid-19 vaccine booster shots for children aged 12-17, and the CDC’s director Rochelle Walensky is expected to make the recommendation official policy, clearing the way for adolescents to receive their boosters immediately. The panel voted 13-1, recommending boosters for all children 12-17 who received their last dose at least five months back. The recommendation comes as schools across the country scramble to reopen safely as they grapple with staff shortages and the Omicron variant, which appears to be infecting children at higher rates than previous variants of the coronavirus. Adolescents 16 and older were already recommended for boosters, but today’s vote expands the age group. Earlier this week, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) authorized Pfizer-BioNTech boosters for adolescents and endorsed waiting for five rather than six months between one’s last dose and the booster. The FDA also recommended an additional dose for immunocompromised children aged five to 11. The US has imposed new sanctions on the Bosnian Serb leader, Milorad Dodik, a television station under his control and two other officials for “significant corruption and destabilizing activities”. The sanctions, involving asset freezes and visa bans, follow Dodik’s threat to withdraw Serbs from the Bosnian national army and other state-level institutions, potentially destroying the 1995 Dayton peace treaty and opening the way for a return to conflict. Official statements accompanying the sanctions focus on the corruption which US officials say underpin Dodik’s political posturing. “His divisive ethno-nationalistic rhetoric reflects his efforts to advance these political goals and distract attention from his corrupt activities,” a Treasury statement said. “Cumulatively, these actions threaten the stability, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of BiH and undermine the Dayton Peace Accords, thereby risking wider regional instability.” It said Dodik had handed government contracts and monopolies in the Serb-run half of Bosnia, Republika Srpska (RS) to close business associates. “With his corrupt proceeds, Dodik has engaged in bribery and additional corrupt activities to further his personal interests at the expense of citizens in the RS,” the Treasury said. Dodik has already been sanctioned in 2017, for obstruction of the Dayton accord. The new measures are wider, criminalizing financial donations to him, and targeting Alternativna Televizija, a television station based in Banja Luka, the biggest town in the RS. The channel is privately owned by a company closely linked to Dodik’s family, the Treasury said, and operates as Dodik’s personal propaganda outlet. Read more: Joe Biden plans to use his remarks tomorrow, the anniversary of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol, to speak of “the singular responsibility of President Trump for the chaos and carnage that we saw”. Attorney general Merrick Garland provided an update on the justice department’s investigation into the 6 January attack, saying that though the department has filed charges against 725 defendants in nearly all 50 states and the District of Columbia, “the actions we have taken thus far will not be our last”. “The justice department remains committed to holding all January 6th perpetrators, at any level, accountable under law — whether they were present that day or were otherwise criminally responsible for the assault on our democracy,” he said. One year later, the FBI still has not arrested the person caught on video planting pipe bombs outside the Democratic National Committee and the Republican National Committee ahead of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. Grainy surveillance video shows a hooded figure placing the bombs at about 7.30pm on 5 January 2021, ABC reports. Investigators later found the devices amid the chaos of the 6 January attack, and at first believed they were merely a diversion tactic. That theory has since been shot down. “This person laid or planted two viable explosive devices in a residential and commercial area that could have done people harm,” Steven D’Antuono, assistant director in charge of the FBI’s Washington field office, told ABC. “We want to catch this person before they do someone else harm.” It was a quiet week already for the Senate, with Monday’s snow keeping everyone out of session for Monday and Tuesday (and Tim Kaine stuck in traffic for 27 hours, lest we forget). Now it appears to be staying that way: While attorney general Merrick Garland and his speech today will not have assuaged any critics who are calling for the justice department to act more swiftly and judiciously with their investigation into the 6 January attack on the US Capitol, the reaction to his remarks has mostly been positive: At one point, Garland began talking about the debunked claims of widespread voter fraud - claims he pointed out were debunked by officials in both administrations - and how these claims are now being used to restrict the rights of voters. Attorney general Merrick Garland quietly acknowledged the frustration with the speed and scope of the justice department’s investigation, making a point to describe how investigators must build a foundation first with the easy cases to get to the big cases. “To ensure that all those criminally responsible are held accountable, we must collect the evidence,” he said. “We follow the physical evidence, we follow the digital evidence, we follow the money. But most importantly, we follow the facts. Not an agenda, not an assumption, the facts tell us where to go.” Attorney general Merrick Garland said thus far, the justice department has filed charges against 725 defendants “in nearly all 50 states and the District of Columbia” in connection to the 6 January attack. Of those defendants, 325 were charged with felonies - 20 have already pleaded guilty. Garland noted that investigators have “issued 5,000 subpoenas, seized 2,000 devices, pored through 20,000 hours of video footage and searched through 15 terabytes of data”. “The actions we have taken thus far will not be our last,” he said. “The justice department remains committed to holding all January 6th perpetrators, at any level, accountable under law — whether they were present that day or were otherwise criminally responsible for the assault on our democracy.” Attorney general Merrick Garland has taken the podium to reaffirm that the justice department’s commitment to defending the American democracy. He alluded to a major point in the Biden administration’s agenda: voter rights protections. “We will protect the cornerstone of our democracy: the right to every eligible citizen to cast a vote that counts,” he said. Tomorrow, Joe Biden will address the nation on the anniversary of one the worst days in the country’s history, the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. Now it appears far-right representatives Matt Gaetz and Marjorie Taylor Greene will be providing a response. As a reminder, many have voiced unhappiness with the justice department and how attorney general Merrick Garland has been handling the investigation into the 6 January attack on the US Capitol - the main criticism being that the justice department has not taken enough action, gotten to the origins of the organizing behind the attack or made any mention about Donald Trump’s role in the whole event. In a moment, attorney general Merrick Garland will provide remarks on the justice department’s investigation into the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. Watch live here. In previewing some of what Joe Biden will say tomorrow when he makes remarks at the US Capitol on the insurrection there last January 6 by Donald Trump supporters, it’s interesting to note that press sec Jen Psaki flagged the word “carnage”, for which the sitting US president will blame his predecessor. Of course Trump memorably referred to “American carnage” to paint a dystopian picture of the land in his first speech as president, at his inauguration on January 20, 2017. As the Guardian’s Ed Pilkington noted on the day, Trump: “coined the sinister phrase “American carnage” to vividly conjure an image of inner cities he said were afflicted by crime, a political elite that had forgotten ordinary people, and a landscape of rusted factories like tombstones. Ed continued: And with Hillary Clinton watching only a few painful feet away, Trump left no one in any doubt that he intends to unleash what he called a new vision of “America first” on the world, delivering a brutal and unrepentant speech that made little attempt to soothe the world or begin the healing of an agitated and anxious nation. Trump delivered a 16-minute inaugural speech that more closely resembled his thunderous addresses from the campaign trail than the oratorical heights of his predecessors, berating the Washington elites of both parties for ignoring the American people and allowing inner cities to fester in “crime and gangs and drugs. The American carnage stops right here, right now. From this day forward, a new vision will govern our land. From this day forward, it’s going to be only America first. America first.” It hardly seems accidental that Psaki used the word today and appeared to indicate that Biden is likely to use it tomorrow to assert that rather than living up to his promise during his campaign that “I alone can fix it”, Trump unleashed chaos and finally carnage on American governance. Speaking earlier at the White House, Psaki also noted, in her preview of Biden’s planned speech tomorrow on Jan 6, that as well as castigating Donald Trump, the president will “of course speak to the moment, to the importance in history of the peaceful transfer of power, of what we need to do to protect our own democracy and be forward looking, but he will also reflect on the role his predecessor had” in inciting the insurrection by his supporters at the US Capitol last year, in a vain attempt to prevent the official certification by congress of Biden’s victory over Trump in the 2020 presidential election. At the White House media briefing today, press secretary Jen Psaki flagged that when Joe Biden makes remarks at the US Capitol tomorrow morning to mark the anniversary of the January 6 insurrection by extremist supporters of Donald Trump, he will make a strong statement. She said Biden “is going to speak to the truth of what happened, not the lies that some have spread since, and the peril it posed to the rule of law and our system of democratic governance.” She went on to say that the current US president will also talk of the work still needed to strengthen American democracy “to reject the hate and lies we saw on January 6 and to unite our country.” Psaki said: “President Biden has been clear-eyed about the threat the former president represents to our democracy and how the former president constantly works to undermine basic American values and the rule of law. And President Biden has of course spoken repeatedly about how the former president abused his office, undermined the constitution and ignored his oath to the American people in an effort to amass more power for himself. and his allies.” Biden, the White House continued, “sees January 6 as the tragic culmination of what those four years under President Trump did to our country and they reflected the importance to the president of winning … the battle for the soul of our nation.” “I would expect that President Biden will lay out the significance of what happened at the Capitol and the singular responsibility President Trump has for the chaos and carnage that we saw,” Psaki said. “And he will forcibly push back on the lies spread by the former president in an attempt to mislead the American people and his own supporters,” she added. It’s been an expectant and reflective morning in Washington as those in the capital prepare for the anniversary tomorrow of the Trump-inspired insurrection at the US Capitol on January 6 last year. Stay tuned for the rest of the day’s coverage of US political news as it happens. Here’s where things stand: Stephanie Grisham, former White House press secretary under Donald Trump, will meet today with the House select committee tasked with investigating the 6 January attack on the US Capitol, CNN is reporting Andy Kim, a Democrat from New Jersey, is tweeting out what leading Republicans said in the immediate aftermath of the violence a year ago, condemning the insurrection and blaming Donald Trump, in a bid to “not let them forget”. Just 55% of Americans polled believe Joe Biden legitimately won the 2020 presidential election - even though proof of his legitimate victory has been established in courts across the country time and time again, a new Axios-Momentive poll is reporting . As Washington prepares for the January 6 insurrection’s anniversary, attorney general Merrick Garland will deliver remarks this afternoon on the investigation by the justice department into the attack. This is separate from the investigation by the special congressional bipartisan committee that we’ve been hearing so much from in recent months, led by the committee chair, congressman Bennie Thompson of Mississippi. While the Republicans of Congress may be a little wishy-washy when it comes to the 6 January attack on the US Capitol - and exactly who bears responsibility for it - the White House said Americans should be prepared for Joe Biden to speak tomorrow about “the singular responsibility of President Trump for the chaos and carnage that we saw”. “President Biden has spoken repeatedly about how the former president has abused his office, undermined the constitution and ignored his oath to the American people in order to amass more power for himself and his allies,” White House press secretary Jen Psaki said at today’s press briefing. CNN is reporting that Stephanie Grisham, former White House press secretary under Donald Trump, will meet today with the House select committee tasked with investigating the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. Grisham was fired from as press secretary and White House communications director in April 2020, replaced by Kaleigh McEnany. She returned immediately as chief of staff to then-first lady Melania Trump. Grisham was one of the longest serving members of the Trump administration, starting her time with Trump as a press aide on his campaign. On 6 January, she became the first administration official to resign as a result of the attack. Grisham confirmed in her memoir that on 6 January, she sent Melania Trump a text asking, “Do you want to tweet that peaceful protests are the right of every American, but there is no place for lawlessness and violence?” Melania Trump, who CNN reported was conducting a photo shoot of some carpets in the White House that she had had installed, replied: “No.” It wasn’t until 11 January that Melania Trump acknowledged the insurrection. Speaking of the 147 members of Congress who objected to the certification of the 2020 election result, HuffPost’s Jennifer Bendery asked all of them, one year later, if they thought Joe Biden won the 2020 presidential election fairly - a fact that has been proven in courts across the country again and again at this point. Nearly all declined to answer, Bendery said. Though Rick Scott, the senator from Florida, responded with, “He’s the constitutionally elected president. I’ve said it like a zillion times” - he told HuffPost that he did not regret voting against certifying the election result. Senators Josh Hawley and Tommy Tuberville both had similar answers - that Biden won the election fairly, but they did not regret their vote against certifying that win. Only one aide out of the 139 House Republicans who voted against certification responded to Bendery’s inquiries - congressman Pete Sessions does not regret his vote, and still had concerns about widespread voter fraud, allegations of which, once again, have never been proven. However, congressman Tom Rice told Politico last month that he should have voted to certify “because President Trump was responsible for the attack on the Capitol.” “In the wee hours of that disgraceful night, while waiting for the Capitol of our great country to be secured, I knew I should vote to certify,” Rice said. “But because I had made a public announcement of my intent to object, I did not want to go back on my word. So, yeah, I regret my vote to object.” The Insurrection Index has identified more than 1,000 Americans in positions of public trust who acted as accomplices in Donald Trump’s attempt to overturn the 2020 election result, either by participating in the 6 January attack on the US Capitol or spreading the “big lie” that the vote count had been rigged. This index was set up by Public Wise, a voting rights group whose mission is to fight for government that reflects the will and the rights of voters, with legal advice from Marc Elias, one of the most influential election lawyers in the US who was Hillary Clinton’s top counsel in the 2016 presidential campaign and who successfully led Joe Biden’s resistance to Trump’s blitzkrieg of lawsuits contesting the 2020 results. Some of the individuals listed in the index include: Mark Finchem, a member of the Arizona House of Representatives who was present at Trump’s “stop the steal” rally in Washington on 6 January and who is now vying to become Arizona secretary of state – the top election official who oversees the presidential count. Jake Hoffman, a lawmaker who represents Arizona’s 12th district, who wrote to fellow Republicans a day before the Capitol insurrection urging them to pressure then vice-president Mike Pence into blocking Biden’s victory. The 147 members of Congress who objected to the certification of the 2020 election results. The Guardian’s Ed Pilkington has more here: The Guardian’s David Smith takes a look at the control that Donald Trump has had on the Republican party - and how it’s grown since the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. Here’s a sweet story from one of the worst days in our country’s history. Politico Huddle tells the tale of how in the chaos of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol, Joe Lowry, the director of emergency preparedness for the House of Representatives, found a gold earring on the floor of the house chamber balcony. Assuming it was lost in the rush to safety, he tweeted out his discovery, hoping to reunite it with its owner. After holding onto the earring for almost an entire ear, he tried again, just ahead of the one-year anniversary of the attack. Almost immediately, Politico reporter Sarah Ferris recognized it as hers. She went back after evacuation to try and find it, but to no avail. Ferris told the Huddle that she had borrowed those earrings from her mother, who is now “very thrilled I didn’t forever lose her favorite earrings.” With one day to go to the anniversary of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol, congressman Andy Kim, a Democrat from New Jersey, is tweeting out what Republicans said in the immediate aftermath of the violence in a bid to “not let them forget”. All these quotes have been previously reported and the ones republished below are fact-checked. But after a year of hearing leaders like Kevin McCarthy and Mitch McConnell backtrack - plus, you know, the whole acquittal of Donald Trump in his second impeachment - it’s jarring to remember how strongly they spoke against the former president in the days that followed. A new Axios-Momentive poll is reporting today that just 55% of Americans polled believe Joe Biden legitimately won the 2020 presidential election - even though proof of his legitimate victory has been proven in courts across the country time and time again. Of those polled, 26% definitively said no, they did not believe Biden legitimately won - a fact that has, once again, been proven false - and 16% said they were not sure. About 37% of those surveyed say they’ve lost faith in American democracy, while 10% said they never had any faith. But this figure skews more toward the right than toward the left — 47% of Republicans said they lost faith while only 28% Democrats agreed. Ahead of the anniversary of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol, about 57% of Americans — about half of Republicans and seven in 10 Democrats — believe that more events like 6 January will happen in the next few years. Only about 58% said they support the work of the House select committee investigating the events of 6 January — 88% among Democrats, 58% among independents and 32% among Republicans. Ahoy there, live blog readers. Happy Wednesday. Much of today’s focus appears to be in preparation of tomorrow’s anniversary of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. Attorney general Merrick Garland will deliver remarks this afternoon on the investigation by the justice department into the attack. The Washington Post’s Jennifer Rubin noted that for some, “patience is wearing thin with Garland”, who has yet to tie Donald Trump to the events of the insurrection. “Garland does not want to give specifics about who is being investigated and for what. Fine. But he then must describe the crime,” Rubin wrote. “On the eve of the anniversary of the Capitol riot, he must explain in clear terms that the assault on democracy was both violent and nonviolent, beginning well before 6 January.” Ahead of Garland’s remarks, senate majority leader Chuck Schumer will be speaking about the attack at the senate rules committee oversight meeting. Reminder that earlier this week, Schumer connected the anniversary of the attack to another attack on our democracy - the attack on voter rights. He laid down a plan to hold to a vote by or on 17 January, Martin Luther King Jr Day, to change the rules to the filibuster, a parliamentary tactic that Republicans have used repeatedly to block voter rights legislation, using strong language about the 6 January anniversary. Meanwhile, Trump has cancelled his planned Mar-A-Lago press conference for tomorrow, just as the House select committee investigating the attack requested the cooperation of Trump adviser and Fox News host, Sean Hannity. Politico is reporting that this news came as a relief to congressional Republicans, who knew they’d be asked to give a response to whatever Trump said.It was a day that shook America. Joe Biden will lead sombre commemorations on Thursday to mark one year since the US Capitol insurrection that left five people dead and the nation’s democracy wounded, and is expected to lay out the “singular responsibility” that Donald Trump has for the “chaos and carnage” of that day. In a speech, Biden will directly address the former president’s role in the attack and his attempts since to distract from or downplay events, the White House said. “At this moment we must decide what kind of nation we are going to be,” the president will say, according to an excerpt released by the White House. “Are we going to be a nation that accepts political violence as a norm? Are we going to be a nation where we allow partisan election officials to overturn the legally expressed will of the people? “Are we going to be a nation that lives not by the light of the truth but in the shadow of lies? We cannot allow ourselves to be that kind of nation. The way forward is to recognise the truth and to live by it.” Biden has been “clear-eyed” about the “threat the former president represents to our democracy”, the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said in a briefing on Wednesday. Biden has repeatedly stated that Trump “abused his office, undermined the constitution and ignored his oath to the American people in an effort to amass more power for himself and his allies”, Psaki said. “President Biden will lay out the significance of what happened at the Capitol and the singular responsibility President Trump has for the chaos and the carnage that we saw,” she added. “He will forcibly push back on the lies spread by the former president in an attempt to mislead the American people and his own supporters, as well as distract from his role in what happened.” The president is also set to praise the bravery of outnumbered police officers on the scene and outline the unfinished work that America needs to do to heal, the White House said. Defeated in the 2020 presidential election, Trump incited his supporters to storm the Capitol and interrupt certification of Biden’s victory. Scores of police were beaten and bloodied and congressional offices were ransacked in the worst ever domestic attack on the seat of US government. Trump this week cancelled his own anniversary event – a press conference at his Mar-a-Lago estate in Florida that had been scheduled for the evening of 6 January – reportedly at the urging of advisers. A year on from the attack, polls show Americans are still divided in their perceptions of what unfolded and why. The anniversary offers Biden, who promised to bring the nation together, an opportunity to reassert a fact-based account. He and and Vice-President Kamala Harris will speak on Thursday morning at the US Capitol. “The president is going to speak to the truth of what happened, not the lies that some have spread since, and the peril it has posed to the rule of law and our system of democratic governance,” Psaki told reporters on Tuesday. Biden will put an extra spotlight on the role of Capitol police and others on the scene, Psaki said. “Because of their efforts, our democracy withstood an attack from a mob, and the will of more than 150 million people who voted in the presidential election was ultimately registered by Congress.” Psaki was asked at the press briefing what the president’s message will be to the many Republicans who believe Biden stole the election from Trump, despite overwhelming contrary evidence. “What he’s going to continue to do is speak to everyone in the country. Those who didn’t vote for him, those who may not believe he is the legitimate president, about what he wants to do to make their lives better,” the spokesperson replied. Other events at the Capitol on Thursday will include a moment of reflection with staff on the House of Representatives floor, a moment of silence on the House floor, a conversation with the presidential historians Doris Kearns Goodwin and Jon Meacham, testimonials from members of Congress and a prayer vigil. Four people died on the day of the riot and one Capitol police officer died the day after. Four officers have since taken their own lives. The crowd called for the then vice-president, Mike Pence, presiding over the electoral college vote count, to be hanged. But Trump, fellow Republicans and rightwing media personalities have pushed false and misleading accounts to downplay the attack, calling it a non-violent protest or blaming leftwing activists. Even Pence has dismissed it as “just one day in January”. Congressional Republicans are expected to keep a low profile or stay away from Thursday’s events. Trump had been expected to create a split-screen moment by pushing his counter-narrative at a televised press conference, but he abruptly scrapped the plan on Tuesday. In a statement, the former president criticised a House select committee investigating the 6 January insurrection, which continues its work and on Tuesday issued a letter seeking the cooperation of the Fox New host Sean Hannity, who exchanged messages with Trump and his chief of staff, Mark Meadows, in the days leading up to the attack. Trump said that he was cancelling his conference “in light of the total bias and dishonesty of the January 6th Unselect Committee of Democrats, two failed Republicans, and the Fake News Media”, and would address the issue instead at a rally in Arizona on 15 January. The ex-president was reportedly talked out of holding a press conference by allies. Senator Lindsey Graham told the Axios website that he discussed the subject with Trump over a weekend golf match in West Palm Beach, Florida, arguing that “there could be peril in doing a news conference … Best to focus on election reform instead.” Separate from the House investigation, the justice department is leading the prosecution of rioters who invaded the Capitol. More than 700 people have been charged so far in one of the biggest criminal investigations in American history. More than 30 have received jail sentences. Trump was kicked off Twitter after the Capitol attack for statements encouraging violence. He was impeached by the House but acquitted by the Senate, leaving the way open for him to seek the White House again in 2024. A Washington Post-University of Maryland poll found that 72% of Republicans say Trump does not really bear responsibility for what happened, 58% of Republicans believe Biden’s election was not legitimate and 40% of Republicans and independents say violence against the government is sometimes justified.The road to Broadway now includes a stop at Rooty Hill. The Sydney Coliseum Theatre opened in the western Sydney suburb in December 2019, funded in part by the Rooty Hill RSL’s gaming revenue and designed to function as both a lyric theatre and concert venue that could attract major productions – and major names – to the region. Now, by hosting a three-week season of The Little Prince – based on the beloved bestselling 1943 novella by Antoine De Saint-Exupéry and produced by the Broadway Entertainment Group – the venue has become part of an international pipeline. The production premiered in Paris in 2019 and made its Australian debut last year at the Sydney Opera House; in March, it lands at the Broadway Theatre in New York. The stage show is directed and choreographed by Anne Tournié, with co-direction by Chris Mouron. It is faithful to the book’s plot, language and structure, as well as its fabulist elements and its heartfelt insistence that the most valuable parts of life lie beyond work, routines, and habits. An aviator crashes in the desert and comes across the titular Prince (Lionel Zacharias, in bare feet and boasting a shock of blonde hair). He has left his tiny asteroid – where he rakes out the little volcanoes that come up to his knee and tends to a rose that has stolen his heart – to explore the world. This production is designed to travel. Built from a strong foundation of visual art and movement, it blends circus arts and dance on video projections that cover the floor and backdrop and relies on these non-verbal elements for the majority of its storytelling. For the rest, there is a Narrator, played by Mouron, who also adapted the novella’s text for the stage. She speaks mostly in English and occasionally in French (the entire work is sur-titled in English); sometimes, her voice lifts in song. She guides us through the scenes as the Prince travels through space to meet an arrogant king, a bustling businessman, and a drunk, among others, before landing on Earth and making a lasting impact on the aviator. It is still that aviator’s story, framed by his encounter with the Prince, which we see here, but Mouron speaks for every character as the story’s singular voice, and keeps the production tied to De Saint-Exupéry’s work by taking very few liberties with the language – it’s less of a new adaptation than a cross-artform translation. It’s as though the story is now a pop-up book being shown to us. Marie Jumelin’s video design is gently surrealistic, creating new skies and visual vocabulary for each planet on the Prince’s journey. When performers swing on aerial ropes to simulate flying, they seem suspended in the middle of the universe. There is often a riot of stars, which makes perfect sense: this is a story that looks constantly to the stars and remarks on their value. Against such detailed video, Tournié’s choreography is often necessarily simple, consisting mostly of bold and broad steps that immediately suggest meaning. The Vain Man (played by Antony Cesar and who, in the production’s most trite update, is obsessed simply with taking selfies) tumbles and break dances, performing tricks on tricks, while the Rose (the heart of the show and a clear audience favourite, played by Laurisse Sulty) is given romantic, balletic shapes. Acrobatic balancing balls cleverly represent planets – the Prince walks onstage on one in his first entrance, evoking the novella’s famous illustrations of the character atop his little asteroid. The ultimate effect is more beguiling than it is persuasive. The production is almost too true to the novella; at nearly two hours long, it begins to overstay its welcome (the opening night audience – children and adults alike – became audibly restless). While its reliance on video technology is its most dazzling element, it is also its riskiest; on opening night, the spell was broken when the show was stopped for 10 minutes waiting for a generator to kick in after a power cut in Rooty Hill. And it really does feel like a spell: the movement and swelling, wistful score (by Terry Truck) weave together an invocation of our better selves – the parts of us that can be moved to tears by the grace of a dancer reaching out her hand; the parts that find beauty and purpose in connecting with others; that part of us that wants to better the world within which we live and work and love. But, like any spell, it thrives on intention: for The Little Prince to work its magic on the audience, they must be prepared to give themselves over to it. Cynics will have a tougher time. Bring your softest self. The Little Prince runs until 23 January at the Sydney Coliseum Theatre. Mask-wearing for patrons over 12 is mandatory, although patrons may take them off to eat and drink. A reduced number of foyer bars are open, and lines are socially distanced. Double-vaccination status is checked at the door. The show runs for one hour and 55 minutes, including an interval, and is in an indoor theatre. In line with current state regulations, the venue is able to seat patrons at 100% capacity.The decision to deport tennis star Novak Djokovic has sparked diplomatic fallout, with the prime minister, Scott Morrison, dismissing pleas from the Serbian government for Australia to reconsider the move. Speaking after the Australian Border Force decision on Thursday, Morrison revealed that diplomats from the Serbian embassy in Canberra had made formal representations to Australia about the decision to deport Djokovic for failing to meet vaccine exemption requirements. The world No 1 is is also challenging the visa cancellation in the federal court. Under Australia’s border restrictions, an unvaccinated person can only enter the country if they have a valid medical exemption. It is understood that Djokovic was relying on a previous Covid infection to claim the exemption, but this is not recognised as a grounds for an exception by the Australian government. Morrison said he understood the Serbian government’s position, but the rules “apply to all those who enter”. “I am aware of representations that have been made by the embassy here in Canberra and I understand those, but my simple point is that all countries have their border rules and these rules are not imposed against any one country or any one individual,” Morrison said. “There is no suggestion of any particular position in relation to Serbia. In fact, Serbia has been a good friend of Australia and provided very strong support, particularly on security issues globally, and we greatly appreciate that. “This is a very specific case that deals with one individual and Australia’s sovereign border laws and their fair application.” While Morrison insisted Djokovic had not been “singled out”, the prime minister said that he had attracted the attention of Australian border authorities because of his public statements about vaccination. “They [border force] act on intelligence to direct their attention to potential arrivals,” Morrison said. “When you get people making public statements, of what they say they have, and what they are going to do, and what their claims are, well they draw significant attention to themselves. “And anyone who does that, whether they are a celebrity, a politician, a tennis player, a journalist, whoever does that, well they can expect to be asked questions more than others before you come, that is how border force works.” Morrison also read part of a letter sent by the health minister, Greg Hunt, to Tennis Australia in November making clear that a previous infection was not grounds for quarantine-free entry into Australia. “People must be fully vaccinated, as defined by Atagi, to gain quarantine-free entry into Australia,” the letter of 29 November said. “This means that people who do not meet the Atagi definition of fully vaccinated will not be approved for quarantine-free entry, regardless of whether they have received foreign vaccination exemptions. “In relation to your specific question, I can confirm that people who contracted Covid within six months and seek to enter Australia from overseas, and have not received two doses of a TGA approved or recognised vaccine … are not considered fully vaccinated.” An earlier letter was also sent to Tennis Australia from the federal health department. Morrison dismissed as “scuttlebutt” suggestions that federal officers had contacted the Victorian government to seek a solution that could have seen the Victorian government sponsor Djokovic. “There were no inquiries being made about support for a visa application, I am advised. “There were inquiries being made about whether quarantine was going to be waived … [but] that wasn’t the basis of any decisions taken.” After the decision, which is being appealed by Djokovic, the Serbian president, Aleksandar Vučić, took to Instagram in support of the “strong” tennis great, saying they had spoken on the phone. “I told our Novak that the whole of Serbia is with him,” Vučić said. “Our authorities are doing everything to see that the harassment of the world’s best tennis player is brought to an end, immediately.” The Serbian embassy has been contacted for comment.Vulnerable Covid patients are set to miss out on the lifesaving treatment sotrovimab, doctors say, because it must be taken within five days of getting sick. Waiting times for PCR tests and results, a lack of rapid antigen tests and the need for a GP referral could mean treatment comes too late, according to the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners. The health minister, Greg Hunt, announced on Monday that the federal government had bought an additional 45,000 units of sotrovimab, bringing the national stockpile to 81,000. The monoclonal antibody treatment is designed to help those who become ill with Covid and have risk factors including lung, heart or kidney disease, obesity, diabetes, being over the age of 65, and undergoing cancer treatment. Clinicians can consider its use for women in their second or third pregnancy trimester. It has a 79% effectiveness rate at reducing serious illness, hospitalisation and death. Mark Morgan, professor of general practice at Bond University and chair of the college’s expert committee on quality care, said GPs were “crying out” for clear clinical pathways to use the treatment. “To be effective, it has to be given in the first five days [after symptoms appear], and there are all sorts of problems with getting tested and finding out if your symptoms are from Covid or not because people can’t access the PCR or rapid antigen tests,” he said. “So there are lots of difficulties finding out if you’ve got Covid, then another layer of difficulty playing catchups with the health systems as to who would access this medicine and how it would be given. “It has to be injected over half an hour, and [the patient then has to be] watched for an hour. And this is someone who’s infected.” Morgan said he didn’t think many GPs would have the proper setup established to deliver the treatment themselves and would probably then refer the patient to hospital. “The thing I’m most concerned about is the delays in testing capacity, delays in results, lack of knowledge about the treatment options in the community, so that people will miss out on the treatments.” With the focus on vaccinations, he said, treatments for the infected had been overlooked. “They let [Covid] rip before they had their ducks lined up,” he said. It’s also unclear how long the 81,000 treatments would last. In a press release from August 2021, Hunt said: “Medical experts estimate that eight to 15 per cent of adults with COVID-19 will be recommended for treatment with sotrovimab.” With more than 271,000 new cases this week, if 15% were eligible, around half the existing stockpile would be needed. At the lower end of 8%, the treatments would last four weeks if case numbers did not go up at all. The range of 8% to 15% was estimated before the Omicron variant arrived and before high vaccination levels were achieved, which could affect the numbers of people eligible. The US has a sotrovimab shortage. Sotrovimab is an “artificial copy of natural immunity, made in a laboratory and injected into a vein”, Morgan said. It would not help someone with full immunity but those who were not vaccinated or had underlying conditions could be kept out of hospital. Rapid antigen testing, if made widely available, would speed up access to sotrovimab. Morgan said he would like to see a greater focus on available treatments as infections rise. According to the Therapeutic Goods Administration, there is a critical shortage of one form of heparin, a blood-thinning drug that has been shown to block the transmission of Covid when used as a nasal spray. There is also a critical shortage of dexamethasone, a steroid medication which can help critical Covid cases. But there is often a “reasonable alternative” to such drugs. A health department spokesperson said there were other brands of dexamethasone available, and that the TGA had approved a replacement heparin product and would continue to monitor the supply. The spokesperson also said the federal government was working “to ensure that Australians have early access to safe and effective treatments as they are made available”. Australia has an agreement for supply of 300,00 courses of molnupiravir, 500,000 courses of paxlovid, which will be used in combination with ritonavir, as well as access to remdesivir, evusheld and ronapreve, according to the spokesperson. Morgan expects Covid case numbers to keep rising sharply, and said GPs wanted guidance. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “GPs are crying out for clear clinical pathways, and guidance and knowledge about how best to help their patients and make sure their service is integrated with pharmacies, hospitals, etc,” he said. “It’s going to really be a quite confronting couple of months.” The health department and health minister’s office have been contacted for comment.A mysterious fraudster who impersonated publishers and agents to steal book manuscripts in an international phishing scam may have finally been caught, with the FBI arresting a 29-year-old man at John F Kennedy airport in New York on Wednesday. Filippo Bernardini, an Italian citizen who worked at UK publisher Simon &amp; Schuster, was arrested upon landing in the US on Wednesday. The FBI alleged that Bernardini had “impersonated, defrauded, and attempted to defraud, hundreds of individuals” to obtain unpublished and draft works. Bernardini is charged with wire fraud and aggravated identity theft in a New York district court, with the indictment saying Bernardini had registered more than 160 fake internet domains to impersonate others since 2016. Bernardini’s arrest may mark the start of the end of a mystery that has fascinated and appalled the literary world for five years, during which hundreds of unpublished manuscripts have been targeted. Some authors, agents, editors, scouts and even judges for the Booker prize have been victims of phishing scams involving manuscripts of highly anticipated novels by Margaret Atwood, Sally Rooney and actor Ethan Hawke. Those responsible created slightly tweaked email addresses to fool publishing figures, including replacing “t” with “f”, “q” with “g”, and using “r” and “n” to make “m”, as in @penguinrandornhouse.com. They would use industry lingo, such as “ms” for manuscript, and demonstrated an understanding of the publishing process, which fooled some into handing over manuscripts and information about upcoming projects or film rights. In a statement, a spokesperson for Simon &amp; Schuster said the publisher was “shocked and horrified” by the allegations against Bernardini and that they had suspended him pending further information. “The safekeeping of our authors’ intellectual property is of primary importance to Simon &amp; Schuster, and for all in the publishing industry, and we are grateful to the FBI for investigating these incidents and bringing charges against the alleged perpetrator,” he added. Simon &amp; Schuster was not named in the indictment, and the Guardian understands it is not accused of wrongdoing. Publishing industry figures and authorities have been stumped for years by possible motivations behind the phishing scam, with no ransom or blackmail demands ever materialising after manuscripts were mistakenly sent on. None of the books ever turned up online, and everything from celebrity releases to debut novels by unknown writers were targeted. Some had suspected the individual was a literary scout, attempting to secure information to make film and television deals ahead of others. “If you try to find financial and economic gain, it’s of course hard to see,” Daniel Sandström, literary director of a Swedish publisher that was targeted multiple times, told Vulture last year. “But if the game is psychological, a kind of mastery or feeling of superiority, it’s easier to visualise. This is a business full of resentment as well, and in that sense, it becomes a good story.”A south-west Sydney nursing home is battling a major Covid outbreak with families now questioning the timing of booster shots and why positive cases were kept in close quarters with uninfected residents. One fully vaccinated resident who was receiving palliative care has died, and 63 more people – 38 residents and 25 care staff – have tested positive to Covid at the Bupa aged care home at Clemton Park. It’s a sharp increase since the facility activated its outbreak management plan on 21 December after a staff member tested positive. Bupa closed the 144-bed facility to all visitors at this point, however cases have steadily risen, and have since spread between the home’s separate “communities” on different floors of the complex. On Tuesday, families of residents were notified by email that a resident receiving palliative care, who had contracted Covid, had died. Residents had been scheduled to receive their Covid-19 booster doses on 10 January, after having received their initial two doses in April and May. Management has now brought forward booster vaccinations for residents, with 31 of the 140 residents receiving the dose on Tuesday and others scheduled for this Friday. Dimitrios Kapeleris is furious at how Bupa has cared for his father, Theofanis, who has tested positive. After first learning of the Covid outbreak, Dimitrios pleaded with management to evacuate all Covid positive patients from the facility, to “avert a disaster of the likes of Newmarch House and St Basil’s”. He was worried about his father’s wellbeing and chance of surviving Covid. He was also concerned about the potential for aerosol transmission within the facility when doors were opened by staff. In Facetime video calls with his father during the outbreak, Dimitrios claims he could see staff leave the door to his room open for several minutes as they came in to clean up. The 84-year-old suffers diabetes and has advanced dementia, and his son had already taken the precaution of taking his father to a private clinic to get his booster shot in early December (before the outbreak began), unsatisfied with the idea of leaving it until January when the rest of the home would receive it. Dimitrios claimed his request to separate positive cases was turned down. He is also critical of how Bupa communicated news about the outbreak to families. “They’re in damage control, it’s all about PR … Only now after complaining are they holding a meeting with the families and sending regular emails and, but they’re still leaving out details,” he said. “I was trying to prevent my dad from getting infected. And lo and behold, he got infected. “He’s holding up OK. But he’s scared, and I’m concerned if he deteriorates. I’m just hoping he pulls through.” Staff are checking in on Covid positive residents, in addition to twice daily clinical observations, but Dimitrios said that should be more frequent and he wanted his father to be moved to a hospital or other care facility. “This is going to be an unmitigated disaster,” he said. At a crisis meeting with families held on Wednesday afternoon, several families raised concerns about the psychological state of their parents with dementia. A spokesperson for Bupa said that most residents were “clinically stable with only mild symptoms”. “In order to keep relatives abreast of the situation, text messages and email updates are being sent on a daily basis,” they said. The spokesperson added: “The health and safety of our residents and team members is paramount so we acted quickly to control any potential spread of Covid-19. This included closing the home to all visitors, using rapid antigen tests on all residents and members, full PPE for team members including face shields, and a deep cleaning of the home.” They also said the facility is “cohorting our team members to single communities”, and that additional agency staff have been brought in. Additionally, the spokesperson said that residents were “remaining within their own communities within the home to minimise movement in the building with team members dedicated to each community so they don’t work in other areas”. The spokesperson also refuted Dimitrios’ suggestion communication was not initially regular. They also said that a public health audit “confirmed that aerosol transmission via mixing of air from different areas of the home was not a contributing factor to Covid spreading at Clemton”. Of the 140 residents in the facility, 118 are double vaccinated. Regarding the timing of booster shots, the spokesperson said: “During the past few weeks, our home had contacted Health Care Australia a number of times to follow up booking dates for the booster program and were advised that 10 January was the only date that had been allocated”. A department of health spokesperson said that commonwealth vaccine providers have been asked to schedule a visit for all eligible residential aged care facilities by the end of January, and that it had so far contacted all facilities to schedule booster shots. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Scheduling and timing is managed between vaccine providers and facilities to ensure clinics are held at a time suitable to the facility and their residents – there has been a focus on booster clinics where there is a higher risk of outbreaks due to community transmission.” “Booster clinics are being delivered by commonwealth vaccine providers, primary care providers and, where eligible, facilities can self-manage an onsite clinic,” the department spokesperson said. Dimitrios said he believed the policy of keeping residents in their own quarters had failed. “We had been advised that they were sealed off from each other. Then how did my dad get it when the first case was in another community (section)?” Dimitrios said his father was “one of the few” who had had a booster dose, and that family of other residents who were unboosted remain concerned. “They are petrified,” he said.Wearing intricate costumes made of plants and adorned with tropical flowers, the women look spectacular. While their torsos remain completely still, somehow, impossibly, their hips are moving in circles so fast it’s almost a blur. These women are performing traditional Tahitian dance, or Ori Tahiti, in Tahiti’s annual cultural festival, the Heiva. And they’re not alone. Thousands of women across the globe, from Mexico to Japan, are doing it too. According to a report published by the French ministry of culture in 2017, there were more than 12,000 Ori Tahiti dancers in the United States and more than 10,000 in Latin America. In Japan, the movement has attracted 25,000 dancers and is projected to grow to 500,000 by 2027. Ori Tahiti is a broad term that encompasses the many traditional dances native to the island of Tahiti, performed by both men and women. The most well-known is the ote’a, a very fast, hip-shaking dance performed by women. Another is the aparima, which features slower, more graceful body movements. Both dances are difficult to master, but absolutely captivating to watch. “The dance itself, in my eyes it is the most beautiful, powerful, sensuous and expressive,” says Tumata Robinson, a renowned Tahitian choreographer, costume designer and founder of acclaimed dance group Tahiti Ora. “I think Ori Tahiti is very complete, you know. It’s fierce, but also elegant and powerful, graceful, feminine when we dance. I feel beautiful [when I dance],” says Moena Maiotui, one of Tahiti’s most beloved professional dancers, who has travelled around the world performing, teaching Ori workshops, and sharing Tahitian culture. YouTube videos of her dancing, both solo and with the dance group Tahiti Ora, have racked up millions of views. “It’s always good to be on stage and to share the culture and what we love and the passion and also tell the story … with our hands and share this moment with the people who are watching.” Self-expression and connecting to nature are what Ori Tahiti is about for Rina Hanzawa. Born and raised in Tokyo, Hanzawa discovered Ori Tahiti in her early twenties. “I went to dance school and I found Ori Tahiti there,” says Hanzawa. “At the time I had no clue about Tahitian culture. But I fell in love with Ori Tahiti when I tried it. The Ori movement was so natural for me – it was just very comfortable to do so I felt a strong connection with it.” What started as a casual hobby soon became an enduring passion, which led to her competing at a national level. Hanzawa now lives in Australia, where she has set up her own Tahitian dance school, Tai Pererau, in Sydney’s northern beaches. “My fire of love towards Tahitian culture will never blow out,” she said. The dance that sparked that fire, however, was almost extinguished. The arrival of Europeans in French Polynesia, along with their religion and laws, saw Ori Tahiti banned or repressed for close to 100 years. At the end of the 18th century, dance was banned by European missionaries, who labelled it immoral. Then, in 1819, the Pomare Code, a set of laws laid down by the Tahitian monarchy, forbade traditional dancing outright. In 1842 the French protectorate allowed dancing – but with so many conditions that the practice was still repressed. It was only in the 1960s that the church began to lose influence and traditional dancing really began to be revived. During this time the first modern dance group appeared on the scene, led by Madeleine Mou’a. Damaris Caire, author of a book titled Ori Tahiti: Between Tradition, Culture and Modernity, says: “Little by little, by doing dance shows at hotels for tourists, Ori Tahiti became popular – even if the local population initially struggled to accept it.” By the 1970s, the Tahitian cultural revival was in full swing and from the 1980s onwards Ori Tahiti was rediscovered, reinvented and fully embraced by the local population. Despite a rocky past, Ori Tahiti has today become a way for Tahitians to connect with their ancestors, their land and their language. It is a celebration of a cultural identity and pride that was almost lost to colonisation. Now, it has become one of Tahiti’s best exports. Hinatea Colombani, a Tahitian cultural expert and director of the Arioi culture and arts centre, says it is particularly satisfying to see Ori Tahiti become popular in the very countries that tried to stamp the practice out two centuries ago. “For me it’s a revenge, because they celebrate our culture,” she says. “Ori Tahiti is for me a freedom. A freedom to move, a freedom for the soul … and a really important way to escape from the everyday and connect to my ancestors and to the tradition.” This year, the Heiva Ori Tahiti Nui international 2021 – Ori Tahiti’s biggest competition – had to be held online due to the pandemic. However, it still managed to attract competitors from 12 countries and territories, including two new participants: New Caledonia and Switzerland. Ginie Naea, from France, is a dance teacher at the Te Ori Tahiti school in Geneva. The school has more than 70 dancers, aged between eight and 68. After competing for the first time online in the international competition, they came away with fourth place in a group category and a first place for the solo ote’a – which was danced by Naea. “It was really a superb experience,” says Naea of the competition. “We danced in front of Lake Geneva and the mountains; it was just magic. The best part of the competition was actually the preparation and team cohesion that it necessitated – a connection that’s created when performing. There is a real bond between Ori Tahiti dancers, a real family that is created around the same passion. “Ori Tahiti is more than a discipline, it’s a way of life. It’s something that really completes me … an art in which I flourish – as a woman, as a friend, as a mother – it’s really part of my everyday life.”Berlin police dogs trained to attack perpetrators have been put on an enforced break, along with their handlers, over contradictions between the methods used to control them and a new law to prevent cruelty to dogs. The use of pulling collars to channel a police dog’s aggression towards an agitator or potential criminal contravenes the law, introduced by the former agriculture minister, which came into force on 1 January. Police said that about 49 dogs, out of about 130 used for operations from arresting perpetrators to drug and explosives detection or locating missing persons, were suspended from duty until a solution was found that would not involve officers breaking the law. A police spokesperson, Thilo Cablitz, said: “We are currently unable to deploy a section of our service dogs due to changes in the animal protection act governing dogs.” Those suspended include dogs working alongside special forces, the SEK, and those used to protect people as well as to arrest offenders. The training of “Schutzhunde”, or protection dogs, involves being able to control when a dog ends an attack, by tugging briefly on a “pulling collar” to restricts the animal’s airway. The logic is that if a dog’s aggression, considered necessary for the apprehension, is not controlled, it could cause serious injury or death to the perpetrator. Under the new ordinance, brought into law by the former agriculture minister Julia Klöckner, the use of such punitive stimuli is no longer allowed when training dogs. While primarily introduced to improve standards of dog ownership in Germany, the rules are intended to apply to all German dogs, including guard dogs. The agriculture ministry has said its decision was based on scientific studies showing that punitive stimuli “contradicts the concept of animal welfare”. Included in the act are rules governing the all-round care and upkeep of dogs, from the size, temperature and ventilation of their kennels, to breeding practices. Dog owners are obliged to take their pets for regular walks, to spend time with them and to ensure they have contact with other dogs. Chaining dogs, except under certain circumstances and conditions, pinch collars and other equipment or practices considered to induce pain, are forbidden. Klöcker has said the need for an update to existing legislation was long overdue but had become urgent during the pandemic, as increasing numbers of people with no experience of owning pets had bought dogs, and cases of abuse were rife. Pet shop owners and breeders should also carry more responsibility for dogs’ welfare, she said. The law change has been known about for months but its effect on the daily workings of police attack dogs seems to have taken police and politicians by surprise. Stephan Kelm, the vice-chair of the Berlin branch of the police union, GdP, said a solution needed to be found, as the dogs’ suspension would have “severe consequences for domestic security”, and the union had asked for the federal interior minister, Nancy Faeser, to intervene. He said the act affected forces across Germany. “We are completely open to innovative training methods, in which it is not necessary to inflict pain. But right now we don’t know of any,” he said. Cablitz said police were having discussions with Berlin’s interior ministry. “We are in dialogue with the ministry in order to find a solution,” he said. The interior ministry has not yet commented.Jana Santos has an unambiguous message for Jair Bolsonaro-supporting anti-vaxxers who want to sup a Moscow Mule or Caipirinha at her bar in south Brazil. “Don’t come. We don’t want you here,” said the mixologist and bar owner who recently placed a placard at its entrance instructing unvaccinated Bolsonaristas to steer clear. Santos, 32, said she had decided to ban unjabbed Bolsonaro followers from the Cosmos Gastrobar in Curitiba as a result of his “villainous” response to a Covid outbreak that has killed nearly 620,000 Brazilians and battered businesses such as hers. “It was a cry from the heart – a protest against everything this president has put us through … He’s a wicked man,” the progressive publican said of Brazil’s far-right leader, who claims not to have been vaccinated and has repeatedly undermined Brazil’s immunisation campaign. Santos is not alone, as the poisonous political atmosphere enveloping Brazil contaminates even its pub scene and a number of watering holes tell their political opponents to get lost. In July another local taproom, Bek’s Bar, told boozers they could buy their beer elsewhere if they insisted on backing Bolsonaro. “I’d like to let it be known that clients who support the genocide of 500,000 Brazilians and thousands of other atrocities will DEFINITELY not be missed,” its owner, Giovanna Lima, 33, announced on Instagram. “I’d prefer to go bust with dignity than go against my principles,” said the leftist bar owner who serves takeaways in bags bearing the slogan: “Get out, Bolsonaro.” Bolsonarista boozehounds are still not short of alehouse options, with their radical president continuing to enjoy the support of about 20% of voters as he prepares to seek re-election next year. In Ouro Preto do Oeste, a frontier town in the heavily pro-Bolsonaro Amazon, diners can even order pizzas named after their populist leader thanks to the rightwing restaurateur Valmir Chaves. “He’s the most patriotic president Brazil’s ever had,” said the 58-year-old during a recent visit to his Bolsonaro-themed eatery Aquarius Pizzaria. Chaves said the Bolsonaro pizza was sprinkled with chicken, olives and two portions of palm hearts in homage to the white vegetable Brazil’s president used to harvest during his childhood in rural São Paulo. As he took an order of fried chicken, Chaves remembered how he had invented the patriotic pizza, which costs 64 reais (£8.50), and decked his bar with Brazil flags after Bolsonaro’s 2018 election. “People say I adore Bolsonaro – that I’m a Bolsonaro fan. But it’s not about Bolsonaro,” said the barkeeper, whose black Hyundai has been decorated with the words: “100% Bolsonaro”. “It’s about my country – and if there was someone else doing the things Bolsonaro is, I’d support him too.” Lefties are not the only thing unwelcome in Chaves’s Bolsonarian bar. A sign on the wall informs drinkers they will not be allowed to tune into Brazil’s largest broadcaster, TV Globo, against which Bolsonaro rails, just as his mentor, Donald Trump, rails against CNN. “To clients and friends of this establishment,” it reads. “We do not watch GloboRubbish.”Tan Lili, the principal of Shanghai’s Baoshan No 2 central primary school, has been wrestling with a problem in recent months: her school does not have enough physical education teachers. She is not alone. Since China embarked in 2021 on a nationwide campaign to reduce academic pressures on children and increase the amount of active time they spent outdoors, primary and middle schools across the country have been struggling. In one school, according to Chinese media, only two PE teachers are available to coach 2,600 students. One key law was passed in October, to reduce the “twin pressures” of homework and off-site tutoring on children, and drove many profit-driven education companies into bankruptcy. According to the official Xinhua news agency, the legislation asks parents to arrange their children’s time to account for reasonable breaks and exercise, thereby reducing pressure and avoiding internet overuse. Around the same time as seeking to reduce academic pressure, China has promoted policies for schools to help students exercise more. “We have 11 full-time PE teachers, but there are 43 classes … we are seriously lacking PE teachers,” Tan said in a recent interview with Shanghai TV. “The demand for PE teachers has now increased dramatically.” Some schools are encouraging PE teachers to pass on tips to parents about teaching personal fitness to their children. But still, Sun Dong, who leads the PE group at Beijing’s prestigious 101 Middle School, complained that “some of our teachers have to teach 21 classes a week”. PE teachers had for years played a minor role in the country’s education system: classes were mandatory in many provinces, but as students and their parents overwhelmingly focused on passing crucial exams, PE was rarely a top priority. A “proposal to prevent the feminisation of male adolescents” from the education ministry earlier last year also led to an increased focus on PE from primary schools to universities. Schools have been on a hiring spree in recent months. Tan’s Shanghai school recently added five professional coaches, ranging from football to badminton to fencing. And late in October, a senior official from the country’s General Administration of Sport said that he and his colleagues were exploring the possibility of allowing retired athletes to work as PE teachers part-time at schools. “I’ve been teaching PE for 20 years, and this is the very first time I have the opportunity to speak in front of you, at the school’s teacher-parents conference,” a Shanghai PE teacher said in a September post that went viral on China’s social media. China has had a long history of attempts to reduce students’ academic burdens, issuing its first directive in 1955. In the last 20 years, Beijing repeatedly promoted a nationwide “burden alleviation” campaign but critics said that without properly reforming the competitive national Gaokao exam system, it was only a slogan. But the new policy has not been equally received by parents across the country. “I’m sure the authorities’ starting point was good, but education is a whole-of-a-society issue. By simply asking schools to cut academic work and increase outdoors activity won’t necessarily help address the fundamental problem,” said one Shanghai schoolteacher and a parent, who prefers to remain anonymous. “That is: education inequality.” Mr Li, a quality control manager in Zhenzhou in the central province of Henan, said despite all the new regulations, his 6th grade daughter at Zhengzhou Ruiding primary school still has a lot of work to do. “The students are still under great pressure … After school, they spend most of their time studying and doing homework, and their spare time is still very tight.” Additional reporting by Xiaoqian Zhu.Novak Djokovic’s visa cancellation and possible deportation has become a scarifying issue for Australian sport and the federal government, a political break point thanks to the inattention and ignorance of the prime minister, Scott Morrison. Morrison was so busy struggling to extricate himself from the mess he had created over the provision of reasonably priced rapid Covid tests, he had no awareness of, or capacity to fully deal with, the controversy so obviously set to arrive with the Serbian tennis champion. Djokovic has previously expressed reluctance about Covid vaccination and has consistently refused to disclose his vaccination status. And it was obvious a hemisphere away he was ready to drive his worldwide celebrity and remarkable sporting record through the resolve of Australian authorities, having secured a medical exemption. No-vax Novak was confident he would be let through. In this objective he was helped, unwittingly, by the prime minister of Australia, who finally got around to doing his job. “Rules are rules,” Scott Morrison eventually advised Djokovic, in an echo of a stern suburban dad scolding a child for staying out late. But it’s difficult to be severe with the tennis champ because the prime minister didn’t know the rules, either. On Wednesday, he duck-shoved responsibility for the world No 1 being allowed into Australia unvaccinated. “Well, that is a matter for the Victorian government. They have provided him with an exemption to come to Australia, and so we then act in accordance with that decision,” he told reporters, clearly not knowing what he was talking about. By Thursday, he had been educated on the matter and announced in muscular fashion it was a federal government matter, and the Serb was out – one of the highest-profile figures ever to be punted from Australia, pending Monday’s court hearing. “Rules are rules, especially when it comes to our borders,” Morrison said in that scolding statement. “No one is above the rules.” And he ended the reprimand with a protective assurance: “… we are continuing to be vigilant.” The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, might have been Morrison’s educator on the matter, as she issued a statement – headed “Australia’s border rules apply to everyone” – contradicting the prime minister’s Wednesday press conference ramble. “While the Victorian Government and Tennis Australia may permit a non-vaccinated player to compete in the Australian Open, it is the Commonwealth Government that will enforce our requirements at the Australian border,” Andrews said in part of a statement. Neither Morrison nor Andrews can now breathe easily. And nor can the foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne. There remain stark questions about the so-called border vigilance Morrison was so hairy-chested about. Djokovic had a visa to get to Australia. What happened when he got here is one thing, but clearly he boarded an aircraft with Australian-issue credentials saying he had a right to land here. Payne will be pressed to explain where and how that visa was issued when there are so many restrictions on the travel of vaccinated Australians. Is there a tennis service, a net accord? Answers on these matters won’t arrive in a rush, as Morrison will wring as much political gain as he imagines he can from this. His keenness to be seen as the tough guy with Djokovic – once it was explained to him it unavoidably was his responsibility and not that of the Victorian premier, Dan Andrews – was the first sign that border protection would be ramped up. His problem is that even insulting and exploiting the world’s best tennis player will not be sufficient distraction from the growing confusion over the response to Omicron as it overwhelms towns and cities. Morrison’s admission that he gets rapid tests for free, while thunderously objecting to other Australians getting the same deal, quite simply stinks. If it’s not the hypocrisy or the deliberate misleading, it’s the broad policy failure of the federal government’s Covid response. There is only one tennis player being deported. There are thousands of Australians every day discovering they have been infected by the virus, and many others unable to get tested but who know they are stricken. None of them will feel safer because Novak Djokovic has been thrown out of town. Malcolm Farr is a political journalistWhat would farmers do without baler twine? Blue, pink, yellow or orange, this thin, strong, polypropylene string seems to hold the countryside together. It ties up gates, zigzags crazily across holes in fences and lashes down tarpaulins. Originally made of natural sisal fibre, baler twine was invented towards the end of the 19th century. Its primary purpose was to machine-bind hay and straw bales. But what did people use before industrialisation, when they had to rely on the materials immediately to hand? Withy, or willow, is one answer. Its slender, whippy stems have been used for millennia for weaving and fastening: the root meaning of “withy” is to twist or plait. Basketmaker Malcolm Seal cultivates willow on his smallholding near Powerstock Common, north-west of Dorchester, where he also keeps curly fleeced Gotland sheep. I visit on a day when he is harvesting coarse withies suitable for garden structures. Willow grows fast in damp earth – in one year Malcolm’s plants reach nearly three metres high. I watch as he cuts the stems close to the ground and gathers them into bundles, known as wads. He secures each wad with a withy bond, a traditional tie made from a single, long stem. There are several stages in making a bond. First, Malcolm takes a withy stem and whirls it clockwise – this is called cranking. There’s a small, dry pop as the fibres break, then he twists it and lets the tightened stem turn back on itself. He threads the straight end through the loop and then encircles the wad, before further cranking and coiling so the tie is held in place by its own tension. That twisting, self-hold principle is an ancient method, used for all manner of materials: thatchers employed it to secure straw to roofs and hayricks. It even works for hair. In 1948, two men cutting peat in a willow-grown bog near Osterby in Germany uncovered a human head. The man’s long hair was held back in a distinctive self-tying fashion, similar to a withy bond. The Roman historian Tacitus describes this iron-age hairstyle – known as a Suebian knot – in his account of Germanic tribes, written in about AD98. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryChinese hospital officials have been fired after a pregnant woman lost her baby after she was denied entry at a Xi’an hospital due to coronavirus lockdown restrictions. On the night of 1 January a woman in labour was denied entry to the Xi’an Gaoxin hospital because her negative test result was four hours too old. She began bleeding heavily while waiting outside, and was eventually admitted but the baby died. The woman’s story and an accompanying video went viral on social media, and was reported by local Chinese media. A related hashtag on Weibo was viewed 600m times. On Wednesday, the Shaanxi Province and Xi’an Municipal Health Commission said it had launched an investigation and determined the baby’s death was an “accident caused by negligence”. Two hospital officials were fired and a manager suspended. The head of the Xi’an health commission also received a formal warning from the Chinese Communist party for mishandling emergency care in the city. Xi’an, a city of 13 million in Shaanxi province, is two weeks into a strict lockdown that has kept residents inside their homes and shut down entertainment venues, shops and public transport. Authorities say the lockdown has allowed them to get on top of the outbreak of Covid cases, which they said were now trending downwards. However, there have also been concerning reports of food shortages and delayed or blocked access to medical care. Strict vaccine and testing requirements for anyone seeking medical care appeared to cause confusion and prevent some people from accessing emergency treatment. In a statement reported by state media, the hospital in the woman’s case said it had done “everything that should be done”. “Now the Health Commission and the Women’s Federation are investigating. They paid much attention to it, and they were more than fair.” The hospital has been ordered to apologise to the public, improve its processes, and ensure all patients can access emergency care. Epidemic prevention and control were not grounds for preventing a patient’s treatment, authorities said, and new “green” channels would be opened for patients with acute and critical illnesses to access treatment. On Wednesday officials also said cases were trending down in Xi’an, with most new cases detected in quarantine or closed areas. More than 42,000 people have been put into quarantine centres, according to state media. Xi’an has recorded about 1,800 cases since 9 December. China’s continued commitment to zero Covid has apparent general public support in a country that has recorded far fewer cases than many other nations despite the virusfirst being detected there. However, there are growing concerns about the impact of continued restrictions, which are getting stricter as local officials strive to prevent and respond to outbreaks or face potential punishment. Additional reporting by Xiaoqian ZhuThe acquittal of four people charged with criminal damage for toppling the statue of the slave trader Edward Colston during a Black Lives Matter protest in Bristol is the latest in a series of cases in which juries have cleared protesters despite there being no question of their having carried out the actions for which they were tried. Most recent examples related to the environment, with those on trial arguing that their deeds were a proportionate response to the climate crisis. Here are some examples. Roger Hallam, co-founder of Extinction Rebellion, was cleared by a jury in 2019 despite not denying causing criminal damage worth £7,000 when he sprayed the walls of Kings College London, with the words “divest from oil and gas” in protest against the institution’s fossil fuel investments. Hallam, who was acquitted along with another activist, said it showed “ordinary people, unlike the judiciary, are able to see the broader picture”. In April 2021 six Extinction Rebellion protesters were cleared of causing criminal damage to Shell’s London headquarters despite the judge directing jurors that those on trial had no defence in law. Protesters poured fake oil, glued themselves to windows and doors, broke glass, climbed on to a roof and sprayed graffiti as part of wider demonstrations across the capital. Before reaching their verdicts, the jury had asked to see a copy of the oath they took when they were sworn in. Thanking the jurors, the judge said it had been “an unusual case”. Six climate crisis activists whose protest halted the Docklands Light Railway, which serves London’s financial district, were acquitted by a jury in December 2021. Five of the Extinction Rebellion protesters climbed on top of the train with banners that read “Business As Usual=Death” and “Don’t Jail the Canaries” while a sixth glued herself to a train window. They were charged with obstructing trains or carriages on the railway and acknowledged their roles in the protest but successfully argued that their action was a lawful protest against government inaction on the climate crisis. While there has been a flurry of cases involving Extinction Rebellion recently, there have been previous examples of acquittals by juries concluding that ostensibly criminal actions were motivated by good intentions. In 2008 six Greenpeace climate change activists were cleared of causing £30,000 of criminal damage at Kingsnorth power station, Kent. The activists admitted trying to shut down the coal-fired station by occupying the smokestack but argued they were legally justified because they were trying to prevent climate change causing greater damage to property around the world. It was the first case in which preventing property damage caused by climate change had been used as part of a “lawful excuse” defence in court. In 2001 Lord Melchett, then executive director of Greenpeace, and 27 other supporters were cleared by a court of causing criminal damage despite admitting destroying a crop of genetically modified maize. The defendants said that they acted to prevent pollen from the maize from polluting neighbouring organic crops and gardens. There have also been a string of acquittals in cases of sabotage of military equipment. In 2007, two anti-war campaigners, Toby Olditch and Philip Pritchard, who broke into RAF Fairford Gloucestershire, to sabotage US bombers at the outbreak of the Iraq war, were cleared of conspiring to cause criminal damage after they argued the B52s would have been used to commit war crimes in Iraq. In 2000, two anti-nuclear protesters who entered a dockyard planning to disarm one of Britain’s Trident submarines with an axe were cleared of conspiracy to cause criminal damage. Sylvia Boyes and River (formerly known as Keith Wright) admitted that they plotted to damage HMS Vengeance while it was docked at Barrow-in-Furness, Cumbria, in November 1999, but claimed their actions were justified because nuclear weapons were immoral and illegal under international law.In light of the energy crisis in the UK, installing a smart meter and heat pump as measures to help combat the climate crisis have exposed serious failings in government policy. A heat pump may be four times as efficient as the best gas-condensing boiler, but the cost of heating a home is as great because of the high price of electricity. The new year weekend of high temperatures across the UK brought this sharply into focus. The heating was off and, even though everything else in the house is electric, daily bills, measured by the smart meter, dropped by two thirds. At the same time notice of new tariffs arrived. Gas will be 8.38p per kilowatt-hour, a rise of less than 2p, while electricity will be 34.64 per kWh, 10.28p more. So electricity will continue to be more than four times the price of gas. Those who turned their backs on fossil fuels and have all-electric homes with suppliers that guarantee power only from renewables are paying a heavy price for their commitment. The distortion is caused partly by the policy of previous governments – loading electricity prices to pay for subsidies for renewables and to discourage the use of coal power stations, while subsidising gas as a cleaner fuel. For the climate’s sake this needs to change.Britain has been accused of reviving a policy of “targeted killing” after it emerged that the RAF had killed an arms dealer linked to Islamic State in a precision drone strike in Syria at the end of October. Reprieve, a human rights charity, asked “what are the criteria” used to justify who can be targeted in a “track and kill” drone strike, and called on ministers to tell the Commons why this strike was deemed necessary. The group’s comments come after the Ministry of Defence announced on its website, more than a month after the attack, that the crew of a Reaper drone, armed with 100lb Hellfire missiles, had “tracked a known terrorist in northern Syria”. In a brief statement, the MoD added: “And at a safe moment, when the individual was alone in a field, carried out a successful attack.” The drone raid took place on 25 October and was disclosed on 27 November. Subsequent reporting by the Syrians for Truth and Justice (STJ) group, based on interviews conducted on the ground, concluded that the victim was Abu Hamza al-Shuhail, “a well-known arms dealer in the region” who had sold weapons to several parties during the long running Syrian conflict, “chiefly Islamic State”. Jennifer Gibson, who leads for Reprieve on extrajudicial killings, said: “This announcement, slipped out on a quiet Saturday morning on the MoD website, appears to herald a new UK government targeted killing policy. “So what are its criteria for tracking and killing? How did it determine that this person was worthy of assassination? And why wasn’t parliament consulted or even informed?” The MoD said it had not changed its policy and said the UK has “a robust target clearance process, operates under strict rules of engagement, and is fully compliant with international law”. It published “regular updates” on airstrikes conducted against IS targets for “full transparency”, a spokesperson added. The drone strike on al-Shuhail appears to have been conducted in conjunction with Turkey. Shortly after the attack, Turkish ground troops encircled a nearby farm and killed a gunman in the compound linked to al-Shuhail including two unconnected civilians who had been nearby, the STJ added. Al-Shuhail had recently relocated near Ras al-Ayn, an area controlled by the Turkish military, having been smuggled out of an area controlled by the Syrian Kurds. Kurdish defence forces had asked the arms dealer that “he help them locate IS cells in the area and find the places where IS hid weapons”, according to the local reports, a request that had him “fearing for his life”. RAF fighters and drones have been engaged in more than 5,000 missions against IS in Syria since MPs voted in favour of military intervention in the country in December 2015. Strikes in Iraq were authorised in September 2014. Reprieve said it believed the raid was the first “track and kill” drone operation targeting a known individual to be acknowledged by the UK since the killing of 21-year-old Briton Reyaad Khan in Syria in August 2015 by an RAF drone strike – although the circumstances were different. At the time MPs had not voted for air raids against IS targets in Syria, only Iraq. A fortnight later, David Cameron, then the prime minister, came to parliament to justify the targeting of Khan – describing it as “necessary and proportionate for the individual self-defence of the UK”. Intelligence indicated that the jihadist and other associates were plotting to attack “high-profile public commemorations”, Cameron added, and it emerged that the UK had drawn up a “kill list” of IS targets following the 2015 general election. Reprieve hopes the recent drone strike will be the subject of questions to the defence secretary, Ben Wallace, when he appears in the Commons on Monday. There is no immediate evidence that al-Shuhail had any connection or link to the UK.Andrea Arnold’s films are known for their spare dialogue, and in her first documentary it is more pared-backed than ever: Cow consists of 94 minutes of moos, with the odd off-camera interjection from farmhands. It is hardly a thriller (though the ending is pure Tarantino). But it is one of the most beautifully crafted and tender portraits of a life you are likely to see. Arnold, who started her professional life as a rollerskating TV presenter on the children’s Saturday show No 73, began thinking about documenting an animal’s life nine years ago. Eventually she settled on a cow. “I thought a cow would be interesting because they work so hard, getting pregnant and giving milk their entire lives. It’s a huge job they do.” She chose Luma because she was told she had a big personality and was feisty. Arnold and her team spent four years, on and off, filming her. Why did she make Cow? “I wanted to show a non-human consciousness. I was intrigued as to whether we would be able to see her consciousness if we followed her long enough.” Her friends have told her Cow is the most personal film she has made. “One friend said there was nowhere for me to hide in a documentary; it was more raw and I was more exposed, she said.” But what is she exposing? “Well, things to do with my childhood, I suppose. But I don’t talk about all that because it’s too complicated. It’s extremely messy, so I can’t really.” We meet at a cafe in south London, where she has has lived for 27 years. Arnold is a youthful 60, dressed in jeans, beret, and a fake fur coat “made of real teddy bear”. She is warm and engaging but fiendishly private. She admits to having a 27-year-old daughter, and being one of four children brought up by a single mother, but declines to answer most questions about family. However, she does it with such charm that the sparring becomes enjoyable. Bits and pieces gradually emerge, from which we can piece together a partial jigsaw. Her films are like this, too: composed of fragments, open to different interpretations. In the autobiographical Wasp, which won the Oscar for best live action short in 2004, a single mother of four is asked out for the first time in years. She pretends she is looking after the kids for a friend and leaves them outside the pub to play without telling her date, which results in all kinds of chaos. Arnold’s narratives are rarely linear and usually elliptical, leaving us to fill in the missing details. In her first full-length work, Red Road, we only begin to understand towards the end of the film why protagonist Jackie has been stalking a newly released prisoner. After it finishes, we find ourselves rewinding the film in our head, reinterpreting all that has gone before – or simply watching it again. Astonishingly, three of her four movies – Red Road, Fish Tank and American Honey – have won the Jury prize at the Cannes film festival. In Fish Tank, which tells the story of a 15-year-old girl finding her way in the world, there is no mention of her absent father because he’s an irrelevance. In American Honey, a road movie about a group of disadvantaged youngsters crossing America and trying to get by flogging magazines, she pretty much does away with backstory. As for her Heathcliff in Wuthering Heights, he barely utters a word – it’s all about the unspoken emotion. Arnold is a wonderful film-maker. Her movies are beautifully written (or under-written), nuanced and gorgeous to look at, even when the world they depict is brutal. They are often unbearably tense, her characters invariably living on the brink of violence or betrayal. Although Cow is a documentary, it still feels very much like an Arnold film. It starts with Luma giving birth. In a lovely extended scene she licks her baby clean of amniotic fluid and the calf starts suckling. Luma really is luminous in the pitch-black cowshed – stills from the film look like bovine Rembrandts. While Cow never anthropomorphises Luma, it does allow us to see the world from her perspective. It’s impossible to watch without imagining what is going on in her head. There are recurrent themes in Arnold’s films – single mums and struggling children, chaotic lives, sexual and commercial exploitation. Cow fits perfectly into this pattern. Luma is the ultimate single mother, constantly pregnant, separated from her children, milked for all she is worth. Arnold’s work could easily be a misery-fest, but it isn’t because she is also alert to all that’s good in life – the intensity of youth, the first flushes of love and lust, dancing yourself to oblivion, the power of resilience. Her characters may not thrive but they are survivors. Again, Cow is consistent with that vision. We experience the purity of the mother-child bond in the first few hours after birth, the joy of the cows at spring turnout when they are let loose in the fields, the literal and metaphorical fireworks as cattle mate on Bonfire Night. As in all her work, music plays a large part. Some songs are piped into the cowsheds from Radio 1 to keep cattle and farmhands happy; others are handpicked by Arnold. Although animals are not the subject of her other films, they feature prominently. In Red Road, Jackie, who works as a CCTV security camera operator, frequently zooms in on a man with a dog – without saying a word, Arnold conveys Jackie’s sense of longing. In Fish Tank, 15-year-old Mia suffers so much trauma in silence, and it’s only when she hears her friend’s horse has been put down that she cries. And Arnold’s short Dog features one of cinema’s most disturbing animal scenes. A teenage girl and boy are having sex. As usual, we witness the scene from the girl’s perspective. While the boy thrusts away, the girl sees a dog steal his stash of dope and eat it. She laughs – at what she has just witnessed, not the boy. But the boy feels humiliated and takes a terrible revenge on the dog. Animals have played a huge part in Arnold’s life. When she was young, the family home on a low-rise estate in Dartford, Kent, was full of waifs and strays – numerous cats and dogs, guinea pigs and gerbils, and a sheep who lived in the garden but would wander in for the occasional chat. “I remember Mum going absolutely mad when we got back with the lamb.” Her mother, who was only 16 when Arnold was born, died a couple of years ago. Were they close? “I’m not going to talk about it,” she says in a sing-song voice. Fish Tank is about the troubled and competitive relationship between Mia (an aspiring dancer, as Arnold was) and her mother. They even compete over her mother’s boyfriend Conor, played with a chilling brilliance by Michael Fassbender. At times Mia is ferocious (she headbutts a fellow schoolgirl without compunction, and abducts Conor’s daughter in a terrifying scene) yet we are always aware of her vulnerability. I ask Arnold if she could headbutt her way out of trouble as a teenager. She laughs. No, she says – she has never had a scrap in her life. “But I’ve stopped fights. I can probably count 20 fights I’ve stopped in the last few years. I’m very good at reading that kind of situation and I’m not frightened of it. It’s probably why I’m a film-maker. I’m vigilant and able to read people. I’ve got some skills from my childhood that have served me well as a film-maker.” Did she stop fights as a kid? “I tried to sometimes. But that’s difficult to talk about because; that’s a lot to do with my …” She trails off. “I can’t talk about this stuff. It involves too many people.” So instead she tells me how she stopped a fight in a pub in Essex. “One of the blokes had the guy on the ground and was kicking his head against the gutter. And everyone was just watching. The guy who was kicking him suddenly got tired, stopped and was panting and I saw there was a moment to get in there. Also because I’m a female I feel they’re not going to turn on me.” She pauses. “Though I have stopped fights and they have turned on me. I stopped a boy hitting his girlfriend. He was punching her in the street and nobody was doing anything and I got in between them. The girl ran away, and he just went mad at me. He got hold of my hair, pushed me on the ground and spat at me. Then my friend had to try to get him off me.” What makes her intervene? “I can’t bear seeing people being cruel or violent to other people.” Has she always been fearless? “I’ve always been fearless, but I’m not tough.” She thinks about what she’s just said. “Actually fearlessness is a kind of toughness.” The young Arnold was a bright girl, who rarely got the opportunity to excel. She left her comprehensive school at 16 to take up hairdressing, hated it, and returned to the sixth form. At 18, she auditioned to be a presenter for No 73, and got the job. She looked so cool – rollerskating, glamorous, carefree – but she says she was always uncomfortable in front of the camera. “I think I look terrified. It was live so it was terrifying. Everyone I was with had done some training and I hadn’t done any whatsoever.” After seven years, when No 73 finished, she decided to reinvent herself as a director. She realised she could turn the stories she had been writing into films. Arnold disappeared from view and has rarely been seen on TV again. She was so determined to make a new start that she swapped continents to retrain at the American Film Institute of Los Angeles. In 1998, she made her first short film, Milk, about a traumatised woman who has given birth to a stillborn baby and addresses her grief by having sex with a man young enough to be her son, who ensures her breast milk doesn’t go to waste. Whatever Arnold’s protagonists have been through, they are never simple victims; they still have “lots of lights on” as she says. The same can be said of Luma. She has endured the toughest of lives, but there is never any sense of her giving up. Towards the end of the film, her udder ligaments have ruptures, she can barely be milked, and she drags her teats painfully along the floor. But, Arnold says, the more she struggled, the more stoic she became. “I sensed this huge sense of service for us. She was still doing this thing she’s been taught to do.” The longer she spent with Luma the more she was able to read her moo music. As the animal got older, and was separated from more calves, she also seemed to become angrier, Arnold says. She is convinced Luma felt compassion for the other pregnant cows, aware of what they were about to lose. “They say the difference between humans and animals is that we can see the past and think about the future, but I could see Luma knew what’s coming when she’s pregnant. She got particularly mad when she saw the farmer taking away a calf from another cow.” Every time she does a Q&amp;A with an audience about Cow, Arnold is amazed by the response. “We had a screening at the London film festival. People were crying, one person fainted, somebody was sick, somebody had a panic attack. Somebody said to me it made them think women’s bodies are not their own; somebody said ‘It makes me think of infertility and how hard I’ve tried for a baby’; somebody said ‘It’s made me feel about my mother and the relationship we’ve never had’; somebody talked about the relationship with a mother she did have, and somebody said it made them think about how our lives are managed.” As for Arnold, more than anything Cow has made her think of the importance of being seen. “I kept saying involuntarily during the edit: ‘I’m seeing you, Luma. Don’t worry Luma, we see you.’ I’m not sure any farm animal really feels seen. And I wondered what that meant in terms of her existence.” Has making the film changed her? “Every film changes me. I take a long time making every film, and each one is like a massive growth for me.” She returns to the idea of being seen. “I wonder how much we see not just other animals but each other. Do we really take on board each other and listen and react to people – our families, our friends, our partners, the person on the street?” She knows she’s just made a film about a cow, but to her it feels more elemental. “It’s made me feel a lot about how we’re all connected. I think all living things feel the kindness or cruelty of other living things, so all the decisions we make about how we behave with animals, with plants, with somebody getting on the bus, are so important.” • Cow is in cinemas in the UK and Ireland from 14 January and exclusively on MUBI from 11 FebruaryWhen the insurrectionists of 6 January rampaged through the Capitol, congressman Andrew Clyde of Georgia helped barricade a door, and he fled when the rest of Congress did. A photograph shows him looking panicky, mouth wide open and arm gesticulating wildly, behind what appears to be a security team member with a gun drawn, defending him. But a few months later he declared: “Watching the TV footage of those who entered the Capitol and walked through Statuary Hall showed people in an orderly fashion staying between the stanchions and ropes, taking videos, pictures. You know, if you didn’t know the TV footage was a video from 6 January, you would actually think it was a normal tourist visit.” Clyde’s account of 6 January might be a little more preposterous than those of his fellow Republican legislators. But they all joined him in pretending nothing much had happened and objecting to the investigation of the day’s events. After all, they were partly responsible, most of them. It was elected Republicans who supported and spread the earlier lies that Donald Trump had won the election, the lies that fed the insurrection; and then they lied some more about their own words and actions before, during and after. In the immediate aftermath, the then Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, was angry and shaken, declaring: “The mob was fed lies. They were provoked by the president.” Then he too began the project of walking it all back. What has ensued is a cover-up in plain sight. When Trump took office in 2016, Republicans faced a crisis: their party had won, but only by ushering to a minority victory one of history’s most extravagantly dishonest men. They had to stand with him or against him, and most chose to stand with him. Others chose to fade away by resigning or going home when their terms were up. Almost none of them stood up against him. The famously vindictive Trump punished any signs of disloyalty, so they were loyal. And to be loyal meant joining him in corruption and lies. “If we nominate Trump, we will get destroyed ... and we will deserve it,” Lindsey Graham tweeted in the spring of 2016, before becoming one of Trump’s most grovelling sycophants. In a way, the sycophants got stronger: if truth restrains us and links us together, they unchained themselves. We make contracts with each other with words; we share information, make agreements and commitments, hold each other accountable and show who we are. Lies are broken contracts, in which words misrepresent what the speaker knows; they aim to delude, exploit and divide. The liar may get stronger, but the social fabric gets weaker. That strength is precarious, so lies have be piled atop lies to keep accountability at a distance. Of course, politicians of all stripes are notoriously shifty, and the Republican party had no great reputation for honesty previously. Many of their campaigns long before Trump could politely be called misleading. But after 2016, they clustered around the gaslighter-in-chief like bugs around a streetlight. I often think of what Trump did as disinhibition: the pallid, bashful untruths of yore were replaced by baldfaced outrages. They lost any compunction about openly contradicting themselves, and did so often, never more than with the insurrection of 6 January. As the mob was smashing its way into the building, congressman Jim Jordan had been on the house floor accusing election officials in six states of corruption. A week later he declared: “I’ve never said that this election was stolen.” But, as CNN noted: “Jordan claimed in October that Democrats were working to steal the election and spoke at a Stop the Steal rally in Pennsylvania two days after the election. In December, he said he didn’t know how he could be convinced that ‘Trump didn’t actually win’ the election.” During the hours when the mob rampaged through the US Capitol building, House minority leader Kevin McCarthy called up Trump, reportedly furious. “The president bears responsibility for the attack,” he said shortly thereafter. Then he devoted himself to winning back Trump’s favour and playing down what had happened. “Pressed on whether he regretted working to overturn President Biden’s 2020 victory, Mr McCarthy took the position that he did no such thing,” the New York Times reported in April. Then he worked hard to sabotage the investigation into what had happened, by trying to put two congressmen most loyal to the big lie, Jim Banks and the ever-disruptive champion shouter Jim Jordan, on the committee. The house majority leader, Nancy Pelosi, blocked their appointment. Banks was later caught sending out letters, seeking information from government agencies, claiming he was the ranking Republican on the 6 January committee, of which he was never in fact a member. By September, McCarthy was full team cover-up: the Guardian’s Hugo Lowell noted that McCarthy “threatened to retaliate against any telecommunications company that complied with the records requests” of the congressional committee investigating the 6 January insurrection. That’s not technically lying, but it’s certainly an attempt to prevent the truth from being known. There’s a lot to cover up, especially if you don’t want the committee to find out the extent to which Congress itself was involved in the attack on Congress. The politicians who fled in fear thereafter threw themselves into denying the threat and protecting its chief instigator. No one did so more slavishly than the then vice-president, Mike Pence, who was pressured before and during 6 January to violate the law and exercise a power he did not possess to change the election outcome. “If Vice President @Mike_Pence comes through for us, we will win the Presidency,” Trump had tweeted early that day; and then, “Mike Pence didn’t have the courage to do what should have been done to protect our Country and our Constitution”. At Trump’s instigation, the mob was chanting: “Hang Mike Pence!” Pence trivialised the event when he told the Christian Broadcasting Network: “I’m not going to allow the Democrats to use one tragic day in January to distract attention from their failed agenda and the failed policies of the Biden administration.” Capitol police officer Aquilino Gonnell, who was seriously injured defending the politicians, told NPR: “That one day in January almost cost my life. And we did everything possible to prevent him [Pence] from being hanged and killed in front of his daughter and his wife. And now he’s telling us that that one day in January doesn’t mean anything. It’s pathetic. It’s a disgrace.” One of the first lies to explode out of the insurrection was that somehow the attack on the Capitol was the work of Antifa. The very idea of Antifa, as they used it, was an older lie, a transformation of scattered individuals and impromptu groups of antifascists into a cohesive sinister gang that could be blamed for pretty much anything, anywhere. The New York Times described how on 6 January the right was claiming that the insurrection had been led by Antifa, not Trump supporters. By the end of the day, Fox was promoting it, the claim was all over Twitter, and: “Representative Matt Gaetz of Florida had stood on the ransacked House floor and claimed that many rioters ‘were members of the violent terrorist group antifa’.” The claim, the Times added, “has hardened into gospel among hard-line Trump supporters, by voters and sanctified by elected officials in the party” That is, they took the position that the riot, which at the time Republican legislators begged the president to stop, was instead a riot by an essentially imaginary leftwing organisation with no conceivable motive to prevent the confirmation of Biden’s victory. Now the investigation is closing in on the role that many in Congress played in the attack on Congress. Having fled their own mobs, they are now trying to flee the truth, and relying on the fact that a significant portion of the country prefers the lies. The Republicans who helped the failed coup along and then dismissed its import are preparing to do it better next time. The Democratic senator Brian Schatz tweeted on Tuesday: “They are organizing the next one, not as a secret conspiracy, but as a central organizing principle for the next election.” The Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer, said: “Donald Trump has infected, and that’s the appropriate word, the Republican party with his big lie and with his desire to stop democracy. We have no choice but to move forward,” by which he meant overturn the filibuster to pass voting rights legislation. 6 January was one confrontation; there’s another one coming. The lies may implode at some point, but the liars have to be defeated. Rebecca Solnit is a Guardian US columnist. Her most recent books are Recollections of My Nonexistence and Orwell’s RosesMishcon de Reya, one of the UK’s most prestigious law firms, has been fined a record amount for committing “serious breaches” of money-laundering rules. The London-based firm has agreed to pay a fine of £232,500, plus a further £50,000 towards the costs of the investigation, which was carried out by the Solicitors Regulation Authority (SRA). In its decision, published on Wednesday, the regulator said Mishcon de Reya’s conduct had “potential to cause significant harm by facilitating transactions that gave rise to a risk of facilitating money laundering”. The SRA investigation concerned work the firm carried out for two unnamed individual clients between September 2015 and April 2017, and corporate vehicles connected with the same two individuals. The work included the proposed acquisition of two separate entities that had “higher risk of money laundering or terrorist financing” under relevant money-laundering legislation, because they involved companies in high-risk jurisdictions. The regulator found Mishcon de Reya failed to carry out the required level of due diligence or ongoing monitoring. Additionally, between 22 July and 28 July 2016, a payment of £965,000 was made into Mishcon de Reya’s client account and three payments – the highest of $1,099,015, equivalent to £810,000 – were made out of it, none of which related to the delivery of services by the firm, contrary to SRA rules that forbid client accounts being used “as a banking facility”. The firm accepted the SRA’s decision and fine, which is is almost double the previous highest of £124,436, imposed by the regulator on Find My Claims in 2019, for sending six million unsolicited marketing letters to members of the public in respect of mis-sold payment protection insurance (PPI). A spokesperson for Mishcon de Reya disputed that the fine was the largest imposed by the SRA because the penalty covered two separate investigations rather than one. The settlement will prevent the investigation looming over the firm as it prepares to float on the London Stock Exchange. The company is expected to seek a value of about £750m, based on typical valuations in the legal sector, a price tag that would make it the largest London-listed law firm, with every member of staff becoming a shareholder. The firm is known for representing the wealthy, famous and powerful. High-profile cases include acting for Diana, Princess of Wales, during her divorce from Prince Charles and for Gina Miller when she took on the government over whether parliament had to approve the triggering of article 50 after the Brexit vote. Keir Starmer advised the firm while in parliament but ended the relationship when he became shadow Brexit secretary in 2016, subsequently turning down the offer of a lucrative second job with the firm. The level of the SRA fine was based on 0.25% of turnover, in the middle of the band of up to 0.5%, because the SRA said “the breaches were serious but the risks did not crystallise into causing harm to clients or the wider public interest”. Based on Mishcon de Reya’s turnover of £155m, that would have been equivalent to £387,500 but it was reduced by the maximum allowable 40% discount to reflect mitigating circumstances. A Mishcon de Reya spokesperson said: “We are pleased to have come to a settlement with the SRA relating to two separate and historic investigations in relation to which we have made appropriate admissions. Mitigating factors such as our cooperation with the SRA throughout the investigations and the corrective action we have taken since to prevent a recurrence have been recognised by the SRA in reaching this outcome.”An intimate and unique snapshot of a nation reeling from the aftermath of the first world war was made available to the public on Thursday as the National Archives’ 1921 Census of England and Wales went online. The unprecedented glimpse into life 100 years ago reveals the very personal impact of the economic turmoil, housing crisis and major social changes caused by the war and the Spanish flu pandemic, capturing the desperation, anger and sadness of the 38 million individuals who filled in the form. It also reveals a very British sense of subversion and humour: for the first time, the Census asked the occupation of every member of the household. With her tongue firmly in her cheek, Constance Bernard Fitzhamon of Middlesex, listed her three young children’s occupations as “Getting into mischief”, “Getting into more mischief” and, for her 11-month old child, as “occupying feeding bottles”. Despite being an official document whose purpose was to collate dry statistics, the Census glitters with emotional gems: John Platt’s son was born in Monmouthshire, Wales, on the very night the Census was filled out: “Baby Boy Platt” was proudly listed by his father as being just two hours old on the form, too young to even have a name. On the same day, also in Monmouthshire, a baby girl born appears to have been named literally as the Census was filled out. Martha Wall initially recorded her newborn baby as “Baby one day old” before crossing it out and adding the name Rose. Census enumerators, local officials who often knew the families, sometimes added extra details to the forms. William Hamilton of Newcastle upon Tyne mysteriously noted that he had a private income. The enumerator added – even more mysteriously – “Never worked. Enjoys Father’s Egyptian Pension”. The British love of animals – or perhaps the national fondness for mild subversion – is evident in the many families who listed family pets among their household members, including “Bobby the Dog” and “Tarzan the Cat”. “The census enumerators rarely had a sense of humour about these entries and struck them out,” said David Olusoga, professor of public history at the University of Manchester. Francis Sutcliffe of Kirkdale, Lancashire, for example, had her entry for “Kitty the Cat” crossed out with the curt explanation that Kitty was merely: “A domestic cat”. Mary McKee, head of content publishing operations at Findmypast, said they had expected humour and gentle sabotage of a document that was, after all, onerous to complete. “But what we hadn’t expected was the bureaucratic graffiti,” she said. “People were angry that they had been promised a postwar ‘land fit for heroes’ by the government but were, instead, experiencing mass unemployment and poor housing.” Many people used the form to protest: “David Lloyd George, build houses”, instructed Henry Burrough in Durham in a large note added to the form. “Lloyd George is hereby requested to bring forth that ‘Land fit for heroes’,” he added. “Nation’s duty to provide houses.” James Eldon Haynes in Yorkshire agreed. “Out of Work in the Land Fit for Heroes,” he wrote. Robert Stevens in Liverpool, who was out of work and had 12 children, wrote: “Please help me. Times are hard.” “It’s fascinating to see how many people subverted the Census and used it as a means of protesting to those in power,” said Olusoga. “This use of the Census reminds me of the way people now use Twitter.” The way the Census had to be filled out unpeeled other intimate details: it had to be completed on 19 June before midnight. On that night, the creator of Sherlock Holmes, Arthur Conan Doyle, appeared to be holding a seance. “The Census shows he was playing host to a number of mystics and psychics that evening,” said McKee. “A seance seems the logical explanation of that gathering.” Other hidden treasures were discovered during the three years of intensive conservation and digitisation devoted to the Census. A dead menagerie of insects were found within its pages: 532 historic insects from a century ago. “I don’t know what’s been done with them,” said Olusoga. “I like to think a specialist conservationist has whisked them away to start a dead zoo.”Screw 9pm, Channel 4 Based on his experience as a volunteer in a prison, the Killing Eve writer Rob Williams delivers a juicy comedy-drama to rival Bad Girls (well, perhaps not quite). A ballsy new screw, Rose (Derry Girls star Jamie-Lee O’Donnell), joins an all-male block being run firmly by its enigmatic head officer, Leigh (Nina Sosanya). Rose claims to be here because she is “really good at shutting up dickheads” – but will her first day change that? With dark undertones throughout, the show leans more into its drama side – but there are still a few hard laughs to be had. Hollie Richardson Dragons’ Den 8pm, BBC One Quids game: veteran investors Deborah Meaden, Peter Jones, Touker Suleyman and Sara Davies return for a new series of the business-boosting show. After the departure of the vitamin tycoon Tej Lalvani, they are joined on their metaphorical piles of gold by the millionaire social media guru Steven Bartlett; at 29, he is apparently the youngest Dragon yet. Graeme Virtue The Dog House 8pm, Channel 4 Because one dog show (last night’s Paul O’Grady: For the Love of Dogs) isn’t enough to get us through to the end of the week, here is another offering of matchmaking dogs and humans – this time from the charity Wood Green. Tonight, Olivia the blind spaniel, Vinnie the staffie and Cech the shy terrier are all looking for a new family and home. HR The Apprentice 9pm, BBC One Oh joy: yet another series indulging some of the most inept chancers outside the government. In tonight’s opener, the Eye of Sauron demands they pitch a campaign for a new cruise liner. Whatever; the real fun is second-guessing who will be the next bloviating contrarian to fug up future editions of Question Time. Ali Catterall Andy Warhol’s America 9pm, BBC Two This considered three-part series looks at the way Andy Warhol’s life and career intersect with the history of the 20th-century US. In week one, talking-head acquaintances explain the artist’s love of – and determination to become one of – the great American brands. Interviewees range from intelligent analysts of Warhol to a beaming Jerry Hall, whose sole contribution is: “Andy – so good!” Alexi Duggins The Real Anne: Unfinished Business 9pm, ITV After the conclusion of the hard-hitting drama Anne, this documentary traces the true story of the Hillsborough campaigner Anne Williams. Maxine Peake speaks with survivors of the tragedy, Williams’s daughter and the footballer John Barnes, who was on the pitch that day. Previously unseen footage of Williams and pivotal moments in court help colour in what happened. HRRuby will never forget the first time she clicked on the database AnonIB. It is a so-called “revenge porn” site and in January 2020, a friend had texted her for help. Ruby is a secondary school teacher, used to supporting teenagers, and her friend turned to her for advice when she discovered her images were on the site. “She didn’t send the thread that she was on,” says Ruby, 29. “She was embarrassed, so she sent a general link to the site itself.” When Ruby opened it, “I couldn’t believe what I was seeing. I couldn’t believe that such an infrastructure existed: something so well organised, so systematic, fed by the people who lived around us.” AnonIB was categorised by country – the US has the most entries, the UK is next – but then broken down by region, city and local area. “And when I say ‘local’, it wouldn’t be ‘London’ or ‘Birmingham’, a city of any size would have smaller, specific categories, like ‘Birmingham University students’,” says Ruby. The thread for Ruby’s town (population 55,000) stretched to 16 pages and with each intimate image of women and girls, there were comments with as much identifying information as possible by local users – names, surnames, the schools they had attended, who their relatives were. There were also lots of “requests” for pictures of certain women – often called “wins” (“Any wins on XXXX?” “There must be more of this slut out there.” “I can now look her boyfriend in the eye knowing I’ve seen his missus naked.”) Ruby was horrified. “I was in shock. Disgusted that it existed, but also confused,” she says. “How could it be allowed?” But worse was to come. Four months later, she found her own pictures had been added to the site. AnonIB has used various names over the last few years – always some kind of variation of “image board” and “anonymous”. It was shut down by Dutch police, but has since reappeared and is currently hosted from a Russian domain. In the past few months, it has gone behind a paywall. Yet the site is not a one-off. It is just one example of what a report last month by the Revenge Porn Helpline (RPH) has termed “collector culture” – something the RPH identifies as “an emerging trend”, “increasing at pace”. In this case, collecting means posting, collating and trading intimate images of women. “It’s one of the most dehumanising aspects of intimate image abuse that we see,” says Zara Ward, senior helpline practitioner at RPH. “Women are prizes to be passed around, shared and traded like a dystopian version of Pokémon. We often don’t know how these people gained the images in the first place – it could be exes, friends, or hackers – but this isn’t a place where women would consensually upload themselves. All we see on the comments is women consistently and aggressively objectified, humiliated and exposed.” This happens on multiple platforms: Mega, Dropbox, Discord, anywhere groups can share. On Reddit, anonymous users post images of (likely oblivious) women with captions such as “trading my gf nudes” and “trading gf. Have bj videos too”. Interested parties are then usually directed to personal accounts on Snapchat or the messaging app Kik. Although it is impossible to know how common this is, the evidence suggests it’s widespread. (When Ruby was added to the AnonIB thread in May 2020, she was image number 72,000.) One general study of intimate image abuse across Australia, New Zealand and the UK suggests one in five men have been perpetrators, and during lockdown – when online activity replaced real-life interactions – calls to the RPH doubled. (Its figures show that women are five times more likely than men to have their intimate images shared.) “Traditionally, we think of ‘revenge porn’ as someone posting your images on Pornhub and sending you the link, or sending pictures and videos to all your friends and family to hurt and humiliate you,” says Elena Michael from the campaigning group #NotYourPorn. And, in fact, this is what current law nominally protects against. Section 33 of the 2015 Criminal Justice and Courts Act makes it illegal to disclose “private sexual photographs and films with intent to cause distress”. Yet, says Michael, that is only one form of such abuse. “The truth is that most intimate image abuse is clandestine. It’s done without consent, but also, often, with no intention of the survivor ever finding out.” Sophie Compton, who also campaigns against intimate image abuse with the organisation My Image My Choice believes “collector culture” could make up the bulk of cases. “I’ve been talking to survivors for 18 months and it’s huge – maybe more prevalent than any other form,” she says. “I’ve looked at the sites and the forums and the casual misogyny, the vile language, is absolutely chilling. The posters genuinely aren’t seeing victims as human, just stocks and shares to be traded. They could be anyone and everyone – and on sites like AnonIB which categorise by location, it could be the person standing next to you in Sainsbury’s.” Clare McGlynn, professor of law at Durham University, says this is the “hardest message”. “People would rather think perpetrators of intimate image abuse are either perverts or an extremely malicious ‘other’ type of person,” she says. “The truth is that it’s everyday men and boys. Closed groups, lad chats, bonding over explicit images and ‘banter’ has become absolutely ubiquitous.” Sometimes, it leaks out and the wider world gets a glimpse. McGlynn points to the rugby group at Oxford Brookes University that challenged players to get as many “Brookes girl” nudes as possible to share and rate. There is the “men-only” private Bristol Facebook group set up to share images of partners and ex-partners that gained 7,000 members in a matter of days. Professor Nicola Henry, socio-legal scholar at RMIT University Australia, has studied the motives of perpetrators, looking at 77 platforms, image boards, community forums and blogging sites where images are shared and traded, and interviewed perpetrators. “Despite a lot of media attention focused on revenge against an ex-partner as the key motivation, it’s more commonly related to sexual gratification or impressing online peers,” she says. “For instance, on some sites, images of wives and girlfriends are shared to get positive feedback from other users.” (“It might have been a bit of showing off,” said one perpetrator she interviewed. “After I’d built up quite a collection, I started to kind of take this pride in it,” said another.) Whatever the motivation, the impact can be devastating. Ruby learned that her images were on AnonIB when a former schoolmate sent her a message breaking the news. The pictures were taken when she was 17, on a girls’ holiday. In one, she had been sunburned, and was lying topless on her front while a friend rubbed aftersun on her back. In the other, she was demonstrating the size of the hotel towels, not big enough to cover her. “On the scale of things, they were not that explicit – although in the context of that website, they looked suggestive,” she says. “I’d uploaded them for about three weeks after the holiday in a private Facebook album. I probably had about 400 Facebook friends at the time so whoever posted them was one of those people. I’ve resigned myself to never knowing who.” But as a local teacher, she had to inform her employer; she has no idea if her students have seen the pictures. And in the immediate aftermath, she found herself bolting from a post office queue simply because the teenagers outside suddenly made her feel uncomfortable. She formed a WhatsApp group for other local victims from the thread; in her small town, news travels fast and friends share their stories. “It has been far worse for some of them,” she says. “Their images were often far more explicit. Some haven’t been able to tell family or friends. Some were pregnant and so distressed they had to make emergency visits to hospital. “One girl wanted to pursue a career in the performing arts but she has put it off. She deferred her place at drama school because in that industry, image is everything. She didn’t know if she could cope with the anxiety of being Googled.” For Helen, 28, it feels as if she is an entirely different person from the one she was before her intimate images were shared in an encrypted chatroom. This spring, she received an anonymous “tipoff” on her Facebook account that explicit pictures of her had been gathered in a Google Drive folder and posted online. The informer – who was later traced to Australia – attached some of the pictures and said they thought she would like to know. She remembers collapsing on to her bed in shock; going for a run, dropping to the ground to cry, running again, then dropping again. The images in the message had been created in the course of a five-year relationship that had ended two years previously. “My ex had assured me they’d all been deleted,” says Helen. “We’d been speaking as friends right up until weeks before this happened. I had no reason to think he’d ever do that.” More than 18 months on, she still struggles. “I’m single,” she says, “and dating is really tough. I used to be open, confident, proud of my sexuality. It has damaged something I loved about myself, made it something I have to fight for again. “I have moments of shame I can’t control, moments when this fear arises that I can’t predict. I’ve had times when flirting with someone suddenly seems to cross a boundary I can’t understand. I’ve largely avoided intimacy as it’s too terrifying to really give that trust to another person.” Helen has tried to find out as little as possible about what was posted and where. “I’ve kind of chosen not to know,” she says. “It could be a lot. I was with that person a long time.” Her ex-partner was interviewed by police and also sent her a message admitting to sharing the images, but adding he had “never meant to hurt her”. He said he did it for his own “kink”. “As painful as it was to have it confirmed, I was happy that at least I had a confession the police could use,” she says. “Then it transpired that his claim of not wanting to hurt me was precisely what protected him from any prosecution.” Ruby and the other victims in the WhatsApp group from her local town have also found no recourse in law. She reported her case to police who gave her a crime reference number and referred her to Victim Support. Others in her group heard nothing back. In one case, one woman said, the officer actually yawned and said it was the 20th AnonIB report of the day. It took a lot of collective pressure for their cases to be referred as cybercrime to the Regional Organised Crime Unit. There has been no update since. “We really felt the police didn’t support us, but the law doesn’t support the police,” says Ruby. “Yes, there’s the website, the infrastructure: why are we allowing access to it in the UK? “But there’s also the local element. Some of the images on the thread were FaceTime screen shots. The image in the corner of the man on the calls could clearly be seen. We positively IDed at least two of them. We know who they are, where they live and told the police – but they didn’t even knock on their doors. Perpetrators have so many admissible defences. ‘I did it for a laugh and didn’t think she’d see.’ ‘I was paid a tenner to upload pictures of girls in my area.’ Doing it for sexual gratification is an admissible defence. We’re campaigning to remove the motive element from the law. Sharing intimate images without consent is the bottom line and that’s what should be illegal.” There are signs that things will change. The Law Commission review of the laws around intimate image abuse began in 2019; the final report this spring is expected to make nonconsensual sharing an offence. However, warns McGlynn, changing the law is a very slow process – and only part of the solution. “It also comes back to culture change, education, work in schools,” she says. “Evidence from studies shows that just as teenage girls are pressured to send nudes, teenage boys are also feeling pressure to get nudes and share them, to gain kudos. Collecting digital trophies is becoming part of being a boy and a man – that’s what we need to change.” In the meantime, Ruby is not sure that it’s worth knowing that your images are online, passed between others, traded, shared, collected and commented on by friends and strangers. “It’s really difficult,” she says. “On the thread for our town, there are girls I recognise, who I haven’t spoken to since I was 16. You feel a sense of moral obligation. Do I tell them – even when I know nothing is going to come of reporting it and there’s nothing they can do? Is it better that they don’t know or is it better that they do know and are as distressed as we were? I’ve decided I’m not going to pop up and derail their life. Maybe ignorance is bliss.” Some survivors’ names have been changed.British consumers spent a record figure of almost £10bn on home entertainment last year as the pandemic continued to fuel a boom in streaming services such as Netflix and Spotify. That included a “miracle” increase in revenues from sales of physical music formats after two decades of seemingly inexorable decline, helped by fans starved of live gigs spending their extra cash on vinyl. Overall spending on entertainment, which covers digital and physical video, music and gaming – including sales of CDs, DVDs and video games – increased by 4.6% last year to £9.7bn. The figures, which were inflated by the growth of streaming TV and music subscription services, defied expectations of a decline after entertainment spending in 2020 grew at the fastest rate in a quarter of a century. James Bond: No Time to Die was the bestselling video content of the year, with Bond fans snapping up three times as many copies as the next most popular entry. The latest edition of football title Fifa once again topped the video games charts, while Adele’s 30 was the most popular album. “The entire sector was braced for revenues to settle down in 2021 after 2020 grew an astonishing 18.7%, but growth has continued for the ninth successive year,” said Kim Bayley, the chief executive of the Entertainment Retailers Association (ERA), which publishes the annual report. “The vast majority of the growth is being driven by digital services making entertainment more accessible and convenient than ever before.” The figures highlight the scale of the dramatic shift towards internet-based services, from subscribing to a service such as Netflix or Spotify to buying or renting a game, film or box set from Sky Store or Apple’s iTunes, with almost 90% of total entertainment spend now on digital services. Total digital revenues grew by 8.3% to £8.66bn, more than the entire market was worth just two years ago. By comparison, overall physical revenues declined 18.5% to just over £1bn. However, the ERA said that within this decline music fans delivered a “miracle”, with sales of physical music showing growth for the first time since 2001. Sales of physical music grew 7.3% to £291.5m thanks to the continuing boom in the popularity of vinyl, which was given an additional boost by fans spending their cash on stocking their music collections because of the lack of gigs and concerts. Revenues from vinyl album sales rose 23% to £135.6m, while CD sales continued to fall 3.9% to £150m. “The return of physical music sales to growth a full two decades since they started to decline is nothing short of a miracle,” said Bayley. However, the music sector remains dominated by digital with income from subscriptions to services such as Spotify, Apple Music and Amazon Music climbing 11% to £1.3bn. This was more than the entire value of the UK recorded music industry as recently as 2018 and accounted for 80% of the total £1.67bn. Adele produced the most popular album of the year with total sales of 600,000, ahead of Ed Sheeran’s =, which sold 432,000 copies. In the video market, spending on subscription streaming services, led by Netflix, Amazon’s Prime Video and Disney+, grew by 28% year on year to £3.16bn. Overall, digital revenues accounted for 93% of the total £3.75bn video market, which grew by 13% in 2021. However, a lack of blockbuster releases in cinemas last year dramatically affected income from subsequent DVD sales as well as digital ownership and rentals from services such as Apple’s iTunes and Sky Store. Overall revenues from DVD sales fell 40% to £150m, while Blu-ray Disc income decline by a fifth to £85.7m and digital rental and ownership fell 28% to £336m. Nevertheless, Bondmania fuelled 1.1m sales of No Time To Die, including renting and buying or downloading a copy physically or digitally, more than the rest of the top five bestsellers combined. “The reopening of cinemas and significant backlog of Hollywood blockbusters means we can expect renewed growth in ownership formats this year,” said Bayley. In gaming, which was the largest sector in the entertainment industry at £4.28bn, revenues fell 3.3% in 2021, having hit an all-time sales record in 2020 having grown by 18%. The ERA said a key factor in the dip was also the global shortage of semiconductors, which had hampered gamers getting their hands on the latest PlayStation and Xbox consoles. The only segment to show growth last year was mobile and tablet gaming, which grew 8% year on year to £1.5bn. Fifa 22, the bestselling game of the year, sold 917,000 physical units and another 1.3m in digital format.Top story: Anger in Serbia at ‘harassment’ of player Good morning, I’m Virginia Harrison and here are our top stories this Thursday. An extraordinary battle has broken out at the Australian border after tennis star Novak Djokovic was denied entry to the country for failing to meet strict Covid vaccination rules. The world No 1, who was due to play in the Australian Open, has launched a court battle amid a spiralling outcry over a controversial “medical exemption” agreed by the tournament’s organisers. The Serbian player is awaiting his fate in a Melbourne quarantine hotel as he mounts a legal challenge against Australia’s decision to cancel his visa. The move has sparked diplomatic fallout, with Serbia’s president Aleksandar Vučić accusing Australia of “maltreatment”. “I told our Novak that the whole of Serbia is with him and that our bodies are doing everything to see that the harassment of the world’s best tennis player is brought to an end immediately,” he said in a statement. The star’s father, Srdjan, had strong words for the world, telling Russian media: “Tonight they can throw him in a dungeon, tomorrow they can put him in chains. The truth is he is like water and water paves its own path. Novak is the Spartacus of the new world which won’t tolerate injustice, colonialism and hypocrisy.” The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, dismissed pleas to reconsider the move, saying “rules are rules, and there are no special cases.” He added: “People are welcome in Australia, but if they’re not double vaccinated and not an Australian resident, you can’t come.” Djokovic, who is no stranger to controversy and bad behaviour, has become something of a flashpoint among the Australian public over the sense that different sets of rules apply to powerful or famous people. You can read our explainer on how the Djokovic drama unfolded here. * * * Covid staffing crisis – Millions of patients will suffer worsening quality of care unless ministers take immediate action to alleviate the staffing crisis engulfing the NHS, health chiefs have warned. The NHS Confederation, which represents the whole healthcare system, has called for a range of new measures to be implemented in the NHS in England to help overstretched hospitals and struggling ambulance, mental health, community, GP and social care services cope with “widespread” shortages of medics and health workers. The measures include deploying tens of thousands of medical students on to wards and other healthcare settings, priority access for NHS and social care staff to lateral flow and PCR tests and a review of self-isolation periods to see if it can be slashed from 10 days to five. The warning is the latest in a deepening staffing crisis across the healthcare system driven by the Omicron wave. You can read all our coronavirus coverage here or listen to this podcast on why so many people are getting reinfected with Covid. * * * Colston Four – Anti-racism campaigners have hailed a jury’s decision to clear protesters responsible for toppling a statue of the slave trader Edward Colston as a huge step in getting the UK to face up to its colonial past. As Rajeev Syal writes, the acquittal of the Colston Four will prompt close scrutiny of the actions of the home secretary, Priti Patel, who became personally involved in ensuring that they were pursued through the criminal justice system. Hours after the statue of the slave trader was toppled on 7 June 2020, Patel appeared on Sky News to demand that police pursue those responsible, saying their behaviour was “utterly disgraceful”. Two days later, it emerged that she had also called Andy Marsh, the chief constable of Avon and Somerset police, to demand an explanation. Nazir Afzal, the former chief prosecutor for north-west England, told the Guardian: “We have a tripartite regime for a reason and that is so that politicians do not get involved in the operational decisions taken by the police. It may be that she has overstepped the boundaries of that arrangement.” As of Wednesday night, Patel had not released a statement commenting on the trial verdict. The acquittal is the latest in a series of cases in which juries have cleared protesters despite there being no question of their having carried out the actions for which they were tried. Here are some other recent examples. * * * Cost of living - Jacob Rees-Mogg asked Rishi Sunak to reconsider impending tax rises as the chancellor and the prime minister came under sustained fire from Conservative MPs to tackle rising costs of living. Ministers are examining further targeted measures to mitigate soaring energy costs for vulnerable households including potentially extending the warm homes discount – but are set to reject a VAT cut. During a cabinet debate on Wednesday, Rees-Mogg is understood to have suggested the chancellor ditch the impending 1.25 percentage point increase in national insurance to ease the squeeze. * * * ‘No more talk’ – One of the only black female QCs in England and Wales has said the time has come for action on tackling race inequality in the legal profession. Barbara Mills, who is co-chair of the Bar Council’s race working group, said the next 12 months would be “critical” to tackling systemic obstacles at the bar. A landmark Race at the Bar report found there were just five black female QCs – senior barristers, also known as silks – in England and Wales (another two were announced last month). Another stark statistic: a black female junior barrister with the same level of experience as a white male junior billed £18,700 a year less on average, and an Asian woman £16,400 less. Mills said: “… [what] our brown and black colleagues are expecting is a sense, a feeling of visibility, that it’s changing – no more talk, just change it.” * * * ‘I kept saying – don’t worry Luma, we see you’ – Oscar-winning director Andrea Arnold has revealed what four years spent filming a cow taught her about life. Her new documentary, Cow, explores warmth, joy and anger through the eyes of a farmyard animal, and consists of 94 minutes of moos, with the odd off-camera interjection from farmhands. Today in Focus podcast: How the Capitol attack still divides the US A year ago today, rioters stormed the Capitol building in Washington DC after Donald Trump encouraged his supporters to march on Congress to protest against the election result. Lunchtime read: The lives ruined by explicit ‘collector culture’ The swapping, collating and posting of nude images of women without their consent is on the rise. But unlike revenge porn, it is not a crime. Now survivors are demanding a change in the law. Sport A dropped catch from Joe Root helped Australia negotiate a wicketless morning session on day two of the fourth Ashes Test, before Usman Khawaja lit up the SCG with a century on his international return as Australia built a large total. Follow our live updates here. Antonio Conte acknowledged Chelsea were “much stronger” than Tottenham Hotspur after watching his side get outclassed by Chelsea at Stamford Bridge on Wednesday night. So bad were Tottenham’s mistakes in the first leg of the Carabao Cup semi-final that they deflected the spotlight away from the storm engulfing Romelu Lukaku. Uefa would welcome a bid for the 2028 European Championship from the UK and Republic of Ireland after hopes of bringing the 2030 World Cup there began to fade. The Women’s Championship club Coventry United have avoided liquidation after an agreement in principle to sell the club’s shares was struck at the 11th hour. Rugby officials are still locked in crunch talks which will dictate whether the Six Nations and European club competitions can withstand the latest wave of Covid-19 infections. And the Philadelphia Eagles quarterback Jalen Hurts has called on the NFL and the Washington Football Team to improve safety measures at FedExField after a railing collapsed at the stadium on Sunday. Business Mishcon de Reya, one of the UK’s most prestigious law firms, has been fined a record amount for committing “serious breaches” of money-laundering rules. The London-based firm has agreed to pay a fine of £232,500, plus a further £50,000 towards the costs of the investigation, which was carried out by the Solicitors Regulation Authority (SRA). The settlement will prevent the investigation looming over the firm as it prepares to float on the London Stock Exchange. To the markets and the FTSE is expected to open lower after falls in Asia and the US. The pound is fetching $1.35 and €1.20. The papers The Colston four dominate today’s front pages, with plenty of space also given to Covid and the Djokovic deportation saga. The Guardian leads with “Four cleared over toppling of Edward Colston statue” while the Telegraph has “‘Colston four’ walk free as jury says no crime was committed”. The Daily Express’s take is “Statue ‘vandals’ cleared … but where will it all end?” The Times has “Bristol jury clears protestors who toppled Edward Colston statue” above a report on “Boost for holidays as travel tests scrapped”, saying families to save £300 to avoid quarantine. The i newspaper leads with “Deported”, alongside a picture of an angry Djokovic, saying the world No 1 tennis player was told he will be removed from Australia in a visa row over his refusal to be vaccinated. The Daily Mail also runs a picture of Djokovic, saying the “anti-vaccine tennis star” is to be “kicked out of Australia”, while its splash is “We have lift-off, Britain!” on the scrapping of almost all testing rules on foreign travel. Covid also features in the Mirror, with “Perfect storm” – reporting on the NHS front line. The paper says the NHS is facing a crisis with soaring staff absences and a huge rise in Covid patients. The FT has “Fuel to the fire: Protests grip Kazakhstan” after fuel price rises triggered violent clashes in the country. You can read the latest from the Guardian on the story here. And the Sun reports Conservative peer Baroness Mone will be questioned by police over allegations she sent a racist text message. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendStaff shortages caused by Covid are pummelling the Australian economy, emptying supermarket shelves and closing shops and restaurants amid renewed calls for rapid antigen tests to be made free in workplaces. While there is no hard data on how many people are off work because they have Covid, are isolating due to being a close contact or are waiting for a test, some companies are reporting that half of their employees are unable to attend. Trucking and logistics are particularly hard-hit, as is the meat industry, which this week warned of shortages unless slaughterhouses and boning rooms were either exempted from health orders prohibiting close contacts from working or provided with Covid tests. There are empty spaces on supermarket shelves in every department of the two big supermarkets, Coles and Woolworths, as staff shortages hit every part of the supply chain from suppliers through to transport companies and the chains’ own distribution centres, which send products to individual stores. In a return to measures last seen at the height of the first wave in 2020, Coles has limited sales of mince, sausages, chicken breasts and chicken thighs to one packet per customer in order to stop panic buying. Woolworths has yet to bring in buying limits. Supermarkets are also reducing the range of products they sell in order to make life easier for their suppliers. There are fears within the supermarket industry that some stores may be forced to shut or reduce their hours due to workers being unavailable. While loosened close contact rules have made it easier to keep people at work, this extra capacity has been overwhelmed by the skyrocketing number of Covid cases, which climbed past 68,000 across Australia on Thursday. Scott Morrison said testing requirements for truck drivers had been watered down in a bid to ease the strain on the logistics system while the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, has spoken to supermarket bosses about the crisis. The prime minister admitted the rolling staff shortages were taking a toll on the economy and said the federal government was focused on increasing capacity in critical areas including healthcare, distribution centres, food production and transport. “We need truck drivers to keep on trucking, that is what we need to do to keep moving things around,” Morrison said. “And right now they are delivering vaccines to GPs and pharmacists, and that system is of course under strain because of the high case numbers.” The prime minister has also asked the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, to meet with state governments to discuss loosening laws that require employers to maintain a safe workplace so that small business does not have to bear the cost of buying rapid antigen tests (RATs), the price of which has skyrocketed due to soaring demand and limited supply. A spokesman for Cash said the Morrison government “will work with state and territory governments to provide clarity to employers on rapid antigen testing requirements under WHS [work health and safety] laws”. “The attorney general is reaching out to WHS ministers to progress this work.” Unions strongly opposed the idea, which they doubt is practical, and repeated their call for the government to provide free RATs for small businesses. The acting secretary of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, Liam O’Brien, said all workers were entitled to the same level of protection at work as Morrison, who on Wednesday said he was able to get RATs provided to workers at the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet because he was “an employee in this building, like everybody else”. O’Brien attacked Morrison for failing to buy enough RATs despite the warning, given by unions and businesses in October, that they would be needed once restrictions were reduced and face-to-face commerce resumed. “On the one hand he’s entitled to this very safe workplace [but] because he’s failed to do his job in securing enough tests for the nation, the rest of us are expected to work in less safe conditions,” O’Brien said. “If we’re going to start to remove the obligations on employers to introduce rapid testing, not only are we going to see more workplace outbreaks, which is going to lead to more people getting Covid, but as we’re seeing right now, we’re going to see businesses shutting down.” He said workplace health and safety laws were under the control of the states, not the federal government. “I don’t think it is possible or practical for him [Morrison] to amend eight different pieces of state legislation,” he said. The union that represents employed chemists, Professional Pharmacists Australia, said a plan announced by Morrison to hand out up to 10 free tests to concession card holders was not good enough. “Such limited access doesn’t help millions of workers and businesses who need access to multiple tests on a regular basis to protect workplace health safety and operational continuity,” the union’s chief executive, Jill McCabe, said. “Access to free tests is a critical health and safety risk-mitigation measure required to reduce the spread of Covid in workplaces.” As Guardian Australia has previously reported, tourism and hospitality operators and airlines have also had to reduce their operations due to staff shortages caused by the surge in cases. Sarah Hunter, the chief economist for Australia at BIS Oxford Economics, said it was hard to gauge the effect of staff shortages on the economy until workforce statistics were released by the Bureau of Statistics late next month. She said it was also difficult to tell whether the hit was caused by the problems with supply or a slump in demand. “You’re also seeing people being less willing to get out and about, shop, that kind of thing,” she said. “Whether it’s because people aren’t able to go to work or they don’t want to go out, it’s difficult to tell because they’re happening at the same time.” However, Hunter said Australia could learn from the woes experienced by the UK and US in previous waves where those countries did not lock down. She said up to 25% of employees across the third of the Australian workforce that was in industries where working from home was not possible could be put out of action at any one time. “Twenty five per cent is definitely a worst case, I’m not saying that’s going to happen, but clearly for the next few months it’s going to be difficult across the economy,” she said. “It’s not just healthcare industries, it’s companies like Woolworths and Coles and the food supply chain. “In the UK in their last wave they were having problems not because of supply problems but because they weren’t able to get things on the shelves.” Hunter said another pressure point would be parents who were unable to work because their children had to stay home and needed to be supervised. “Again it’s hard to know how much of an impact this will have, but in the US and the UK this factor has been cited in surveys as one of the reasons people haven’t yet returned to the workforce.”The three weeks with my 19-year-old back from his first term at university has been a joy. We missed him, of course, but also, as the only member of our family to have done anything novel over the past year, he seems thrillingly exotic. We badgered him with questions like medieval peasants welcoming a knight returned from the crusades. “You went bowling?” we whisper in wonder. “You sat in a library! With strangers!” But his return has also revealed to me how worryingly far along the road of role reversal we have already gone. His is a sweetly sensible generation and I often feel grossly irresponsible around them. So far, he has told me off for not drinking enough (well, any) water, not taking weight-bearing exercise, and looking forward to The Apprentice (him: “It’s just trashy reality TV”; me: “That’s the point?”). As his father and I experimented with various festive alcohols and artery hardeners, he brewed his own herbal teas from whole spices, ground in the pestle and mortar he requested for Christmas, and bemoaned the lack of a tofu press in our house. Yesterday, he urged me, the person who views any meal that takes more than 15 minutes to prepare as a personal affront, to soak my own pulses. Most evenings he works or reads something improving while we sit gormlessly in front of yet another iteration of MasterChef, picking biscuit crumbs from our cleavage (me) or sleeping (spouse). Last week things came to a head when he distributed copies of a paper he had read on the deleterious effect of “media multitasking” (basically, looking at our phones while watching TV) on memory. It will never stop being delightful to see your child become an adult, but this is dangerous. If I can now relinquish responsibility for behaving like a grownup, where will this end? Will I blow the mortgage on 90s fashions on Depop, or get a mate to give me a septum piercing? When he comes back at Easter, I might have to download TikTok and finally find out what a “milk crate challenge” is. Adrian Chiles is on holidayThere’s a great turn from Jeremy Irons as the careworn appeaser Neville Chamberlain in this breezy what-if political thriller, adapted from the page-turner by Robert Harris and directed by Christian Schwochow. It’s set at the notorious 1938 Munich conference, convened by Adolf Hitler to force the cringing western powers into giving him the Czech Sudetenland. With some generous revisionism, this film makes the case for Chamberlain’s savvy negotiating powers and heroic self-sacrifice: he was apparently buying time for British rearmament and exposing Hitler as a bully at the cost of his own reputation. The movie even includes some eyebrow-raising dialogue on the plane home, after Chamberlain has got Hitler to sign that piece of paper promising peace, in which the prime minister predicts that if the Führer ever broke his promise, he would call down world fury on himself – and even bring the Americans into the resulting war! Could Chamberlain have come within a mile of foreseeing that? Or is the movie’s tongue in its cheek? George MacKay and Jannis Niewöhner play Hugh Legat and Paul von Hartman, two (fictional) minor functionaries on the British and German sides who happened to be best friends at Oxford in the early 30s. With their German friend Lenya (Liv Lisa Fries), they had a kind of come-to-the-Cabaret intimacy, of a more wholesomely non-sexual sort, before Hugh fell out with Paul over the young German’s Hitler fan-worship and Lenya mysteriously vanished. But fast forward to 1938 and Paul is now secretly anti-Nazi, planning to sneak his old pal Hugh a secret document that will prove Hitler’s plans for conquest and disrupt the deal. If he is caught, he will be sent to the camps – and the British themselves, increasingly committed to appeasement and their own supposed heroism in averting war, would be furious at this desperately dangerous game. Robert Bathurst plays genial British ambassador Sir Nevile Henderson and Alex Jennings is the peppery, stiff-necked diplomat Horace Wilson. In this very male world, perhaps it is telling that the female characters are the fictional ones: Jessica Brown Findlay is Hugh’s unhappy wife Pamela and Sandra Hüller is Helen Winter, the worldly army widow with whom Paul is having a gloomy affair. The Führer is Ulrich Matthes, who played Goebbels in Downfall. Just as Hugh is beguiled by Chamberlain’s twinkly-eyed charm in private over whisky and cigars, so Paul finds himself mesmerised by Hitler’s cobra gaze and the sickly, hideous thrill of Führerkontakt as Hitler, due to some caprice of his own, decides that he will elicit the opinion of this stammering aide. It all rattles along easily enough, with some nice spycraft set pieces. As with Frederick Forsyth’s The Day of the Jackal, the fact that you know what happens in the end is no bar to enjoyment. But the junior members of the cast, who are the stars, look pretty lightweight compared to Irons’s Chamberlain and I wonder if it wouldn’t have been better to adapt Harris’s book as a two- or three-part streaming TV version in which characterisation could have been built up and smoothed out, and Lenya’s fate would have been resolved less perfunctorily. Well, none of this stops it being an ingenious, elegant counterfactual drama. • Munich: The Edge of War is released on 7 January in cinemas and on 21 January on Netflix.Striking images taken during the Falkland Islands conflict will go on display together for the first time in a new Imperial War Museums (IWM) exhibition which aims to highlight the long-term legacy of war. The photographs, by Paul Haley for the British army’s Soldier magazine, will feature alongside other exhibits, including online films, to mark the 40th anniversary of the 10-week undeclared 1982 war, with a focus on new awareness of its impact. Opening on 2 April – the anniversary of the invasion by Argentina – at IWM museums in London, Salford and online, the exhibition aims to bring a new perspective to a war that claimed the lives of 255 British military, 649 Argentinian troops and three civilian Falkland islanders, said the show’s curator, Dr Hilary Roberts. Haley was a first-hand witness, accompanying the taskforce from setting off on board the QE2, to landing at San Carlos in East Falkland and capturing the immediate aftermath of the Battle of Goose Green and the journey to Port Stanley. He also photographed the Argentinian Skyhawks flying overhead on their way to bomb the British navy vessels Sir Galahad and Sir Tristram. Some of the images, and accounts from Falkland islanders, will also feature in five short films, made digitally available, which will explore the impact of the war, at the time and subsequently. Roberts, the senior curator of IWM’s cold war team, said research offered a new understanding of the conflict, which even today was “still a lens” through which UK-Argentina relations were assessed. “Today we have a greater understanding of the way in which that small conflict has permanently influenced international events, in terms of political legacies, military legacies and social and cultural consequences,” she said. The outcome shaped both governments in power. The Argentinian military junta fell, with Gen Leopoldo Galtieri forced to resign the following the year, while Margaret Thatcher became one of the longest-serving prime ministers. “The Falklands factor has been much debated. I won’t say it’s the only reason why, but it was clearly one of the factors,” said Roberts. The conflict led to new research into post-traumatic stress disorder and had a lasting influence on Royal Navy ship design, deployment of vessels and commitment to aircraft carriers and submarines, she added. “I hope it will give people awareness that this wasn’t simply a small colonial war, and it wasn’t simply an aberration. It does continue to affect our lives, and that small wars should not underestimated,” she said. “The conflict is moving, slowly, from contemporary history, which is informed by people still alive to tell the story, into documented and researched history, where we learn more from the archives but we gradually lose those voices which are so important.” Haley’s work will feature alongside that of the war artist Linda Kitson, accounts from the Falkland islanders, and exhibits including an Exocet missile and an Argentinian anti-aircraft gun captured by the Gurkhas.Treasure hunters who believe they found a huge cache of fabled US civil war-era gold in Pennsylvania are now on the prowl for something as elusive as the buried booty itself: government records of the FBI’s excavation. Finders Keepers, a lost treasure locate and recovery service, filed a federal lawsuit against the justice department over its failure to produce documents on the FBI’s search for the legendary gold, which took place nearly four years ago at a remote woodland site in north-western Pennsylvania. “With its request Plaintiff seeks to confirm the FBI’s recovery of Civil War-era gold buried in the mountains of Pennsylvania, based in significant part on scientific evidence of the gold’s existence that Plaintiff provided the FBI,” the lawsuit said. The FBI has since dragged its feet on the treasure hunters’ Freedom of Information Act request for records, their lawyer said on Wednesday. “There’s been a pattern of behavior by the FBI that’s been very troubling,” said Anne Weismann, who represents Finders Keepers. She questioned whether the agency was “acting in good faith”. A message was sent to the justice department seeking comment on the suit, which asks a judge to order the FBI to immediately turn over the records. Finders Keepers’ owners, the father-son duo of Dennis and Kem Parada, had spent years looking for what, according to the legend, was an 1863 shipment of Union gold that was lost or stolen on its way to the US Mint in Philadelphia, which was supposed to be used to pay the wages of federal troops. The troops carrying the gold went missing, along with the loot, giving rise to generations of speculation about what happened to it, although historians have cast doubt on the claim, pointing to the lack of official records of the shipment. The duo focused on a spot where they say their instruments detected a large metallic mass. After meeting with the treasure hunters in early 2018, the FBI brought in a contractor with more sophisticated instruments. The contractor detected an underground mass that weighed up to nine tons and had the density of gold, according to an FBI affidavit unsealed last year. “I have probable cause to believe that a significant cache of gold is secreted in the underground cave,” in Dent’s Run, holding “one or more tons” belonging to the US government, Jacob Archer of the FBI’s art crime team in Philadelphia said. Accounts differ as to the amount of gold in the shipment. Some reports say it was 26 gold bars, others 52. Each would have weighed 23kg, meaning it would be worth up to $50m today. In March 2018, the Paradas accompanied the FBI to the site in Dent’s Run, approximately 135 miles north-east of Pittsburgh, but say they were confined to their car while the FBI excavated. The FBI has long insisted that the March 2018 dig came up empty, but the agency has consistently stymied the Paradases’ efforts to obtain information. Finders Keepers asked the justice department for expedited processing, which can be granted in cases where there is widespread media interest involving questions about the government’s integrity. However, the justice department has denied the request – and, as of last month, has yet to assign the Foia request to a staffer for processing, according to the lawsuit. “From the outset, it seems as if the FBI is doing everything it can to avoid answering the question of whether they actually found gold,” Weismann said.Ethiopia has lifted a five-month suspension of the Norwegian Refugee Council’s aid work after it cleared the organisation of allegations of spreading “misinformation”. The government ordered the NRC, along with Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), to stop work for three months in July, including operations in the Tigray conflict zone. Both organisations were ordered to stop their humanitarian work in July but while MSF’s suspension was lifted in October, the NRC’s was extended. “It is heart-breaking that we were unable to reach our target of serving more than half a million in need across Ethiopia in 2021,” Jan Egeland, NRC secretary general, said in a statement. “Now that we have to restart, it will take time to again reach as many people as we did before the suspension. We have lost many of our staff. We urgently need permits for our international staff to return, and we need to be able to pay our suppliers.” NRC said it was given a “strict warning” from the government over future advocacy on humanitarian needs. NRC had been providing food, clean water, shelter, education and legal help to 25,000 people when it was ordered to suspend its operations. At the time, the UN called the bans “dangerous” and said Ethiopia needed evidence to back up its claims that the aid groups were spreading misinformation. MSF was banned in the Tigray, Gambella, Amhara and Somali regions. Along with spreading misinformation, the organisation was accused of bringing in satellite communication equipment without authorisation and not getting the correct permits for employees. In September the organisation said the suspension had forced it to discharge patients from clinics at short notice, and meant it could not help people affected by the Tigray conflict, refugees from South Sudan and people suffering from neglected tropical diseases. MSF said that while the three-month suspension had been lifted in late October, it had been difficult to restart operations. “Although we are permitted to resume our work, it has not been possible to restart those medical programmes, mainly due to the current security situation and administrative obstacles,” the spokesperson said. In November, MSF was forced to suspend work in some parts of the country for safety reasons. “Despite the significant scale of humanitarian needs faced by the Ethiopian people in many regions of the country, MSF considers it difficult to restart and expand its response to address those needs.” MSF said it was talking with the government and other parties to find ways to continue providing medical services.The evidence for whether new year resolutions are effective is mixed. Make them Smart – specific, measurable, achievable, realistic and timely – and they can be a spur to effective action. But vaguer resolutions such as “get fit”, “lose weight” or “stop wasting so much time” often conceal a deeper self-criticism that undermines our intentions. The underlying approach is that we must simply try harder – sometimes at everything at once – and that sets us up to fail. We binge on diets, then binge on food and, finally, binge on guilt. I’ve found that apps that help turn my unfocused intentions into a Smart plan really work. A Couch to 5K programme got me running, and I liked having a clear objective. It feels good to be fitter. You might see a bald bloke running with a waddling gait, but I see goals met and targets smashed – and a 10K in my sights. But there’s a downside to resolutions, even when they’re effective and we achieve them. The focus on results has got me checking my Google Fit stats a little too often, introducing an element of data-driven compulsiveness to the simple activity of exercising my body. It reminds me of the impulse I sometimes feel to check my Facebook likes and Twitter followers. I sense it fits with a wider cultural current: the strain coming from the constant effort to keep up, be productive and get ahead is a source of stress, not its cure. Recognising this, part of me wants to simply ditch my phone and forget the targets. I’m a Buddhist, I’ve taught mindfulness for 15 years, and that part of me wants to be unproductive and turn, as we say on our courses, from doing mode to being mode. My favourite exponent of such non-utilitarian living is John Keats, who advocated “delicious diligent indolence” in a letter written to a friend in 1818: “Let us not,” he writes, “go hurrying about and collecting honey, bee-like buzzing here and there for a knowledge that is to be arrived at, but let us open our leaves like a flower, and be passive and receptive.” Keats’s word “diligent” signals that, by indolence, he doesn’t mean inertia. Maintaining an alert receptivity requires what Buddhism calls practice – a conscious effort to develop it over time, which should be undertaken with “balanced effort” – a middle way between wilful or compulsive striving and self-indulgence. The Buddha’s image of this was of a musical instrument whose strings must be tuned neither too loosely nor too tightly. Drawing on my experience as a mindfulness teacher, I have some suggestions for middle-way practices that foster the alert receptivity Keats recommends. The first is learning to settle the mind. Meditation is by no means the only way to do this, but it’s popular because it offers simple methods for shifting attention from the flow of thoughts to something calming, like the breath. If you’ve tried it for yourself you’ll know that the thoughts don’t just stop, and you sometimes feel uncomfortable. But settling the mind and stepping into a different kind of awareness is actually a fairly straightforward process. That’s a start, but the value of doing this is the “mental space” that opens up by freeing yourself from mental strain and clutter. So it’s important that we don’t just fill the space up again with more input. Buddhism has always spoken of the need to “guard the gates of the senses” – to manage what we expose our minds to, if we want them to develop. And that takes on fresh importance when, with a few clicks, we can access an effectively unlimited supply of movies, music tracks, websites and just about any other diversion we can imagine. There’s not much point in achieving a goal like getting fit or losing weight if it becomes a new source of stress. What I’m really seeking as I run is a sense of flourishing and vitality, and that can only happen by being fully present and aware in each moment, not just when I reach 10K. A more mindful way of living values simplicity over consumption and allows space between activities. It focuses on doing one thing at a time and doing it fully. We need time to reflect and to be curious. These things can be practices, and perhaps you can frame them as Smart resolutions. But in the end we don’t just need to be smart. We need to be wise. Vishvapani Blomfield is the Buddhist contributor to BBC Radio 4’s Thought for the Day and leads meditation on the RoundGlass appFarmers in England will be given taxpayers’ cash to rewild their land, under plans for large-scale nature recovery projects announced by the government. These will lead to vast tracts of land being newly managed to conserve species, provide habitats for wildlife and restore health to rivers and streams. Bids are being invited for 10-15 pilot projects, each covering at least 500 hectares and up to 5,000 hectares, to a total of approximately 10,000 hectares in the first two-year phase – about 10 times the size of Richmond Park in London. These pilots could involve full rewilding or other forms of management that focus on species recovery and wildlife habitats. Rare fauna such as sand lizards, water voles and curlews will be targeted, with the aim of improving the status of about half of the most threatened species in England. The exact funding has not been disclosed, as bids will be compared to determine value for money before a final decision on which should go ahead is made this summer. However, the total amount available for such schemes is expected to reach £700m to £800m a year by 2028. By 2042, the government aims to have up to 300,000 hectares of England covered by such “landscape recovery” projects – an area roughly the size of Lancashire. Ministers also plan to offer English farmers payments for “local nature recovery”. The smaller-scale actions taken on their farms could include planting more trees, restoring peatlands or wetlands and leaving space for wildlife habitats. These payments, which will be revealed later this year, should also reach up to £800m a year by 2028. George Eustice, the secretary of state for environment, food and rural affairs, said the aim was for wildlife and nature protection to run alongside food production as a matter of course for most farmers. He is expected to tell farmers at the Oxford Farming Conference on Thursday: “We want to see profitable farm businesses producing nutritious food and underpinning a growing rural economy, where nature is recovering and people have better access to it. Through our new schemes, we are going to work with farmers and land managers to halt the decline in species, reduce our greenhouse gas emissions, increase woodland, improve water and air quality and create more space for nature.” As well as the two new schemes – landscape recovery and local nature recovery – farmers will also be able to apply for payments to help them protect their soil and take other basic environmental protection measures, under plans announced last year. Funding for these measures will also reach about £800m a year, as part of the post-Brexit overhaul of the £2.4bn-a-year farming subsidies into a system of “public money for public goods”. This means farmers are paid for making environmental improvements, rather than the amount of land they farm. Green campaigners were sceptical over whether the new payments would be enough to meet the government’s aim of halting the loss of wild species abundance and managing 30% of land for the good of nature by 2030, as well as ensuring that farmers help to solve the climate crisis rather than add to it. The Wildlife Trusts, RSPB and National Trust charities said detail on how the schemes would work was still lacking. Craig Bennett, the chief executive of The Wildlife Trusts, said: “The real test of this agricultural transition is not whether it is a little bit better or moderately better than what came before, but whether it will be enough to deliver on [the government’s targets]. Anything less than that means that this historic opportunity will have been wasted. While we’re hearing the right noises from the government, the devil will be in the detail and the detail is still not published nearly six years after the EU referendum.” The schemes would fail unless more was done to help farmers move away from intensive practices, said Jo Lewis, the policy and strategy director at the Soil Association. This could include the introduction of ambitious targets for reducing pesticide and fertiliser use. “These schemes won’t work in isolation. They risk failure if they are forced to compete with mounting commercial pressures that encourage more intensive farming and cheap food production, for which the environment and our health ultimately pay the price,” she said. Though some are benefiting from high grain prices, many farmers are facing a difficult outlook, with rising input costs, plummeting exports due to Brexit red tape, and potential new competition from prospective importers after post-Brexit trade deals. Martin Lines, the UK chair of the Nature Friendly Farming Network, said that farmers who already take environmental measures were “left in limbo” before the schemes start in 2024. “Government has been running similar environmental stewardship schemes voluntarily for farmers for 20 or 30 years, yet we still have seen huge declines in wildlife. We need these schemes to be bolder and more ambitious, not just delivering more of the same with minor improvements,” he said. Tenant farmers, who work on about a third of farmed land in the UK, are concerned over how they can access the new schemes. They also fear that their landlords may take advantage of large-scale rewilding to remove their tenancies. George Dunn, of the Tenant Farmers Association, said: “It is alarming that, after at least three years of discussions with the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, it has no clear plan for access to these schemes by tenant farmers. [Current payments] are being removed while we have a vague commitment for further work to be undertaken on how tenants, and those who use common land, can access schemes. It does feel like we are pushing water uphill.” Mark Tufnell, the president of the Country Land and Business Association, which represents 28,000 farmers, landowners and rural businesses, said: “The government must also ensure that policy changes look towards domestic food production and security. Britain is already at the forefront of agricultural innovation and animal welfare standards, and we must do more to make certain that our great produce is supported here and abroad. We need to guarantee that profitable agriculture remains a core part of the rural economy and feeds the nation sustainably.”Like swirling paper scraps from a bonfire, the charcoal-winged vultures circled high overhead. When I imitated a lamb’s bleat they circled closer, stretching their massive wings and craning long wrinkled necks. The bone-white rocks of the Gorge of the Dead was a fitting backdrop for these pterodactyl-like birds – I could have been in a scene from Jurassic Park. Named not for the hikers that have perished here (happily none has) but because it’s littered with caves where the Minoans once buried their dead, this seven-mile canyon – also called the Zakros gorge – is the end of the Cretan section of the ultra-long-distance E4 hiking route. The whole trail runs for more than 10,000km from Tarifa in Spain to Cyprus, but this island’s stretch starts 320km away in the north-western town of Kastelli-Kissamos and ends at the remote resort of Kato Zakros. My plan was to hike a bite-size 35km stretch of the E4 in reverse, from Kato Zakros, near the start of the gorge, to Vóri, a hamlet further south where I would catch a bus back to the port town of Sitia. Far from the doom and gloom of TV and social media and the stress of living in a Covid-stricken world, I would heal my soul – for a weekend, at least – by hiking through untamed landscapes and foragiing for food in one of the wildest corners of Crete. Packing my old rucksack with fruit, drinking water and a bag of crumbly feta cheese, I set out in early December. Just over 300 nautical miles from Libya and on roughly the same latitude as Cyprus, eastern Crete is almost as warm as Andalucía in winter. In summer and autumn, soaring temperatures can make hiking sticky and unpleasant, but winter means temperatures around 20C, and the sun shining gently in a sky the colour of stone-washed denim. Leaving the vultures behind, I was soon deep inside the gorge, hiking on a slippery, shale-strewn path between skyscraper-high cliffs. Apart from the drone of bees in the late-flowering thyme and the fierce whistle of a golden eagle somewhere on high, the silence was absolute. The caves where the Minoans once worshipped the souls of their ancestors – and where in later years defiant locals hid from the successive wrath of Venetians, Turks and Nazis – stared down at me like the blankly watchful faces of ancient Greek masks. After two hours of hard hiking I collapsed on a rock near the top of the gorge and took in the view. Far below, the once-magnificent Minoan Palace of Zakros, with its remains of marble-pillared halls, shrines and ceremonial pools, shimmered like a mirage above the horseshoe-shaped bay of Zakros. It was from the bay that the Minoans once sailed – boats weighed down with jars of wine, olives and figs – to trade for gold and ivory with Egypt and Syria. It was easy to picture the square-sailed ships setting out from this lonely spot; with little or no tourism and only a handful of inhabitants, Kato Zakros still has a sense of antiquity. Scrambling up one final, staircase-steep section of gorge I emerged near pano (upper) Zakros: a handful of tavernas and a cluster of square white houses in the Unesco-classified Sitia Geopark. At Hotel Zakros I lunched on fried snails (xochloi bourbouristi) in vinegar, rice-stuffed courgette flowers (kolokithanthi gemisti) and other delicious meze. Leaving Zakros I followed a winding road – past an old mill and the springs that once fed it – and into a sheltered valley where I found an abandoned citrus grove and filled my pockets with tiny sweet tangerines and waxy-skinned lemons. A buffeting wind that tugged at my pack pushed me up along a track lined with purple heather and out on to the plateau of Mavros Kambos – the Black Plain – named for a bloody skirmish with Ottoman troops in the 16th century. Black was a misnomer, however: the fertile plain was viridescent with horta, the wild greens that have been a staple of the Cretan diet since Minoan times. I gathered some of my favourites – galatsida (common brighteyes), radiki (dandelion) and agriozohos (golden fleece) – for dinner. By 6pm when I reached Skalia (abandoned in the 18th century after its inhabitants were massacred by the Turks) the sun was low on the horizon, casting an eerie scarlet light on the old stone houses with their caved-in walls and roofs. Finding a sheltered spot I boiled the horta on my camping stove, drained off the water, added lemon juice and olive oil and ate it with a chunk of feta, enjoying the contrast of salty pungent sheep’s cheese with the tender greens. It was dark by now – so dark that, apart from the distant glow of a village far below, there was no light at all and stars filled the entire sky. It was breathtaking – like being inside a geodesic dome pasted with millions of glittering snowflakes. Filled with renewed energy after my vitamin-packed foraged dinner I set off along a flinty path fringed with purple heather to Ziros, where I spent the night at Arismari apartments, a sparkling modern complex in the centre of the village. With its small square houses – and backdrop of jagged blue mountain, this tiny village 30km from the nearest town seemed incredibly isolated when I woke to bright sunshine the following day. Nikos, who owns the cafe where I breakfasted on toast and local thyme honey, told me that recent DNA tests by a Florida university proved that most of the inhabitants in this Lasithi region are descended directly from the Minoans. A dirt track – via vineyards that produce the crisp and spicy Assyrtiko wines – led through the tiny mountain village of Armeni and then down along a winding road to Vóri. A fug of wine and woodsmoke told me I was approaching a casani, the copper still where – in winter – Cretans distil grape skins left from winemaking to produce raki. Manolis, the shepherd who owned the still, handed me a plastic beaker of what looked like spring water. I took a sip and nearly choked on the burning 70% proof alcohol. Manolis told me he’d lived in Lasithi all his life. I mentioned what I’d heard about the DNA tests. “Eh!” he shrugged and took a deep slug from his beaker. “The Minoans loved dancing, women and raki – of course they were our ancestors!” I hiked on to the outskirts of Vóri where – with Manolis’s permission – I rolled out my sleeping bag in his olive grove. As I lay back to admire the blazing sky full of stars my head was spinning. It was mostly the raki, but I was also giddy with the joy of escaping – for those 35km – the world of Covid. Yamas! Kato Zakros is an hour’s drive from Sitia. Buses from Vóri to Sitia take 45 minutes, €2.50 single. Arismari apartments sleep five from €65 a night For the latest Covid advice on travelling to Greece see the Foreign Office websiteOne of my brothers has a serious addiction and mental health issues. My elderly parents are concerned about what might happen to their estate after their deaths. My brother is not likely to be safe with any amount of money, but he will need ongoing care, which they currently fund. They do not want to leave behind a divisive decision, or any more of their life’s work to be handed over to drug dealers. What do you advise they do? LW, London Start by consulting a specialist solicitor or financial adviser. I asked the government-sponsored Money and Pensions Service (MaPS) for options. Andrew Johnson, a senior money expert, suggests a will trust. This is created within the will which enables nominated trustees to hold property for the benefit of one or more individuals. Trustees would have legal responsibility to make decisions in your brother’s interests. The MaPS website provides guides on setting up a trust and how to choose a financial adviser. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsIt was a visceral cry at the moment of maximum peril for American democracy. A furious mob had overrun police and was nearly at the door of the House of Representatives. Inside the chamber, Republican Paul Gosar was launching a spurious challenge to Joe Biden’s election victory in Arizona. Then, at the back of the gallery on the second floor, Democrat Dean Phillips rose to his feet and screamed at the top of his lungs at Gosar: “This is because of you!” The outburst was out of character for a “Minnesota nice” congressman with a reputation for moderation and working across the aisle. But a year later, Phillips remains convinced it was an urgent and necessary response to the deadly insurrection inspired by then president Donald Trump. “It’s not my style to break decorum and to scream,” he told the Guardian, “but I have to say at that moment I felt the way that tens of millions of Americans did, which is there were people responsible for what was about to transpire and there are moments where you do what you got to do, and I had to do it. I don’t regret it one bit because it’s true.” Phillips, 52, comes from a business background. He led a family-owned distillery – producing vodka, gin, rum and other liquors – and ice cream company. He was elected to Congress in 2018, representing Minnesota’s third congressional district, and is vice chair of the bipartisan Problem Solvers Caucus. “I never imagined I’d be doing this,” he admits. “I woke up the morning after the 2016 election, saw the reaction of my daughters, who were 18 and 16 at that time – their fear, their tears – and I promised them right then and there I would do something, and here I am.” On 6 January 2021, he had been advised that there could be trouble so told his staff to stay home. He watched his office TV “horrified” as Trump gave a speech urging supporters to “fight like hell” to overturn his defeat. He then walked to the House to begin certifying Biden’s election victory. But soon he received text messages from anxious family members showing video of protests forming outside. “I asked my colleague, Tom Malinowski from New Jersey, to walk from the House chamber with me to look out the windows and a Capitol police officer literally screamed at us to get away from the windows and get back into the House chamber. We asked if everything was OK, and – I’ll never forget it – she said, ‘You’re in the United States Capitol. It’s the most secure building in the country’.” They returned to the House chamber just as Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Majority Leader Steny Hoyer were being evacuated. Gosar was at the microphone, leading efforts to subvert his state’s electoral college vote, when the sergeant-at-arms urged members to take cover behind seats and prepare their smoke hoods – prompting Phillips to feel “fury” and let rip at the Trump loyalist. While members on the House floor were able to escape, there was no way out for 20 sitting up in the gallery due to coronavirus safety measures. “I screamed at my colleagues at that moment to follow me to the Republican side of the chamber because I thought it would be safer,” Phillips says. “I thought the insurrectionists were coming for us. “First, it was almost impossible to get through these railings; you either had to go under or over. But more than that, I recognized at that very moment that a lot of my colleagues couldn’t blend in. I’m talking about those of color. It really left an indelible mark on me. “That whole day changed me, of course, as it would anybody, to recognise that privilege and the fragility of democracy and also a significant increase in my empathy for those who have endured trauma in their lives, which is life-changing.” Rioters reached the doors of the House chamber but found their way blocked by an improvised barricade and Capitol police with guns drawn. After an ordeal lasting about 25 minutes, Phillips recalls, members in the gallery were led out by a Capitol police officer and through a maze of tunnels. “We ran into the Rayburn lunch room and it was a bizarre moment because there were people just having lunch at the tables. The sun was shining in from the big plate glass windows and here we are, an officer with a rifle running with us into the lunch room and people just stunned, looking at us like, what the heck’s going on? Of course, the TVs moments later would sure change that.” The group was then moved on to a committee room where they were finally safe. But their shared ordeal would stay with them. They now call themselves “the gallery group” and still meet regularly, sometimes with facilitators or therapists. “It’s been the most wonderful support group imaginable because we endured it together,” Phillips says. On the night of 6 January, with the Capitol finally secured, they and other members returned to the House and Senate to finish the job and ratify Biden as president. For a fleeting moment, it seemed that Democrats and Republicans were united in completing the work of democracy and jettisoning the authoritarianism of Trump. But it was not to last. In the year since the insurrection, some Republicans have embraced Trump’s “big lie” and his portrayal of the mob as patriots driven by a noble cause; others have simply remained tight-lipped and failed to denounce it. Phillips, who sees them up close during sessions of Congress, believes they are motivated by self-preservation of both position and personal safety. “That’s perhaps the saddest part of all this. Many of my colleagues – especially those who voted to impeach, those who voted to impanel the January 6 commission, those who voted to certify the election – have received horrifying threats to their safety and the safety of their loved ones. It’s an unenviable position but it’s also our responsibility and duty. I understand self-preservation but I do wish principle would take precedence,” he says. It has been difficult for Phillips to witness 6 January denialism as Republicans and rightwing media attempt to rewrite the history of what happened that day, variously characterising it as a “normal tourist visit” or an FBI “false flag” operation designed to entrap Trump supporters. The former president himself insisted that his followers were “hugging and kissing” police. The Democrat says: “This is one of those rare occasions where I was there. I was inside. I heard the gunshot. I saw the remnants of the insurrection in the rotunda and went with [Congressman] Andy Kim at midnight that night to help clean it up when I saw him on his hands and knees alone.” “I saw the body armour. I saw the clubs. I saw faeces. I saw the speaker’s office ransacked. I saw with my own eyes people on the ground under arrest. I saw the mob breaking in. I met with the officers who were subject to it since. I was there to bear witness to it and to hear people say it didn’t happen or it wasn’t a big deal or it’s time to move on, shame on them.” Republicans’ denial of reality, and continued addiction to Trump, has raised fears that 6 January was the beginning, not the end, of American democracy’s near death experience. The party is imposing sweeping voter restrictions across the country and seeking to put “big lie” believers in charge of future elections. Trump could mount another bid for the White House in 2024 with many checks and balances no longer in place. Phillips comments: “We are at the precipice of a very slippery slope and it’s a long way up the mountain when you’re building a democracy but it’s a fast ride down when it slips away. We collectively have to make a choice and a decision here, starting with the simple fact that this is not something that one side or the other can win.” “If one side upends democracy and destroys its institutions and disrespects the rule of law, chaos will result, violence will result and everything that those propagating this claim is important to them – a strong, stable, secure, prosperous country – will have been lost. That’s why I try to be a voice of reason and a bridge builder, not a destroyer.” A self-described eternal optimist, Phillips believes there is still a cohort in the Republican party that can find a way back to the mainstream. He describes Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger, Trump critics serving on the House select committee investigating 6 January, as “heroic”. “I know there are more that share that sentiment that simply are not as public. I have confidence that we will see some type of restoration of principle, assuming American voters find that important.” The congressman’s efforts to lower the political temperature include a series of “common ground” get-togethers in his home district that encourage mutual understanding between constituents across the ideological spectrum. He says: “They’ve inspired me and made me more optimistic because I’ve discovered when, with some intention, you bring people together with disparate political perspectives and break bread, get to know each other and share life stories, common ground is readily available and easily discoverable.” But in this age of polarisation and negative partisanship, there must be some awkward conversations? “We had an experience just a few weeks ago in which someone pulled up in what would be considered a vehicle that a Donald Trump supporter might be driving and someone who was on the far left of that person – in a very uncomfortable moment but it turned out to be a very productive one – acknowledged what she felt when she saw that vehicle pull into the parking lot and what she expected of the person who drove it. “It took courage to share that. It took courage for the driver of the vehicle to listen to it. At the end of the evening, for both of them to recognise their shared humanity and shared interest in a safe and secure country, was a moment of great reassurance but one that can only occur if people stop stereotyping and actually start breaking bread together.”When dozens of apparently healthy young men who had emigrated from Laos started dying in their sleep in the late 1970s, US medical authorities couldn’t fathom what was going on. They termed the phenomenon “sudden unexpected nocturnal death syndrome”, but that was just a label for their bafflement. Today, we think we know the cause: the men experienced sleep paralysis, which is common and harmless in itself; but they understood it as a visitation from the dab tsog, a malevolent spirit who sits on victims’ chests at night. Living far from the shamans and family members who might have helped them ward off the evil, the men panicked, probably exacerbating a form of heart arrhythmia more prevalent in people from south-east Asia, and triggering cardiac arrest. The science writer David Robson’s mission in The Expectation Effect is to convince us we shouldn’t look on those men with condescending pity: our own expectations and beliefs, however irrational, influence our health, happiness and our survival no less decisively. Take, for example, ageing: if you think it’s a matter of inevitable cognitive decline and becoming useless to society, you’re more likely to experience hearing loss, frailty, even Alzheimer’s. Such attitudes predict higher levels of stress and inflammation, which in turn contribute to a range of disorders. (By contrast, in places such as Sardinia, where centenarians are numerous and thriving, their role in intergenerational households is thought to be a factor: it encourages them to expect to stay active.) If you convince yourself that you’re prone to insomnia, you’ll suffer the symptoms of insomnia – even if the truth is that you sleep fairly well. And it’s common for participants in medical trials to experience not only the placebo effect but the “nocebo effect” – drug side-effects such as nausea, dizziness or rashes, even though they’re only taking sugar pills. To an extent, the “expectation effect” is the stuff of self-help cliche: “Whether you think you can or think you can’t, you’re right,” Henry Ford is supposed to have said, rather irritatingly. But one of Robson’s many strengths as a chronicler of science is to take what might seem familiar and show – to his own evident excitement, as well – just how much deeper the rabbit hole goes. You knew about the placebo effect. But did you know it often works, a little mind-bendingly, even when the patient knows they’re taking a placebo? (This is promising, in terms of medical ethics, because it suggests that people need not be deceived in order to benefit.) And if you knew that, did you know there’s evidence that the placebo effect is growing more powerful over time, as more people learn of the placebo effect, and thus expect to experience it? That’s right: the placebo effect has a placebo effect. Expect your expectations to change your life, and they will. While the book abounds in compelling anecdotes – the cyclist who thought he was injecting performance-enhancing drugs, and performed better accordingly; the Portuguese TV show that caused an outbreak of breathing difficulties in its viewers – Robson’s central point is that the expectation effect isn’t an amusing psychological quirk, but a fundamental aspect of our interactions with reality. Our brains are “prediction machines”, steering us through life by generating expectations, and only revising them when unavoidable. Those expectations then play a vital role in shaping what we experience. This explains why far more people, especially children, see a rabbit in the famous “duck-rabbit” optical illusion around Easter than at other times of year. But it also helps explain why pupils from low-income backgrounds tend to live down to their teachers’ academic expectations – and why some of those teachers tend to react with discomfort, not pride, should they defy their assumptions instead. “Like a dramatist carefully crafting a narrative arc,” Robson writes, “we don’t like the objects of our expectations to go off script.” Robson is aware of the objection that this might all sound like a paean to positive thinking. He rejects that claim: the expectation effect concerns specific outcomes, not a general effort to feel good. Moreover, the cult of positivity reinforces the idea that merely experiencing negative emotions constitutes a crisis, or a personal failing, leading only to more negative emotions: “By demonising unpleasant but inevitable feelings, we have been creating a potent nocebo out of modern life.” In any case, wisely harnessing the power of expectation isn’t a matter of eliminating bad things so much as reframing them – for example, by understanding the feelings of exertion during exercise as evidence that you’re making yourself fitter. (Likewise, I think “writer’s block” is often best thought of simply as what it feels like to push yourself creatively.) That way, apart from anything else, you’re far less likely to quit when the going gets tough. Startling research even shows that when people are encouraged to think of the physical movements in which they already engage for their jobs as exercise, they reap greater health benefits. The result of marinating for a while in this outlook is surprisingly transformative. We’re accustomed to thinking of the external world as an implacable thing that either lives up to, or more commonly frustrates, our expectations. That’s why I’ve always been fond of “defensive pessimism”: keep your expectations low, and you can only ever be pleasantly surprised. But this approach defines our expectations as wholly impotent: vain hopes that reality might or might not deign to fulfil. The Expectation Effect shows that, on the contrary, our expectations participate actively in that reality. Clearly, believing that you could be a champion salsa dancer in your 80s – to pick one of Robson’s examples – doesn’t guarantee that you will be. But it might prove easily as important as the genes you were born with. We defensive pessimists could do with remembering that sometimes things do actually turn out really well – especially if you expect them to. • The Expectation Effect: How Your Mindset Can Transform Your Life by David Robson is published by Canongate (£18.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.It’s been 10 years since Steven Bartlett unsuccessfully applied to be a contestant on Dragons’ Den. Since then a lot has changed. The school dropout, who once stole food from corner shops and foraged for loose change to keep his hunger at bay, went on to start his own company from his bedroom and was a millionaire by age 23. Bartlett will be the youngest ever investor – or “Dragon” – on the BBC’s hit series when it returns on Thursday. But pay attention and you’ll see him everywhere – whether it’s debates on daytime television, motivational quotes on Instagram or on his podcast, the Diary of a CEO, which has consistently topped business charts for the past year. Joining the show is a privilege and a responsibility for Bartlett, who hopes young people from less privileged backgrounds like his, especially minorities who don’t always see themselves reflected in certain programmes or industries, will feel enabled. “Dragons’ Den was the only window I had into business from 12 years old,” he said. “It’s like the first time you go to New York City after seeing it in films for your entire life. But I understand what I bring. A new perspective from a new era of business. “I feel a responsibility because there’s never been a black, young Dragon on the show. The most powerful role models, of course, are those that are most relatable.” Bartlett was born in Botswana to a Nigerian mum and a British dad. His mum left school aged seven and can’t read or write, his dad was a structural engineer and “very, very smart”. The family (he is the youngest of four siblings) moved to Plymouth, Devon, where they “struggled financially in a nice, white, middle-class area”, something he expands upon in his bestselling book, Happy Sexy Millionaire. That feeling of otherness, of not having “the nice things other people had”, drove him. “I learned that if I was to have anything, it wasn’t going to be left for me under the Christmas tree, it was going to be a direct consequence of my own actions.” He was an insecure boy who struggled in school, barely scraping through GCSEs and A-levels. His attention, he says, was focused elsewhere – from organising school trips to brokering deals with vending machine companies and taking a cut. It was clear from a young age that his interest and talents lay in the world of entrepreneurship. So it wasn’t entirely surprising that he dropped out of his course in business management at Manchester Metropolitan University after just one lecture. He says he looked around the room, full of hungover students and a lecturer handing out felt-tip pens, and “realised this wasn’t going to take me to where I needed to go”. He has vociferous opinions of the education system, which he calls a “propped up scam” held together by a number of stakeholders, none of which are incentivised to help young people nurture their talents and work towards what they’re good at. “You’ve got the employment world that requires a 2:2 for jobs. You’ve got the university who are getting paid to drag you in and keep costs low, and then you’ve got the schools, which are ranked by grades. It’s an archaic system that hasn’t moved with the modern world fast enough. Information is almost redundant by the time universities publish their textbooks. There’s probably not that many that have been written about blockchain, but we know it’s a pivotal part of our future.” Bartlett’s first proper registered business at 18 years old – a marketing agency called Social Chain – now valued at $600m. He talks much of the importance of following your internal voice and knowing your purpose, a thread that runs through the work of contemporary self-help gurus, including his most recent podcast guest, Jordan Peterson. “I’m really bad at doing things I don’t want to do. If you’re fortunate and take the right steps, that culminates in a life where you’re doing a lot of things you do want to do.” This explains why he left Social Chain in 2020 to pursue new projects, including Thirdweb, a company that creates blockchain-based applications, and Flight Story, a marketing platform. In the latter part of last year, he was also listed as number six in the UK’s black power list alongside Marcus Rashford and Michaela Coel. “Quitting has been demonised in our society. It’s associated with being weak. But it’s the incredibly important thing you have to do before you start the next thing.” His key advice for creating a successful business is being unromantic about your hypothesis. After all, Jeff Bezos originally looked to create an online bookstore. This, and other lessons about business life, were imparted through interviewing other entrepreneurs and business leaders. Though he imagined they’d be incredibly unique, he says he discovered that most of his guests are actually very similar. “They’re all affected by the same anxieties. One thing that happened to them on the playground might steer the course of their life. Sometimes your curses become your blessings and vice versa. Most of the time, having a really shitty childhood is the reason why my guests end up being really remarkable people in their later life.”“Security. Prosperity. Respect.” Keir Starmer appeared in Birmingham on Tuesday to lay out his offer to the country. It is always, if you care about the Labour party, nerve-racking to hear its leader make an account of its core values, though nothing will ever match the dispiriting moment before the 2015 leadership election, when it named one of its core values as “having strong values”. Shelving, very briefly, the question of who is and who isn’t centrist enough for the country, values are like an octave, or a deck of cards: they are fixed in number, at least the acceptable ones; they are always the same. “Another C sharp, another jack of diamonds,” you think. “Big wow.” It’s only once you’re in the middle of a game that any of them become precious or meaningful, and for far too long the Conservatives have been writing the rules. “Labour values” such as equality were effortlessly lifted, to become “levelling up”. The progressive party flailed to adapt – what next, are we all leveller uppers now? Do we level down? – not realising that the rules were always changing, and now jokers were wild in play too. The way to win against the Conservatives was not to find better, different, newer, or more traditional, or more decisive, or more interpretable values. It was to divest the Conservatives of the legitimacy of their rulebook. So Starmer’s offer in this speech was more of a placeholder: he vowed that “if we work hard, we should have a right to job security”. I would have preferred a more radical promise, that if we work hard, we should be relatively confident that we can feed and house ourselves, then a side order of support if by circumstance we can’t work hard. He asserted, too, that “everybody has a right to be valued for who we are and what we do”. It’s a laudable idea but quite hard to measure. Yet if you connect those two thoughts – we have workplace rights, and we all have value – it represents a significant break with the last 12 years of economic reality and political discourse. The transfer of power from the worker to the employer that, with zero-hours contracts and poverty wages, has seemed inexorable, would not survive this meaningful reassertion of workplace rights. And the many cruelties of austerity have only endured this long thanks to the underpinning narrative that hardship was self-inflicted and that some (millions of) people simply had less value than others. This is an optimistic interpretation of the speech; the counterpoint, that it simply didn’t say enough about Labour’s policy intentions, is also fair. Its driving purpose was to establish the party as the dynamic vessel of, rather than a moaning participant in, anti-Conservative feeling. Boris Johnson’s critique of his opposite number has, of course, always been that he’s a lawyer – combining the insults boring, technical, elitist, an observer rather than an actor, “Captain Hindsight”. Starmer’s speech, perhaps for the first time since he became leader, performed a jujitsu move: yes he is a lawyer, and Johnson could have at it. He conveyed this explicitly, his patriotism mediated through his hinterland as the “country’s leading prosecutor”. He also did so implicitly, framing his relationship with voters as a “contract” – about as lawyerly as it comes. And he laid a very simple, yet nevertheless lawyerly trap for Johnson: the prime minister himself is unfit for office, yet the problem is with the entire party, not just one man. The Conservatives care so little about the country that they’re “gearing up for a leadership fight” precisely when we most need stability. It was a systematic, rather obvious, block of each exit: they can’t keep Johnson because he’s bent; another candidate won’t stop the rot, because the party is spent; if they ignore the problem and forge on with their leader, it will merely be a depressing illustration that “they’ve been in power too long”; if they try to replace him, they indicate their lack of seriousness and civic duty. These points lay out a foundational principle, without which Labour will always be on the back foot: the Conservative rulebook is no longer legitimate. Later the same day, Johnson gave a press conference of his own, in a move that cynics, which is now all of us, read as attempting to draw attention away from Starmer’s speech. Problematically for Johnson, that press conference was drivel: repetitive, chaotic, and largely devoid of substance. Any that there was, was immediately contradicted by the look on the face of the man (Chris Whitty) standing right next to him. Johnson is getting to a place where, every time he opens his mouth, he makes his opponent’s point for him. Lawyers, huh? Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistHere’s your day two episode of The Final Word podcast: Geoff Lemon on Usman Khawaja’s triumph: If you’re just waking up - here’s a report on today’s play to sustain you. That’s it from me, time for more coffee and a stretch. Thanks for all the messages and sorry I didn’t have time for them all. See you, I hope, on day four. Have a peaceful Twelfth Night. Stuart Broad is freshly showered and in a blue polo shirt: “It was nice to get five, I think we stuck at our task pretty well as a group, when Stokes was ruled out. I think all the seamers kept running in well, MArk Wood deserves more.... Test bowling is about character, and we kept trucking in, We could have bowled them out for 350 but... I think 400 is always that psychological thing on the scorecard.. it wasn’t the nicest Nathan Lyon pumping me into the stand, the first five-fer ball I’ve ever had to have sanitised. “The pitch isn’t doing too much, you could see it today, Khawaja applied himself, there is nothing wrong with taking time to get in, and when you do you can score some runs. {unsubtle hint to batsmen] “I think when you haven’t been playing, particularly at 35 years old, you value it so much. It’s frustrating when you miss out, particularly on pitches where you feel you could have a positive influence, but nobody has a right to play in the side. I ran in all day. Nice to get a five-fer, but would have preferred it to be when bowled Australia out in 250 to make more of a statement. “I would love to have taken five-fer in the first Test match at Brisbane but that’s top-flight sport. I can’t do much about that, but I haven’t particularly grabbed this chance, 5 for a hundred and something isn’t something to write home about but I felt I worked pretty well within the plan of the team.” Zac Crawley is a lucky, lucky, lucky man. Starc’s misplaced size giant foot gives him another life going into tomorrow and a chance to bring to life that pre-match century fighting talk. Australia dine on top, after that beautiful fluid century from Osman Khawaja, but England - they’re not comatose. 5th over: England 13-0 (Hameed 2, Crawley 2) Hameed lets by, defends, defends, defends with style, defends with not so much style and ball outside edges away to Cameron Green in the gully, defends, survives! And England’s opening partnership gets to walk back together at the end of the session for the first time all series. 4th over: England 10-0 (Hameed 2, Crawley 2) Crawley prods back Starc’s last ball, surviving against all the odds. Just one over left now for Hameed to play through against Cummins. A gorgeous ball , swallowed by Warner at slip, but hang on- Starc has overstepped! Not out! 3rd over: England 10-0 (Hameed 2, Crawley 0) Hameed leaves a succession of balls from Cummins, one which jags back and just glazes his off bail. Still, he survives and so far this doesn’t have quite the menace of the penultimate night in Melbourne. 2nd over: England 10-0 (Hameed 2, Crawley 0) Hameed again takes a quick single, off the second ball, to book his berth up the other end. Starc isn’t quite as menacing as Cummins and England pick up four leg byes. “England to bat for 20 mins,” muses Peter Kelly, “So Root will be batting in 10…..” 1st over: England 5-0 (Hameed 1, Crawley 0) Cummins takes the new ball and immediately beats a prod of indefinite certainty from HH. He scampers a single and Crawley survives the over - just - leaving a scorcher which thuds into the front pad, then urgently pulling his arms out of the way and nearly overbalancing against one that rears off the surface and the keeper can only parry the ball down to the boundary. If you’re just waking up, you might want to take the dog for a walk. Australia have declared leaving England a “testing”final flurry. I actually didn’t think England bowled too badly in the last two sessions, especially without Stokes to call on: Broad was excellent, Wood unlucky, Anderson parsimonious. Anyway, here we, Cummins has ball in hand. 134th over: Australia 416-8 (Starc 34, Lyon 16) Lyon smacks Broad down the ground for four, heaves him for two, then shovels him up, up and away for SIX. And that, my friends, is the declaration. Let the agony begin. Cummins rushes onto the field to warm up in the middle as England meander off. There will be about 20 minutes for Crawley and Hameed to endure. “Regarding your earlier discussion about needed to be introduced to cricket early I actually started enjoying it an adulthood,” taps Jakob Mathiszig-Lee. “I remember being taken to a county game at Lord’s in primary school and was bored stiff and disregarded cricket as a game from then on. “For whatever reason watched a bit of the 2019 ashes (at the age of 31) and suddenly found myself enjoying it, the 2020 visit from the West Indies cemented it and now love the longer form. “As for the game, it’s over isn’t it? At least we made it last till day 2 this time.” Jakob, do you have doubts about the solidity of our top-order? 133rd over: Australia 403-8 (Starc 33, Lyon 4) Lyon, with ungainly bent-kneed stance, heaves Wood’s bouncer through midwicket for four. 132nd over: Australia 398-8 (Starc 32, Lyon 0) Broad holds up the ball between his fingers and gets a goodly amount of applause from the Sydney crowd. It is his eighth Ashes five-fer and the 19th of his career. Excellent work. At last! Broad picks up his five-fer with an inside edge onto the stumps, pretty much his first false shot I’ve seen on my shift ( though he was dropped earlier on 28). Khawaja pulls off his helmet and raises his bat, turning to face the stadium just before he crosses the rope. What a smashing innings - talk about taking your chance. 131st over: Australia 393-7 (Khawaja 133, Starc 31) Wood beats the outside edge, of course he does. Love all these falling-for-cricket stories: “Growing up in Ireland watching the West Indies terrify the English in the late 70s/early 80s was where my interest was sparked,” taps James Cahill. “Very useful as I later moved to Australia where I can still see this happening, just swap out Windies for Aussies.” 130th over: Australia 392-7 (Khawaja 133, Starc 30) Broad’s back, which should lead to events. But just a couple of singles from the over. There is a rattle and the dog briefly raises her head from the sofa as the paperboy pushes the paper through the letterbox. Not too long now till dawn. “Thanks for your entertaining commentary.” Thank you Jean Turner Chapman! “I’m sitting at home, not feeling 100% with what may or may not be CoVid as we are still waiting for our PCR test results three days down the track. Looking forward to the Aussies squeezing in a session with the ball before stumps. And as for the cricket bug, I love listening to the radio (ABC) or reading the OBO, but watching the telly and listening to the blokey banter leaves me a bit cold. Though I do think Ricky Ponting is worth listening to and Skull is always good for a joke.” Get well soon! Hope you get good news with a negative test. 129th over: Australia 390-7 (Khawaja 132, Starc 29) An almost-grimace passes over Wood’s bonny face as Starc has a swing and Bairstow on the boundary loses sight of the ball completely as it flies for four. A 91mph bouncer follows which Starc fends, safely, away. 128th over: Australia 384-7 (Khawaja 132, Starc 23) Anderson bowls the first ball after drinks as clouds start to build around the SCG, the flags jagging in the wind, the floodlights switching on. It’s a maiden from the penny-pincher and he and Broad chew the fat at the end of the over as Anderson puts his sunglasses upside down on the back of his cap. “England have dealt reasonably well with the top order but the game is moving away from them again,” muses Matthew Petch. “Starc and Cummins can both bat and are dragging us inexorably to 400 with Khawaja. The advantage was with England 321-6 at tea.” Yes, the Australian tail is proving a great irritant for England. 127th over: Australia 384-7 (Khawaja 132, Starc 23) Mark Wood deserves more - first Starc fends a short one past Buttler for four, then Starc is given out caught behind, only to be over-turned on review because it hit the arm guard. And with that, they take DRINKS. An email pings in from Karen O’Connell. “My mum, Rose O’Connell, a Canadian immigrant to Australia, and the least sporty person you’d meet, caught the cricket bug – and a crush on Shane Warne – in her 70s, after never watching a game in her life. Never too late to develop an obsession… or two!” Brilliant! I took some friends to a World Cup match at Headingley in 1999 in an attempt to win them over to cricket. It completely failed except in one respect, they too developed Shane Warne obsessions. 126th over: Australia 380-7 (Khawaja 132, Starc 19) You feel for the bowlers, going through the motions now after a long day, just waiting for the declaration. Having typed the figures for a few overs with a tired brain, it is only striking me now how effortlessly Khawaja has moved towards 150. A military maiden from Anderson. “Why can’t you provide a link to the score sheet, or at least show a photograph of the score board. It’s impossible to get a quick summary of what happened in the game so far. And it’s even worse in the regular articles.” There should be a link Gareth Thomas, at the top of the page under the score? It says View Full Scorecard, at least on my page? 125th over: Australia 380-7 (Khawaja 132, Starc 19) An admirable maiden from Wood, as we watch Cameron Green on the Australian balcony being schooled in the ways of the baggy green. This sounds like the plot of an arthouse film. 124th over: Australia 380-7 (Khawaja 132, Starc 19) Khawaja’s drives are full dream boy. Here Anderson gets the treatment, as he kisses the ball away through the covers. Mark Butcher pays them due reverence: “Goweresque,” and they are. 123rd over: Australia 376-7 (Khawaja 129, Starc 18) Root sends down a stinker, which Khawaja treats with deserved disdain. 122nd over: Australia 369-7 (Khawaja 123, Starc 17) It’s Jimmy, to do things.Needle-point accuracy from the off. I probably should know this, but don’t - can anyone help? How did Khawaja get to inherit the magnificent No. 1 shirt? Up on the wrought iron balcony, in the shade of the pavilion, one of the Australian bowlers is looking at cricket balls, trying them out for size. 121st over: Australia 367-7 (Khawaja 122, Starc 16) Root looks around his men, and turns to himself. Innocuous fare mostly, and Australia pick up four. Someone is playing Waltzing Mathilda on the trumpet. “I’m a bit unsympathetic to the plight of English supporters back home having to endure the ignominy of all this,” harrumphs Chris Walsh. “You need to think of those of us resident here (Queensland’s Sunshine Coast in my case) who hear about it day in and day out in every interaction with a local. “In any event, I have a plan. We bowl Australia out for around 400 which gives us 3 days to score 600 and bowl them out on the last day. Victory by an innings and a few. Couldn’t be simpler.” But Chris, you have sunshine. That makes everything, everything more bearable. 120th over: Australia 363-7 (Khawaja 121 Starc 13) Starc throws the kitchen sink and the sticky rice pan at a wide one from Broad but only picks up two. Has he instructions? Does Cummins want the ball this evening? Broad goes off the field - for a rub-down? - to appreciative noises from the SCG crowd. Looking for cricket fans in a desert? Jonathan Horowitz found his through, “Twitter and Discord! You know the one good thing social media is for, finding the weirdos like you.” 119th over: Australia 356-7 (Khawaja 117, Starc 10) A reverse-sweep, an edge, a drive - they all count as Australia ease towards 400. 118th over: Australia 348-7 (Khawaja 112, Starc 7) The ball after a beatified straight drive for four, Starc does well to survive a review off Broad’s bowling, a grenade that nips back and hits...something? Root gambles on a review and it turns out to have avoided the bat but hit the pad - but it is umpire’s call. Broad deserved that wicket for sheer force of effort and skill and good humour. 117th over: Australia 343-7 (Khawaja 112, Starc 2) There’s another one of Khawaja’s square drives, charmingly elegant, stopped from going to the rope by the fawn-like HH. Another wicketless over for poor Jack Leach. Someone lend him some of their luck, please. “Greetings from Singapore!” Lovely to hear from you Kevin Tong. “Speaking of the cricket bug, I have to say it isn’t true that the golden years are in the pre-teens. I’m 23 this year and have only been following cricket for the last 3 years or so! I can’t be the only one who got absolutely hooked by the 2019 World Cup final and that astonishing super over. I remember I was in a hotel room in Thailand reading every over of the OBO while the rest of my mates were drinking. I’m sure I had more entertainment.” I’ll tell Rob Smyth and Tim de Lisle that, they’d be tickled! 116th over: Australia 338-7 (Khawaja 109, Starc o) Stuart Broad stretches out those long, long legs for another over of sweat and toil. Just a run and a leg bye from it. 29 overs left in the day Hello Jonathan Horowitz! “To respond to Finbar earlier, I’m a Chicagoan with no cricket ancestry/experience and started getting into the game at age 27. I think the most exciting sporting event of this year so far was the Bangladesh victory over NZ and I’ve been watching the Ashes instead of American football. I’m also in contact with a bunch of other Americans about cricket, most of whom learned the game as adults. It’s never too late if you find the game interesting!” That’s great. Being nosy, but how did you guys find each other? 115th over: Australia 336-7 (Khawaja 108, Starc o) Khawja still making it effortless as he drives Leach through the off side. 114th over: Australia 331-7 (Khawaja 103, Starc o) Just reward for Broad, who had tried a couple of short ones earlier in the over. It’s that man Broad again! It goes to review but he gets one to rear up - nasty, nasty - and it seems to fly off Cummins glove as he protects his face. The onfield umpire says not out but England review and despite there being no hotspot, the third umpire goes with the balance of probability. A nice catch by Buttler, stretching above his head. 113th over: Australia 331-6 (Khawaja 103, Cummins 24) Leach, tis. Rattles through an over, they take two, thanks very much ma’am. Are there, incidentally, many simpler pleasures than a hot water bottle on a cold winter night? “ Morning Tanya and a Happy New Year.” Hello Finbar Anslow. “I was wondering if there is a cut off age for loving/understanding cricket? I was fortunate enough to have been taken to the county ground in Taunton by my mother at 7 years old, but my older siblings were presumably all too immersed in the Pretty things and Herman’s Hermits to be interested. Could it be that if you haven’t caught the bug by your teens then it’s simply not going to happen? My wife, bless her, dutifully tries to make the right noises when I try to enlighten her - “Butler’s gone berserk” “Oh dear!” - We’ve even watched Lagaan twice, but yesterday’s comment was the cherry on the ageing Christmas cake; “He clean bowled him, shattering the stumps, but No Ball!” “Where was it?” I think it is often a chore if you don’t get the bug young. Not just cricket, but especially cricket. 112th over: Australia 329-6 (Khawaja 102, Cummins 23) Cummins creams the first ball after tea through extra cover for four, Broad thinks he’s got his man second ball. He’s wrong. Cummins provides further irritation by dabbing him through the slips down to third for another four. Well, yes: NOT OUT! Nah, missing off stump. Wise call by Cummins. Broad is sure, but Cummins reviews straight away... Out the teams come for the last session, Khawaja and Bairstow share a joke. England need their bowlers to find a breakthrough rapidly or the next couple of days look very sticky. Beautiful batting from Khawaja, whose wife/partner and young baby were delightedly watching from the stands. Time for coffee here, back shortly. 111th over: Australia 321-6 (Khawaja 102, Cummins 15) It’s Leach to whom Root turns, to ruin the fairytale. Cummins finds a single and Khawaja has three balls to get a run. He squeezes the ball, through the gap at square leg, and that’s it! He leaps in the air, pulls off his helmet, marches on the spot like an ecstatic drummer, raises his bat and gets a hug from Cummins and rousing applause from his home crowd. His ninth Test century, and what a return to the Test side after two years out. The teams stroll off for tea, Khawaja leading the way up to the lovely green-roofed pavilion, slaps on the back every step of way. 110th over: Australia 314-6 (Khawaja 99, Cummins 11) Root turns to his joker, Dawid Malan, and Cummins slogs him for two fours back over his head before taking a single off the last ball of the over to steal the strike. Pat! The crowd boos their dear captain. One over till tea. 109th over: Australia 305-6 (Khawaja 99, Cummins 2) On the brink of tea, Khawaja cuts a juicy wide one from Root and is within just a sprint of three figures. 108th over: Australia 297-6 (Khawaja 93, Cummins 0) Khawaja pivots on his perfect axis and hooks Wood’s first ball for four, and he’s thrillingly coming out his shell as he approaches three figures. Interestingly, Geoff Lemon on the radio is talking about what a rotten time all spinners, not just English spinners, have had in Australia recently with only Ravichandran Ashwin breaking the mould. Anyway, Wood bounces Cummins who sways out of the way. Worries for Travis Head, but I think Khawaja would be in the selectorial minds regardless because of his form in Asia and three tours of the sub-continent coming up. 107th over: Australia 292-6 (Khawaja 88, Cummins 0) Khawaja rocks out another of his wristy, glorious, off-side strokes but only picks up a single this time. 106th over: Australia 291-6 (Khawaja 87, Cummins 0) Wood, forever smiling, tickles Cummins with a bouncer then beats him with a beauty at 90mph plus.And another: Cummins shakes his handsome helmeted head and purses his lips in something - profession admiration? 105th over: Australia 290-6 (Khawaja 87, Cummins 0) An uneventful Root affair. 104th over: Australia 289-6 (Khawaja 85, Cummins 0) Wood replaces the forlorn Leach and tests Cummins with an over of fast ping pong. “Given the weather,” ponders Tanay Padhi, “I think Australia should declare soon and then enforce the follow on.” I think they’ll want a few more - and such is the fragility of England’s batting that they don’t really need to think about putting the openers in for a dodgy half hour before the close. 102nd over: Australia 289-6 (Khawaja 85, Cummins 0) After the joy of the wicket, Khawaja unfurls another beautiful shot, a drive square and handsome. He accelerates towards that hundred on his return. Matthew Ayre has been inspired by Paul Harrison. “England, I still love you, when you collapse like pawns Like a flag-bedecked ape Playing The Great Escape Cos you’re still the one team who’ll get me up before dawn” Carey tries to bellow a huge sweep but just top edges and Bairstow scurries backwards towards mid-off and holds on to a tricky steepler from over his shoulder. 101st over: Australia 284-5 (Khawaja 80, Carey 13) Leach switches ends, to ply his wares from the Paddington end. The first is a tasty morsel, full and wide and Khawaja drives hims stylishly for four. Two more come in a similar manner, and then another dumpling of a half volley which Khawaja dismisses with similar style for another boundary. Eleven from an over he’ll want to forget. 101st over: Australia 273-5 (Khawaja 69, Carey 13) Toot, toot, it’s time for Joe Root, and Carey sparks a bit of life into proceedings by lofting him back over his head for four. 100th over: Australia 268-5 (Khawaja 68, Carey 9). These Australians they just dig in, and this is starting to develop a bit of an ominous feel as one comes off Anderson’s over. My bones are telling me Australia trudge to 375 and then put in England on a worrisome pitch as Pat Cummins snorts up dust at one end, Mitchell Starc at the other. As Ben Grant says: 99th over: Australia 264-5 (Khawaja 65, Carey 8) Signs of frustration from Khawaja who attempts a swing at Leach but misses. Three singles. Cricket Australia have published the revised dates for the Women’s Ashes which starts on Jan 20 with a T20. 98th over: Australia 264-5 (Khawaja 65, Carey 8) The sun is showing its wares out there at the SCG, and Anderson’s arms are turning a reddy-brown. Another maiden as the crowd bubble on the edge of restlessness. 97th over: Australia 264-5 (Khawaja 65, Carey 8) Another careful over, another maiden, no particular dangers. And the cameras pan to Mark Wood climbing the stairs off the field as Overton comes on as replacement.TBH, I’d forgotten he was there. 96th over: Australia 264-5 (Khawaja 65, Carey 8) A couple from a typical Anderson over of exactitude. Paul Harrison is wallowing.NYC “Humming this sitting in the bath here NYC during the lunch break, to this tune “Welcome any OBO-er additions! England, I love you But you’re bringing me down England, I love you But you’re making me frown Burns out for that duck Our tactics that suck Our head on a plate Stokesy bowled through the gate Two years’ plans unfold Leachey still underbowled Broad put to the sword Jimmy toils, no reward Baggy Greens up on high I’m asking you why? England, I love you But you’re bringing me down Like a death of the heart OBO-ers, where do we start? Marcus endlessly chirps Giles falls from his perch Roots alone on his throne Silverwood on his way home They make the Kookaburra sing But for us there’s no swing Smith running for rain Oh, I can’t take this pain England you’re losing And you’re wasting our time All records do show Batting averages’ too low Cummins can do no wrong Scottie Boland gets a gong England, I love you But you’re bringing me down But the Ashes are still the one pool Where I’d happily drown And oh, take me off your barmy army mailing list For kids who think it still exists.” 95th over: Australia 262-5 (Khawaja 64, Carey 7) It’s Jack Leach - Root doesn’t have much choice with Stokes unable to bowl with a side strain. Leach fiddles with the ball in his hands: long sleeves, collar up. Ooof, one goes on with the arm and just evades Khawaja’s outside edge. Keeping it tight. 94th over: Australia 260-5 (Khawaja 62, Carey 7) TheTV replays are showing the variable bounce England’s bowlers are getting on this SCG surface. It’s not great news for England’s batters. Jimmy Anderson takes over from Broad: a lbw appeal and a single. 93rd over: Australia 259-5 (Khawaja 61, Carey 7) Carey squeezes a couple away. 92.4 overs: Australia 257-5 (Khawaja 61, Carey 5) There’s a wind at Sydney which is ruffling Wood’s trousers as he waits at the top of his mark. Carey inside edges with a huge slice of luck and the ball slices down to the boundary. Wood is really hurtling in; wow, that one keeps low and bounces in front of Buttler, in fact it hits him on the back of the hand. They’re taking drinks midway through the over while Buttler gets treatment. 92nd over: Australia 253-5 (Khawaja 61, Carey 1) Thanks Jonathan. Morning/afternoon everyone, it’s a chilly old middle-of-the-night here but. Broad, who has done the damage with the new ball, is looking toothsome and Khawaja tempted, all squared up. 91st over: Australia 249-5 (Khawaja 57, Carey 1) Wood bowls the first over with England’s fourth ball of the match so far, and four deliveries in beats the edge of Khawaja’s bat for the first time in an age. Not much else doing as I take my leave and hand you over to Tanya Aldred for the remainder of the day. See you tomorrow! There’s another ball change for England at the SCG. Not sure what was wrong with this one. It bagged them two wickets after all. 90th over: Australia 248-5 (Khawaja 56, Carey 1) Khawaja now looks right on top of his game and he calmly defuses the latest over of Broad’s menacing spell. After a single, Carey is drawn tentatively forward, but not enough to induce a chance. “The decision to omit Broad at the Gabba looks sillier than ever,” emails Mark McNamara. Yes, it does. For me, Chris Woakes is the great enigma of this England team. For a while he looked like Anderson’s natural new ball swing bowling heir, and at other times he’s looked a possible No 7 bowling allrounder. Yet, despite all this potential he’s still not guaranteed a place in the starting XI, and when he is selected ahead of Broad and Anderson it feels wrong somehow. 89th over: Australia 246-5 (Khawaja 55, Carey 0) Wood strays onto Khawaja’s pads and is glanced finely for four. The rest of the over is defended calmly from the crease. Poor England fans. They can’t win either way. 88th over: Australia 242-5 (Khawaja 51, Carey 0) Four overs 2/13 this new ball spell form Stuart Broad. Almost in spite of themselves, England are still in with a shout here. Broad does it again! The drop from the previous over counts for little as Green again gets a thick outside edge not coming forward decisively. This time the ball carries low to Crawley’s safe hands at third slip. England are making inroads with the new ball. 87th over: Australia 241-4 (Khawaja 50, Green 5) Mark Wood gets an early look at the new ball, and after four dots he finds Green’s outside edge but the ball doesn’t carry to first slip, and Stokes, more advanced at second, doesn’t dive across. Drop? Wood will surely mark it down as one. Oh England. 86th over: Australia 237-4 (Khawaja 50, Green 1) Broad has his tail up - not full KNEES PUMPING BROAD - but he’s definitely into the contest and the ball is coming out very nicely in the direction of a tentative Green. The big allrounder holds his nerve and gets off strike, and a duck, with a simple push into the covers. Khawaja then uses his time at the crease to squirt a couple behind square leg - the second not a guaranteed run - to bring up a hard-earned comeback 50. Lovely stuff. Brian Withington has emailed in some curmudgeonly greetings. “I’m in two minds here whether to join in with the pile on or launch a contrarian defence of the England team, but I don’t think I can summon the necessary bile or energy. Instead, can I just opine that in relation to the captaincy side-show question, Ben Stokes (and heaven forbid, Eoin Morgan) are most certainly not the answer. However, the sooner Andrew Strauss replaces Ashley ‘what’s irony’ Giles the better in my dog-eared book. Well bowled Broad by the way.” 85th over: Australia 234-4 (Khawaja 48, Green 0) Can England prise open this Australian middle order? The slow run-rate means they’re only a couple of wickets away from being right back into this contest, despite such an awful morning session. Not this over. Khawaja is dialled in and defends Anderson from the crease, pulling handily for a couple in the process. “Does anyone know what the third umpire does while waiting for reviews to occur (or not)?” asks the delightfully tennisified Murray Henman. I think they read Lord of the Rings and practice telling batters to walk. Broad’s second over with the new ball begins with a superb square drive from Smith, the kind he plays so well, seemingly neither on the front or back foot. But then, he inexplicably offers no shot to a delivery angling into his pads. Broad appeals in trademark fashion, the on-field decision is not out, England REVIEW, and DRS shows the delivery was just, only just missing the top of leg stump. Very very odd decision from Smith. Perhaps he was as post-prandially drowsy as many of us watching and wanted to liven things up a bit? Broad follows up with a jaffa, spitting and seaming away from the outside edge just short of a length. Smith responds with a swivel pull for four. Broad fancied it as a chance for the leg gully, Hameed in that position was nowhere near it. THEN BROAD GETS HIS MAN! What an over! Back on the fifth-stump line, a bit of wobble, and Smith nicks the new ball through to Buttler. A session’s worth of incident in one over, and Broad is the man to make something happen. 84th over: Australia 232-4 (Khawaja 46) 83rd over: Australia 224-3 (Smith 59, Khawaja 46) Even in the hands of James Anderson, the new ball is doing nowt. Khawaja and Smith effortlessly nudge singles to keep the scoreboard moving. 82nd over: Australia 222-3 (Smith 58, Khawaja 45) Just as it has been since the time of the Flintstones, Stuart Broad shares the new ball with James Anderson. He comes around the wicket to Khawaja, targeting the top of off stump, but a slight misfield allows a rotation of strike. Smith looks to score from his half-over but can’t beat the ring fielders. “What a horror session for England,” surmises Nick Parkinson, accurately. “After sharing the honours yesterday, England have dished up a pedestrian session and allowed Khawaja and Smith to get their eye-in. Once again, English hopes rest with the Anderson-Broad cartel with the new ball. Seems to me that if Khawaja/Smith can see off the first 4-5 overs, a hard new ball on a green pitch might see them score runs very quickly. As an Australian who was nevertheless hoping for some competitive, knife-edge Ashes cricket, how disappointing.” 81st over: Australia 221-3 (Smith 58, Khawaja 44) Anderson doesn’t get a whole heap of lateral movement, or extra zip from the new ball. Smith is happy to leave a lot alone and watch through a sighter of a maiden. Some encouraging news for England. England take the new ball straight away. James Anderson is back into the attack. The next hour is critical. 80th over: Australia 221-3 (Smith 58, Khawaja 44) Now it’s time for some Joe Root part-timers, replacing the part-timers of Dawid Malan. England really coming out all guns blazing after the lunch break. And of course Root gifts Khawaja a long-hop to slap through midwicket like he’s playing backyard totem tennis. 100 partnership up (from 235 balls). 79th over: Australia 216-3 (Smith 57, Khawaja 40) Rank from Leach first ball of the session, short and wide and clarted to the cover boundary by Smith. Seven runs in all come from a soporific over. We’re back after lunch interval, by the way. Hang onto your hats, it’s Jack Leach with the ball, anything could happen!* *Nothing will happen. Eamonn Maloney has logged on in the lunch break with the funnies. “’Runs hardly flowed, but amongst the showers Smith and Khawaja were largely untroubled...’ Heard it rained a bit too while Smith and Khawaja were amongst the showers. Of which Root was the dampest with his fields.” Boom, and indeed, tish. That was all too easy for Australia. Runs hardly flowed, but amongst the showers Smith and Khawaja were largely untroubled as they built a platform from which to attack later on. It was a nightmare session for England. Toothless with the ball, Buttler and Root conspired to drop the only chance on offer, Stokes limped off with a side strain, and the general tone was one of malaise. 78th over: Australia 209-3 (Smith 51, Khawaja 39) Malan with the last over before lunch, and Smith treats it respectfully, until he can’t help but bring up his half-century with a single into the covers. Khawaja then gets the part-timer’s beamer, which he bunts through the covers. 77th over: Australia 206-3 (Smith 49, Khawaja 38) Leach bowls, Australia add three to their score. Lunch imminent. 76th over: Australia 203-3 (Smith 48, Khawaja 36) Wood didn’t last long, replaced by Dawid Malan’s part-time leggies. Malan lands his first couple to Smith very nicely, although without huge revs, then the Australian batters calmly milk a series of easy singles. 75th over: Australia 200-3 (Smith 46, Khawaja 35) Finally, after an hour of bowling, Leach gets an orthodox field to bowl too. It keeps Khawaja honest and encourages the batter to improvise, which he does on the second occasion, using his feet to time a shot through the covers for a brace. 74th over: Australia 197-3 (Smith 45, Khawaja 33) Wood remains in the attack after mopping up Stokes’s over but Australia rotate the strike neatly and continue on their merry, if not very urgent, way towards lunch. Steve Rose has gone hyper-local with his reasoning for any booing caught on the TV mics during the rain breaks. “Randwick wear green,” he emails. “The groundstaff at the SCG wear green. At the Randwick End, some of the booing may well be parochial, never mind the weather.” 73rd over: Australia 195-3 (Smith 44, Khawaja 33) Bleurgh. Buttler and Root combine to drop a catch. Stokes does himself a mischief. Leach is into the tenth over of the most uninspiring ten-over spell you could imagine - one that contains a Hameed misfield. Time for bed, England. John Catchlove is fishing for some Victoria-NSW beef. Frankly, I’m here for it. “Given that Sydney tests are washed out on a 1/4.5 ratio, he emails, “why does Cricket Australia persist in scheduling tests there? It always bloody rains in Sydney!! I believe Melbourne with a 1/11.5 ratio would be a better venue and deserves two Tests a summer. Sydney fans, few as they are could easily travel down here as they are all rich. That I am a long term Melbourne Cricket Club member has no bearing on my proposal.” 72nd over: Australia 191-3 (Smith 42, Khawaja 31) Ben Stokes is done. Side strain. Five deliveries into the fourth over of his spell of nothing but bouncers. Mark Wood completes the over. 71st over: Australia 189-3 (Smith 41, Khawaja 30) DROP! Leach found the angle across Khawaja, kissed the edge, Buttler’s gloves were nowhere near, the ball bounced off his thigh and just to the right of Root at a very catchable height, but the England skipper couldn’t react and hold on in time. Those chances simply have to be taken in a match as attritional as this. “Morning Jonathan, Gervase Greene here.” Hello! “With Leach bowling old-fashioned darts and Stokes to someone invisible around backward square, I am assuming they are looking to bore the Australians out. Or is this a cunning plan to have the lynch mob assembling at Gatwick to turn off the telly?” 70th over: Australia 185-3 (Smith 39, Khawaja 28) Stokes lands a blow on Smith! After both batters navigate the opening few deliveries with some strike rotation, Smith takes his eye off a ball lasering into his chest from around the wicket. The impact was flush on his gloves, but it could have been much worse. 69th over: Australia 182-3 (Smith 37, Khawaja 27) More rapid ‘meh’ from Leach. Australia nudge a couple of singles. Khawaja almost invites catastrophe with an unnecessary stab at a delivery outside his off stump that almost turns into a play on. 68th over: Australia 180-3 (Smith 36, Khawaja 26) Stokes continues his Wagner tribute act, and after an over and half of searching for the line and length he gets a delivery to climb awkwardly at Khawaja’s front armpit from around the wicket. 67th over: Australia 179-3 (Smith 36, Khawaja 25) Better from Leach, bowling around the wicket across Khawaja, and then getting one to bounce and grip at Smith. Still, Murali in a dustbowl it is not. 66th over: Australia 178-3 (Smith 36, Khawaja 24) Ben Stokes replaces James Anderson in the attack. What is the plan here? Oh boy, the field is wild! A short leg, no slips, a short third man, a gully, plenty out on the leg side... Are we in for some Neil Wagner chaos? Yes! Stokes runs in and hurls down bouncers to Khawaja. The first two are too short and loopy, then the third is hooked off the glove! But it doesn’t carry to fine leg. He continues around the wicket to Smith, but the superstar has all the time in the world to dab a single into the on-side. Finally, some out-of-the-box thinking from England. The execution not yet spot on, but at least some innovation. 65th over: Australia 175-3 (Smith 35, Khawaja 23) Couple of singles from a nondescript Leach over. England just seem to be going through the motions and the game is drifting away from them. As an aside, the coverage of the groundstaff sprinting into the middle every rain delay - and their jostling for position in the dash - is joyous. 64th over: Australia 173-3 (Smith 34, Khawaja 22) Despite the interruptions Australia have batted with control all morning, picking up runs when they’re on offer. Khawaja gets one when Anderson loses balance in his delivery stride and drops short, then Smith eases into a sumptuous cover drive for a couple. England are in need of inspiration. Smith is running the show. 63rd over: Australia 168-3 (Smith 30, Khawaja 21) Smith nudges Leach for a single to move above Justin Langer on the all-time run-scorer’s list for Australia. Khawaja then enjoys a bit of good fortune when he cuts uppishly, just wide of gully, after the ball skidded off the surface more than he expected. Still, the outcome is four runs. And there’s more rain... and Smith pelts off the pitch like he’s Renton evading the rozzers through the backstreets of Leith. England are standing their ground, waiting for the drizzle to pass. And Smith is ushered back onto the field before the groundstaff can even lay the hessian. This is not doing much for Smith’s reputation, I can tell you. Play resumes with a dot ball. 62nd over: Australia 163-3 (Smith 29, Khawaja 17) Khawaja defends Anderson and the 62nd over is completed. Play will resume shortly. Only the light covers are on, and there are plenty of people still out in the middle, including the umpires. This delay shouldn’t be long. 61.5 overs: Australia 163-3 (Smith 29, Khawaja 17) Anderson thinks he’s a chance when Smith plays around his front pad in front of his stumps, but like he has on so many occasions Smith gets wood on ball and glances a couple of runs to fine leg. There’s an odd moment mid-over, as drizzle drifts over the SCG and Smith begins to walk off, only to be recalled by the umpires and told to play on. Smith has been very quick to get off the ground at every possible rain break opportunity. And then two deliveries later he gets his wish and the groundstaff charge on like it’s a royal rumble. 61st over: Australia 160-3 (Smith 26, Khawaja 17) A rare maiden from Leach. Khawaja unable to pierce the field with the ball spinning into him from outside off stump. 60th over: Australia 160-3 (Smith 26, Khawaja 17) Smith calmly defuses another Anderson over, nurdling a couple of runs behind square leg for his troubles. Australia are an hour into the day and cruising. 59th over: Australia 158-3 (Smith 24, Khawaja 17) More who-knows-what from Leach and England. Neither attacking or defending, Australia are milking runs at will, and showing how much confidence he has in the match-up, Khawaja reverse sweeps extravagantly for four. 58th over: Australia 152-3 (Smith 23, Khawaja 12) Rain delay, what rain delay? After the brief interruption Smith straight drives Anderson for four. He looks in good order today. Andrew Benton is online. “‘It’s really not obvious what England are trying to achieve...’ Jonathan, you must know by now that everything England does is one big learning experience and that they’ll take that learning and apply it next time. See if they don’t.” Ahem. The shower has just about blown through, and we’ll be back on shortly. No overs lost. 57.3 overs: Australia 148-3 (Smith 19, Khawaja 12) A squally shower has just blown across the SCG. It doesn’t look set in, but the players are jogging off for the time being. 57th over: Australia 147-3 (Smith 19, Khawaja 11) More Leach. more easy runs for Australia. It’s really not obvious what England are trying to achieve with their spinner with gaps all over the place for the batters to pick at will, and no clear plan of attack for taking wickets. 56th over: Australia 145-3 (Smith 18, Khawaja 10) Anderson is settling into his work to Khawaja, slanting the ball across the left-hander, but he’s yet to find a penetrating line and length. Australia have settled into the day nicely. 55th over: Australia 144-3 (Smith 17, Khawaja 10) Jack Leach has been thrown the ball early on day two. From an England perspective there’s not much to get excited about - not helped by an ultra-defensive field - and Australia advance their score by four with the minimum of fuss. 54th over: Australia 140-3 (Smith 14, Khawaja 9) After his early burst, Wood makes way for Anderson, and the veteran shows he’s still got some spite, rapping Khawaja on his knuckles with a delivery that launched off a length. Haseeb Hameed’s heavily strapped fingers must be quivering in the field. After the strike is rotated Anderson beats Smith’s outside edge (around a sixth-stump line). Good start from the record breaker. Colum Fordham has joined in. “It’s all very well to pick out Jimmy Anderson and Joe Root as our Test stars – and they are undoubtedly are – who do not feature in white ball cricket (although Root does play in ODIs). But Australia have just won the T20 World Cup with Hazlewood and Starc as their strike bowlers and many of the Aussie team play equally well in all formats (Warner is a shining example as a batsman). How do India, Australia and New Zealand, to name just a few cricket-playing nations, manage to play so well in all formats of the game? I think one of the ECB’s many mistakes over the last five or so years has been to focus almost entirely on white ball cricket, neglecting Test cricket (and county cricket along with it) but still try to milk test cricket for the kudos and the filthy lucre (Ashes tours), inviting Pakistan, West Indies and South Africa to tour England in difficult circumstances, but backing out of away tours at the first opportunity (noticeably Pakistan).” 53rd over: Australia 139-3 (Smith 14, Khawaja 9) Broad fancies his chances to Khawaja, with that Warner-wicket line from around the wicket, but his attempt to build pressure is undone when the batter does well to rotate the strike midway through the over. Broad then sends down a rank delivery miles down the legside that Smith takes the P out of with an exaggerated front foot leave. Smirks all around. A nice reflection of the spirit of this series. 52nd over: Australia 138-3 (Smith 14, Khawaja 8) Wood offers Khawaja some width to drive and the Australian takes advantage, striking crisply square for his first three runs of the day. Smith then pulls with great control a very well directed bouncer. It only results in an easy single, but that was excellent cricket all round. Wood adjusts his approach to around the wicket to Khawaja, but he loses his line and concedes an easy leg-side run. 51st over: Australia 133-3 (Smith 13, Khawaja 4) A couple of thick edge squirts behind point earn Smith four runs and a bonus Broad teapot. A vintage Smith step to off and easy push to leg earns a couple more. Then he signals to the pavilion for more gloves, 18 minutes into the day. Tim Lane on the Channel 7 commentary just said that Steve Smith is breathing down the neck of his coach, talking over a graphic showing the leading run-scorers in the history of Australian cricket. Now I cannot rid my mind of the Ghost pottery scene playing out in the Australian dressing room. 50th over: Australia 127-3 (Smith 7, Khawaja 4) Mark Wood is coming over the wicket to Usman Khawaja, trying to slant the ball across the left-hander. Khawaja leaves smartly and defends from the crease with soft hands to see off a maiden. Australia starting the morning conservatively. 49th over: Australia 127-3 (Smith 7, Khawaja 4) Broad, after his solitary delivery warm-up, sends down a tight over to Smith, doing his best to bowl full and straight. 48th over: Australia 127-3 (Smith 7, Khawaja 4) Mark Wood is entrusted with the first full over the day, which pleases Ricky Ponting. And his extra pace tests Steve Smith, his third delivery beating Smith’s attempted pull and inducing an ungainly deflection off arm guard and thigh pad. The fidgety run machine then rotates the strike neatly, and Khawaja sees off the rest. I don’t think we need to concern ourselves with lost overs just yet. 47th over: Australia 126-3 (Smith 6, Khawaja 4) Stuart Broad sends down a decent delivery to complete the 47th over that was curtailed by rain last night, and we’re underway. Right, the players are out, day two will be underway in a jiffy. “Where do you come down on the idea of having a multi-format Ashes?” asks Ben Mimmack, no doubt prompted by Jonathan Liew’s comment piece on the idea. “Granted, I’m a middle-aged fogey but I just don’t enjoy watching any other format as much as I do Tests, so a multi-format series would be inherently less interesting for me. Plus, I can’t help but feel it would end up hastening the end of regular test series.” I am open minded. I am concerned we might be trying to fix something that isn’t broken, and end up in a world of disastrous unintended consequences. But also, the logic of Jonathan’s argument is difficult to refute. In an age when cricket’s global calendar must surely be up for revision, is a standalone five-Test series with no preparation fit for purpose? “Hi Jonathan,” hello Peter Salmon. “The question I have at this point is does Australia already have enough runs?” Ooh, you cheeky scamp. And yes, probably, for their first innings. Although maybe not for an innings victory quite yet. It’s warm, humid, and gusty at the SCG. There is a small risk of showers, but the odds are on our side for a full day’s play. The excellent pitch, with pace, bounce, and plenty of grass, is getting a heavy roll. Andy Bull has had enough of Ashley Giles. If Giles is right and more systemic change is needed, the pressing question is whether, given his track record in the job, he is the right man to lead it, given that he made such a mess of the (well-intentioned) rotation policy, and the mistake of binning the head selector to load more responsibility onto the coach. Ramaswamy has dropped by with a conspiracy bomb. “Pat Cummins chose to bat after winning the toss only to extend the Test into day 4, to maximise the McGrath Foundation’s fundraising. The showers will help, of course. This is one ‘fix’ that I have to applaud.” I wouldn’t put it past Post-Tim Pat to even be in control of the weather and dose out showers at an appropriate gap to ensure the Test reaches the final session of day five with all results still on the line. Andrew Biggs wins the Academy Award for the first email of the day, commenting on the relationship between England’s standout red ball performers and their lack of white ball exposure. Coincidence? He thinks not. “England’s two best cricketers have for different reasons not played white ball cricket. Jimmy took a decision not to, to prolong his career and Root has been overlooked.” That is clearly going to have to be central to England’s debrief. As Mike Atherton’s masterplan for the way forward indicated, surely it’s time for specialist coaches for each discipline, and I suspect, as a pathway for almost distinct identities for each category. Mark Wood bowled with raw pace at the SCG yesterday, but he was no guarantee to line up in the England XI after a “rough night” with illness. Geoff Lemon has looked at the latest episode in the Stuart Broad v David Warner epic. Here’s Barney Ronay’s take on a 24-hour period in which Test cricket flourished in New Zealand, Australia, and South Africa. Start your day of cricket by listening to Geoff Lemon, Adam Collins, and Emma John chew the fat. Hello everybody and welcome to live over-by-over coverage of the second day of the fourth Ashes Test. We’re underway at the Sydney Cricket Ground at 10am local time (11pm UK). That’s right, we’re underway half an hour earlier than usual today - although it might feel like an hour earlier, considering how many delayed starts there have been this series for one reason or another. There wasn’t a whole heap to wax lyrical about yesterday because the many showers floating around Sydney prevented any rhythm to the play. The pitch looks good for batting, but there’s enough assistance for the bowlers if they put the ball in the right areas often enough. David Warner looked in good nick before his nemesis Stuart Broad did what he usually does. James Anderson found some swing but lacked precision. Mark Wood was quick. Marcus Harris consolidated his status at the top of the order after his runs at the MCG. Here’s how Ali Martin saw things from the SCG press box. The forecast today is still showery, but there is far less risk of any interruptions to play. The Test should move forward considerably in the extended sessions. If you would like to join in, you can reach me by email or Twitter (@JPHowcroft).Russian paratroopers have arrived in Kazakhstan as part of a “peacekeeping” mission by a Moscow-led military alliance to help the president regain control of the country, according to Russian news agencies. Kazakhstan’s president, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, asked for the intervention from the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) – an alliance made up of Russia, Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan – late on Wednesday and it was swiftly approved. It comes as violent clashes continue between protesters and the police and army in Kazakhstan. There is little reliable information on the number of casualties, but local news agencies quoted a spokesperson for police in Almaty, the country’s largest city, saying dozens of people were killed during attacks on government buildings. Almaty city authorities said on Thursday that 353 police and security forces personnel had been injured, and 12 killed. On Thursday morning, shots were fired as troops entered Almaty’s main square. Several armoured personnel carriers and dozens of troops moving on foot arrived on Thursday morning, with shots heard as they approached the crowd, Reuters witnesses said. State television reported on Thursday that the National Bank of Kazakhstan had suspended all financial institutions. The internet in the country is mostly down as well as mobile phone reception. On Wednesday, there had been reports of violent clashes and shooting in Almaty and other cities, as well as unverified videos suggesting casualties among protesters. On Wednesday night, Tokayev asked the CSTO to help him regain control. Armenia’s prime minister, Nikol Pashinyan, said the alliance would dispatch forces to “stabilise” the central Asian country. It is not clear how many troops the CSTO will send or how long they will stay in the country. Russian MP Leonid Kalashnikov told Interfax the troops would stay “for as long as the president of Kazakhstan believes it necessary”. He said they would mainly be engaged in protecting “infrastructure” in the country. Tokayev had appealed to the bloc for help, decrying the actions of “terrorists” and alleging the country had been the victim of “attacks” by foreign-trained gangs after fuel price rises triggered widespread protests. On Wednesday, demonstrators took over government buildings and reportedly stormed the airport in Almaty, the country’s commercial capital. “Almaty was attacked, destroyed, vandalised, the residents of Almaty became victims of attacks by terrorists, bandits, therefore it is our duty … to take all possible actions to protect our state,” said Tokayev, in his second televised address in a matter of hours. The Kazakh events come at a time when all eyes have been on a possible Russian intervention in Ukraine. Images of police being overpowered by protesters are likely to cause alarm in Moscow, as another country neighbouring Russia succumbs to political unrest. Kazakhstan is part of an economic union with Russia and the two countries share a long border. The protests began in the west of the country at the weekend, after a sharp rise in fuel prices, but have spread quickly and taken Kazakhstan’s authorities and international observers by surprise. The protests have swelled amid broader discontent with Tokayev, president since 2019, and Nursultan Nazarbayev, the former leader. “Nazarbayev and his family have monopolised all sectors, from banking to roads to gas. These protests are about corruption,” said 55-year-old Zauresh Shekenova, who has been protesting in Zhanaozen since Sunday. “It all started with the increase in gas prices but the real cause of the protests is poor living conditions of people, high prices, joblessness, corruption.” Darkhan Sharipov, an activist from the civil society movement Wake Up, Kazakhstan, said: “People are sick of corruption and nepotism, and the authorities don’t listen to people … We want President Tokayev to carry out real political reforms, or to go away and hold fair elections.” The five former Soviet Central Asian republics have been largely without protest in their three decades of independence, with the exception of Kyrgyzstan, which has had several revolutions. Kazakhstan has never held an election judged as free and fair by international observers. While it is clear there is widespread discontent, the cleansing of the political playing field over many years means there are no high-profile opposition figures around which a protest movement could unite, and the protests appear largely directionless.On Wednesday, the word on the street was that upwards of 11 Manchester United players wanted to leave the club, the reaction of fans being one of “good riddance”. Those reportedly most frustrated by the lack of changes under Ralf Rangnick include Jesse Lingard, Donny van de Beek, Dean Henderson and Eric Bailly. But who might replace them? Rúben Neves, one of the Wolves players to feature in Monday’s win at Old Trafford, has been linked with a move to Manchester for some time, and it may happen this summer. Dan-Axel Zagadou, a Borussia Dortmund defender available on a free this summer, is also a target. Neves appears to the be the priority, as a cure to the aching gap that is United’s midfield. They would really like to have him on board by the end of January. Aston Villa are ambitious. That much was clear even before Dean Smith was shipped out in favour of Steven Gerrard. This month’s transfer market looks like being the latest demonstration of that ambition. There is a Liverpool theme to Stevie’s latest moves. There will be no dice on an attempt to sign Joe Gomez from his former club but Philippe Coutinho has been the recipient of a personal phone call from his one-time captain at Anfield. Getting Coutinho off the books is one of the first steps in the new Barcelona regime’s attempts to become the old Barcelona. Should he leave then Ferran Torres, signed last week, might actually be allowed to play. Sources close to Coutinho have been telling hacks that a host of Premier League clubs want to sign him. Keeping it Liverpool, the word is that they are prepared to lose the defender Nat Phillips and Divock Origi, the lucky charm super-sub who is out of contract. Origi is wanted by Lazio, and both players can leave in January, despite the club’s Covid crisis and inability to play Thursday’s Carabao Cup semi. Across Merseyside, the future of Lucas Digne remains up in the air. With Everton having bought two full-backs already in January, the Frenchman looks headed for Chelsea as a replacement for Ben Chilwell rather than Newcastle to pair up with Kieran Trippier, the expected new arrival on Tyneside. Instead, Newcastle are looking to Digne’s compatriot and another man on the Barcelona exit list, Samuel Umtiti, a World Cup winner no less. Aaron Ramsey is another on the unwanted list, with Juventus wanting to get rid of someone on a hefty wage and who doesn’t feature too much in the first team. Where might he end up? Newcastle seems a fair bet right now, with their financial fair play situation quite decent after Mike Ashley barely spent a penny. His wages of £325,000 a week would be prohibitive to many, but maybe not Newcastle. “Ramsey, he returned today after we had given him a few days off to work, to train separately, in England,” said Max Allegri, the Juve coach. “In any case, he’s an outgoing player.”Last year the player empowerment movement that has swept across sports finally arrived in the huddle. Quarterbacks throughout the NFL started to flex their power. Aaron Rodgers, Russell Wilson, Matthew Stafford, and Deshaun Watson all suggested (or demanded) trades; all four were stars at the peak of their powers. It will be much the same this summer. Rodgers, Wilson and Watson will be joined in trade discussions by Kirk Cousins and Matt Ryan, and the domino effect of any moves will be felt around the league. Some decisions have already been reported. The Giants are intent on riding the Joe Judge-Daniel Jones partnership over the waterfall. The Dolphins have been the most active team in pursuit of Watson. If that plan comes to nothing, they will continue to build around Tua Tagovailoa. The Falcons should stick with Ryan, rather than jumping into a rebuild of their own. So, let’s play pin the trade on the quarterback – a quick note that these are fun trades we think should happen rather than ones we think will happen. Aaron Rodgers to the Denver Broncos Who knows what Aaron Rodgers will do? He could stay with the Packers. He could walk away from the game altogether. Most likely: He pushes through a trade away from Green Bay. Let’s take a step back to understand exactly how bonkers that is. Rodgers is on his way to winning back-to-back MVPs. He’s playing the best all-around football of his career, balancing his tap-dancing style with Matt LaFleur’s carefully choreographed system. And yet, there’s a chance that he may not play the sport next season. And there’s an even stronger chance that if he does play, it will not be in Green Bay. And this is because the Packers front office drafted Jordan Love in 2020 without consulting their Hall of Famer and refused to allow further roster input (this despite the Packers front office putting together an excellent roster and coaching staff around Rodgers). It has a whiff of Yoko sitting on the amp about it. The Broncos have the kind of supporting cast that could convince Rodgers to ditch the Packers, particularly if Green Bay fall short in the playoffs again. Plus, the Broncos are likely to have a head coach opening, which would allow Rodgers to handpick his own man in Colorado. Denver also have the assets to further upgrade their roster. They hold five picks in the first three rounds and have bundles of cap room. Could Denver swing a double deal to pinch Davante Adams, the game’s top receiver, away from Green Bay, too? It’s plausible. Russell Wilson to the Cleveland Browns The Russell Wilson-Pete Carroll dynamic has reached breaking point. One of them will leave this offseason. Maybe both. There remains a scenario in which the Seahawks pick Wilson over Carroll, only for the quarterback to say he wants out regardless. If Wilson opts to push for a trade, there’s no better fit than the Browns. Cleveland can mimic the style of offense that brought Wilson success early in his career, while releasing enough of the handbrake to allow Russ to – yes – cook. Add to that, the Browns are loaded. Injuries and Covid issues have sapped the roster throughout this season, but there is star-level talent at every single position throughout the roster and they have as much depth as any team in the league, all under contract heading into next season. Russell Wilson 2.0 – he of his last 25 starts – has developed into a similar kind of player to Baker Mayfield: he’s risk-averse and lacks the dynamism of his early years. But he’s also ruthlessly efficient, someone who can run the same style of run-centric offense but can do so at a higher level and with more out-of-structure upside. If it’s all about winning, Wilson to the Browns makes the most sense for both sides. The Rams’ deal to send two first-round draft picks, a third round pick, and Jared Goff to the Lions in exchange for Matthew Stafford will likely send the benchmark for any future quarterback deals with potential MVP candidates. The Browns could look to recoup some value by moving Baker Mayfield elsewhere, or including him in the deal with Seattle to chip some draft picks off the overall price. And speaking of Mayfield … Baker Mayfield to the New Orleans Saints There exists a world in which the Browns and Mayfield find a compromise. We’ve yet to see a young quarterback play out a lame-duck fifth-year on his rookie-scale deal since the NFL moved to its new contract system. Mayfield could be the first. Injuries comprised Mayfield’s prove-it year, and there’s little to no chance Cleveland opt to give him a long-term extension. Yet if the Browns are able to snag an upgrade, Mayfield will be out. In that scenario, it will be fascinating to see what his market looks like. His impressive 2020 season is fresh enough in the memory that somebody will talk themselves into trading for Mayfield, perhaps with a long-term, affordable contract tied to the deal. The Saints make sense. Sean Payton has squeezed all the juice out of the Saints’ talent-laden roster this season. One of the league’s best rosters has been hamstrung by brutal quarterback play. Mayfield may not be the long-term answer, but he would represent an upgrade over Taysom Hill and Jameis Winston at this stage in their careers. Kirk Cousins to the Carolina Panthers Cousins will account for (avert your eyes) $45m on the Vikings’ books next season. Forty-five! With just one year left on his free-agent deal, there’s little wiggle room for the Vikings to manipulate the cap number, unless, of course, they commit to the kind of long-term deal that would cause two-thirds of Minnesota to faint. This year represented the final ride of the Mike Zimmer-Kirk Cousins axis. With the duo failing to make the playoffs, the Vikings are staring down a hard reset. If Minnesota can trade Cousins early in the offseason, they will reduce his gaudy cap hit to $10m. Enter the Panthers. Carolina owner David Tepper is infamously impatient. Carolina took swings at all of the big available quarterbacks last offseason. They made a move for Stafford before the Rams blew their offer out of the water. They enquired about Wilson before he chose to return to Seattle. They were the front runner on a Watson deal before sexual assault allegations took him off the market. Not to be deterred, Carolina dealt for Sam Darnold. Oops. That was a bust. Now, they’re back on the merry-go-round, ready and willing to spend whatever draft capital it takes to land a high-level starter. Rodgers and Wilson will be at the top of the list. Beyond those two, Cousins seems like the top choice. Cousins playing on a one-year deal to prove if he can be anything more than Kirk Cousins would make sense for all parties. Teddy Bridgewater to the Pittsburgh Steelers It has been a vintage Bridgewater year. Little to get excited about; little to panic about. His lack of playmaking chops means that he can never be the kind of quarterback that elevates a good roster into a great one. Still: teams will be queuing up for Bridgewater’s brand of don’t-get-me-fired ball, most likely one that will also be dipping into the draft for a young quarterback prospect. The Steelers fit the bill. Pittsburgh will be looking for a long-term replacement for Ben Roethlisberger in the draft. But they also have the defense to win now, provided they can find a quarterback who can squeeze something out of the team’s ho-hum offense. The Steelers will aim big. It’s possible that the allure of Mike Tomlin, a settled infrastructure, and a top-tier defense could be enough for Rodgers or Wilson to try to force their way to Pittsburgh. But the AFC North is a blood bath, and the Steelers’ offensive pieces — as presently constructed, pre-free agency and the draft — don’t exactly inspire a burning in the football loins.Speaking of summaries, we will wrap up the blog for today. Here is what went down today: World mens number one tennis player, Novak Djokovic, had his visa officially cancelled. His legal team appealed against the decision, with the matter to go to a full hearing in the federal circuit court on Monday. Prime minister Scott Morrison took credit for Djokovic’s visa cancellation, saying “rules are rules.” NSW reported 34,994 new Covid cases overnight, with 1,609 people in hospital and 131 people in ICU. Six people died overnight. Victoria has reported 21,997 new cases, with 631 people hospitalised, with 51 people in ICU. Six people died overnight. Victoria announced new restrictions today, with density limits applying across the state, particularly at hospitality venues. The state will also mandate reporting of positive RATs. Queensland has recorded 10,332 new cases, with 284 in hospital and 12 in ICU. South Australia has recorded 3,070 new cases overnight, with 123 people currently in hospital. Positive RATs will also need to be reported in South Australia, with the tests being provided for free for close contacts. The Australian Capital Territory has recorded its highest ever daily number of cases, reporting 992 new cases overnight. The Northern Territory recorded 256 new cases overnight. NT also went into a territory-wide “lockout” from 1pm today until noon on Monday. Chief minister Michael Gunner said the fully vaccinated will not be affected by the “lockout,” which appears to only affect the unvaccinated. Western Australia reported nine new Covid cases today. Experts criticised changes to testing requirements announced yesterday, with Prof Tony Blakely saying the “horse has bolted.” Thanks for reading. The ABC is reporting that the Australian Border Force is investigating two more players granted medical exemptions by Tennis Australia. The two people are one player and an official, and it comes after world mens number one Novak Djokovic had his visa cancelled, and is currently in hotel quarantine. Cait Kelly has been down at Park Hotel today, and has been posting some of the very interesting happenings there on Twitter, including more dancing: Ok so with that, we have some clarity on where things go from here. Both parties agreed to an interim injunction that prevents Djokovic from being removed from Australia until then. With the tournament 10 days away, both parties discussed the timing and the need to have a judgement handed down soon, although the court has yet to see all the submissions, with the judge urging the parties to submit them in a timely manner. The matter is now listed for hearing at 10am on Monday. Chris Tran, who is representing the immigration minister, said they do not actually oppose an interim injunction to prevent Djokovic from being removed today, just that they wanted it to be a short interim break. The hearing was just adjourned, with parties agreeing to pick it back up on Monday. OK so it appears Novak Djokovic’s challenge of his visa cancellation will go to a full hearing in the federal court on Monday, with Djokovic likely to stay in Australia in the interim. Judge Anthony Kelly has asked the parties to make their evidence and submissions over the weekend ahead of the potential hearing, with Djokovic’s lawyers saying it might be “tight”. Lots of discussion initially in the federal court on the scope and timing of Novak Djokovic’s appeal, with Judge Anthony Kelly putting to the parties the pressing nature of the matter and the potential for “cascading” appeals from the government making the current hearing important to the overall outcome. And we are on standby for the continuation of Novak Djokovic’s appeal in the federal court, which should start momentarily. We should get a clear picture tonight of what will occur over the coming days, but no guarantee either way. Gareth Liddiard’s band, Tropical Fuck Storm, have announced they are pulling out of the Sydney festival, following a growing list of artists and performers boycotting the festival. The band released a strong statement about their decision, saying they urged Sydney festival to reconsider its relationship with the Israeli embassy, which is sponsoring the event for $20,000. The deal sparked calls from Palestinian activists for artists to boycott the event, with a host of them responding and pulling out. Tropical Fuck Storm called the sponsorship “dodgy, pointless and controversial” and criticised the festival for putting artists in difficult positions: Rather than immediately announce online that we’d jump ship, we thought we’d actually try to do something in the real world for everyone involved and try to encourage Sydney Festival to do the right thing and fix the problem they created, that problem being Sydney Festival taking on a sponsor so dodgy, pointless and controversial it would inevitably mean that hundreds of unwitting artists (who are having a rough enough time with the pandemic as it is) would become the targets of online harassment, bullying, smear campaigns, ridiculous accusations, misrepresentations and abuse from total strangers who have no idea what’s actually going on behind the scenes, what any artist’s position is or even what they’re talking about. It is a problem we didn’t create and one we weren’t aware of until about 48 hours ago. At the time of posting, Sydney Festival has stated they have no intention to refund the money or sever the sponsorship relationship, even though the shit sandwich they’ve landed every billed artist in is blatantly obvious to them. Due to this complete lack of respect and integrity towards the artists billed from Sydney Festival and its partners, we have decided to cancel our two appearances. Musician Hope D, costume designer and visual artist Gerwyn Davies and comedian Tom Walker also withdrew from the program in the last 24 hours, joining more than 20 acts/individuals who are boycotting the festival, which opens tonight with the Israeli embassy-sponsored performance Decadance. Read more here: Sticking with Djokovic for a bit (a recurring theme today), earlier today Victorian health minister Martin Foley returned serve (sorry) on accusations it was the Victorian government behind the visa debacle. Foley pointed out the federal government issued the visa, which was subsequently cancelled, saying Victoria cannot actually issue visas. “It doesn’t say ‘Victoria’ on the Australian passport. It says ‘Australia’. The Constitution makes it pretty clear that it is the Australian commonwealth that issues visas, although given how much the commonwealth seem pretty keen on outsourcing responsibility to the states on most things, who knows what the future will be? Someone issued Novak Djokovic a visa and it wasn’t the Victorian government. Refugee Action Collective Victoria has released a statement on the Djokovic issue, focusing on the fact that he is being held at the Park Hotel, where 36 refugees are currently detained. RAC Victoria’s Chris Breen called on the PM to use his powers to free the remaining refugees detained at the hotel. Prime minister Scott Morrison has made a populist move to quell outrage over Djokovic’s special treatment by cancelling his visa, but this only highlights the arbitrary nature of Australia’s border regime. If Djokovic was an au pair, he may well have got in. Will Australian Border Force instruct the Serco guards to make the windows open-able again to protect the un-vaxxed tennis star from Covid? (Serco sealed them when medevac refugees arrived there in Dec 2020, and tinted them to hide the refugees from view). The real crime at the Park Hotel is the ongoing and arbitrary detention of 36 medevac refugees for more than eight years now. So earlier today, WA premier Mark McGowan posted on Facebook, urging people to “not be a dropkick” when dealing with venues requesting proof of vaccination. McGowan, who has always shown a penchant to add his own spin to things, asked people to not be rude to staff asking for proof of vaccination at high-risk venues, saying it made everyone attendance a little safer. If you’re asked to show your proof of vaccination, don’t be a dropkick. There is never an excuse to be rude to staff – not now, not ever. It’s not the Western Australian way. Requiring proof of vaccination for higher-risk venues means that everyone in attendance is safer. It’s already been rolled out in some other states and there is no reason WA can’t do it too. So the matter has been adjourned until 6pm, wherein we will continue our coverage of Djokovic’s attempts to have his deportation reversed. An interesting tidbit at the end was a discussion on the scope of the hearing, with parties agreeing that a visa was actually issued, and that the matter at hand was the cancellation of the visa, not the requirements of the visa itself. It’s a small difference that I’m sure will matter once the hearing begins properly. Judge Anthony Kelly has begun proceedings by first stating that he would like to have the matter resolved today, which I think everyone can agree is a good thing. Good afternoon, Mostafa Rachwani with you this afternoon, a quick thanks to Tory Shepherd for her stellar job this morning. Novak Djokovic’s appeal is in the federal court right now, and we will bring you updates as they come. I’m handing you back to Marvellous Mostafa - stay tuned for that Novak Djokovic court case... Western Australia has reported nine new Covid cases. One new local case is not related to the backpacker cluster. The case is a household contact of security guard from the Hyatt hotel who earlier tested positive. Eight other cases were international and interstate arrivals in isolation. Some more details on the impending court case with Novak Djokovic (which we’ll cover as it happens). AAP reports there was a brief hearing at 3pm today but that there was no formal application or supporting evidence filed. Justice Anthony Kelly (who confessed to not knowing a lot about tennis) said: I need to know a little more than I presently do about the conditions of the applicant. I don’t think it’s unreasonable to ask for the court to ask, as an open question, whether the particular hotel in which the applicant is staying or may be able to stay might have available to him tennis practising facilities. Not the court he was hoping for ... My brain cannot compute the fact that South Australia was essentially Covid-free until the borders opened in late November. There’s speculation the state’s outbreak will peak in two weeks ... Life moves pretty fast. Vulnerable Covid patients are set to miss out on the lifesaving treatment sotrovimab, doctors say, because it must be taken within five days of getting sick. Waiting times for PCR tests and results, a lack of rapid antigen tests, and the need for a GP referral could mean treatment comes too late, according to the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners. (Now with some added details on the available treatments.) Some more detail on the South Australian situation: Some of you are a little sceptical about Scott Morrison’s advice that they can report a positive rapid antigen test to their GP and get advice – mostly because lots of people don’t have a regular GP they can just buzz when they want. Let’s also spare a thought for the GPs themselves: Jacqueline Housden moved back to Australia after 18 years in the United Kingdom. It was not a seamless transition: Oddly, my dreams of our new life had not included my mother bursting into work meetings holding a kilo of raw chicken and launching into a raft of complicated cooking options, or my dad rushing past to use the spare fridge as I attempted to look vaguely professional on a Zoom call. Thank you, Mostafa! Tory Shepherd back with you now, having restored myself slightly. On with the afternoon! Gunner says authorities are assuming roughly a quarter of reported cases are the Delta variant. I want to reassure Territorians that while the replication rate is faster than what I want to see, we can flatten the curve, which we had done before and we will do it now. We have a mix of Delta and Omicron in the territory. Evidence is mounting that Omicron results in less hospitalisations. We are assuming half of the cases are Delta at the moment for decision-making but it’s growing more evident that ... this is a conservative assumption as [it’s] more likely a quarter of [cases are] Delta. We are transitioning between Delta and Omicron. Our priority is to keep community transmission low, and hospital case loads manageable. Gunner has announced a “territory-wide lockout” from 1pm today until noon on Monday. From noon Monday, a vaccine pass system will be introduced. Only residents and essential workers will be allowed to enter “excluded communities” in the NT, and they must show a negative RAT result on day of entry. Gunner said the fully vaccinated will not be affected by the “lockout,” which appears to only affect the unvaccinated. They can only leave home for medical reasons, to buy essential goods and to provide care. If you are not fully vaxxed, stay home. You are at greater risk of catching Covid, getting ill and needing hospital care. Northern Territory chief minister Michael Gunner has stepped up to give a Covid update, announcing the territory has reported 29 new cases overnight. Gunnar said the territory will keep requiring people to confirm their positive rapid antigen result with a PCR test. Covid is often an exponential problem. One positive case in the community usually sees more than one person infected. Our community reproduction rate has remained below one. Yesterday and today, it has jumped well above one. To maintain our caseload, to manage it within our health system, we need to keep our case numbers steady. The Australian Capital Territory has recorded its highest ever daily number of cases, reporting 992 new cases overnight. A small crowd has now gathered to show support for Djokovic. About 10 supporters, some draped in flags, are playing Serbian music and singing. There is also now dancing. The South Australia premier, Steven Marshall, has announced some changes to the way rapid antigen tests will be distributed and recorded in the state. Close contacts will be able to get a RAT, with a new system introduced whereby people can contact SA Health and obtain a QR code. They then have to show that code to staff at collection points to get two RATs. That means the people getting the tests are being registered, with officials then following up so the RAT results can be recorded in daily numbers. Marshall said it would ease the pressure on PCR testing sites: If they get a positive on day one, they’ll be deemed Covid positive. No need for a corresponding PCR test. South Australia has recorded 3,070 new cases overnight, with 123 people currently in hospital. It’s a slight drop on yesterday’s numbers, with 12 people currently in ICU. Royce Kurmelovs has pulled together today’s palaver into something I think we all need: And now for a light moment from Matilda Boseley: New South Wales hospitals are clearly under strain, as Covid numbers in the state rise rapidly (with the 35,000 cases now likely a fraction of the true daily count). While Victorian numbers are soaring too, other states such as South Australia are not far behind. Here’s some detail from an email from one person worried about conditions for her granddaughter, a young doctor at the Royal Adelaide Hospital: Like most of her colleagues, she’s committed to her job, extremely conscientious and hardworking. Even before Covid she regularly started her shifts early to be up to date with all patient info and invariably finished late. The health system in SA has had punishing funding cuts over many years and now, with the pandemic, is failing to cope. My granddaughter is now being called in to extra 13-hour shifts, admitting Covid patients all day. She is badly stressed and exhausted but there’s no way she can take a break as her fellow staff are all feeling the strain and are already overloaded themselves. It’s an impossible situation and I fear very much for the long-term consequences on these young willing workers. Our health minister blithely says that the system is working. It isn’t. Particularly the frontline workers are being pushed beyond any acceptable limit. I particularly hate the denial of our governments about the failings of their departments. Truth and reality are sadly lost to them it seems. Admitting problems is the crucial first step to improvement. I’m guessing there are many similar examples around Australia. If you would like to contact me, please try peter.hannam@theguardian.com Two Novak Djokovic supporters have arrived at the Park Hotel, where it’s thought the tennis star is being held. Billy Misovic and her husband, Ziggy, came down to show their support for the Serbian. Waving a flag from Djokovic’s hometown, Belgrade, they yelled “free Novak”. “We came to support the number one,” Billy said. “It’s ridiculous, he’s got an exemption why not let him in?” Asked about Djokovic’s vaccination status, Ziggy said: “It’s a private matter. Do I ask if you have Aids? It’s private.” Billy said they understood the frustration of Victorians but that Djokovic had been “humiliated”. “My father passed away two years ago. He was in Serbia. The boarders were closed, I understand (the frustration),” she said. The hotel is currently housing 46 refugees. The windows do not open, they are not allowed on the roof for fresh air and have recently reported finding maggots and mould in their food. Advocate Jenny Leah says she comes everyday to show her support, and has never seen this many members of the media. “There are dozens of media here today, we are here every day – we get a lot of support from passing motorists, tram drivers, but never any media,” she said. “To us, it says something about the priorities of the media, and public.” Some of the refugees have recently been released on bridging visas but the future of those left inside is unknown. If Djokovic is in there, Jenny says he will receive very different treatment. “He’ll get to leave.” People, that got pretty wild! There was a lot going on, and I’m a little anxious that I’ve missed something. But fear not. I will retrace my steps and make sure everything you need is here. Still in Victoria – it will now be mandatory to report positive rapid antigen test results to the health department by phone or using an online form. A positive home test will carry the same obligations as a positive PCR test. Acting chief health officer, Prof Benjamin Cowie, said with significant transmission of the Omicron variant, pressure on the PCR testing system, and millions of rapid tests being ordered by the Victorian government, the rapid antigen tests will now have the same “authority” as a PCR test. He said: We know that based on laboratory data coming in, greater than 90% and in some laboratories greater than 95% of people that have a rapid antigen test go on to have that result seconded by a PCR. Rapid antigen has provided really high degree of diagnostic authority. That’s why other countries around the world, including for the United Kingdom, did shift to the use of rapid antigen tests in a similar way when we got to this point. So this is the biggest change to our testing system since the start of the pandemic. In terms of context, I think it is important to reflect the number of people that our PCR testing system diagnosed yesterday was greater than the number our PCR testing system diagnosed for the entire 2020, and it’s likely that in the first 10 days of this year, our testing system will diagnose more people than it did in all of 2021. That’s the sort of volumes we’re talking here. The Victorian government has announced new restrictions. Victorian health minister Martin Foley has announced new density limits for the state, as Covid cases continue to rise. From 11.59pm tonight, there will be new restrictions on the number of people in hospitality venues. Density limits of one person per two square metres will be enforced in indoor hospitality and entertainment venues. That limit won’t be applied to cinemas and theatres, because people are seated and masked. The government has also urged all venues to shut down indoor dance floors and only have seated food service and Victorians have also been urged to work from home. Queensland has announced another record day of Covid cases. The state detected 10,332 cases in the 24 hours to 7pm last night. One person has died, bringing the state’s total deaths during the pandemic to nine. 284 people are in hospital, 12 in intensive care and two require ventilators. The death in Queensland was a man in his 80s who died just prior to Christmas. It is now considered to be Covid-related The Queensland health minister, Yvette D’ath, has again called for patience as Covid testing centres in the state continue to be overwhelmed. Some people will be given take-home rapid antigen tests to help ease the congestion. D’ath says the state needs to prepare for Covid in the same way communities prepare for storms or cyclones and people need to prepare supplies to last a seven-day isolation. Morrison, having been asked earlier about parents struggling to get appointments for their children’s vaccinations, says it simply can’t be so: There are enough vaccines in the country to vaccinate every single child (from) five to 11 between now and school going back. There’s plenty of vaccines. You heard that from Lieutenant General John Frewen yesterday. And it starts on Monday. And those vaccines are being distributed as we speak. Here are those Queensland numbers: Morrison is also being asked about the short supply of rapid antigen tests, whether Australia was caught unprepared (I’m fairly sure it was our own Sarah Martin grilling him on this). Morrison uses his nifty little trick of pretending criticism of him and his government is actually criticism of someone else (I’m sure you can spot it): The whole country, and the whole world, has been in a similar situation. As I said yesterday, there are plenty of armchair critics and people who’ve said what could have been, but those who are actually doing it every day, and the health officials who have responsibility for it every day, those who are regulating vaccines – which have very profound implications for people’s health – and I don’t accept the suggestion that they haven’t been doing their job. I think they’ve been doing their job extremely well and under extraordinary pressure in a very uncertain environment. There’s no guidebook to Covid. We all know that. So what I think’s important is the country just focuses on the task ahead. Keep looking through that windscreen. That’s where I’m looking. We’re looking forward. Morrison has been asked about people quarantining at home. He said: I would encourage people to become familiar with the supports that are in place. Support is already there for those who are in the situation, where they are forced, because of a state government requirement to isolate, to access the pandemic relief payment. Large numbers of Australians have done that, and it has been an important tool that we have had, has been funded together with the states and territories. Our health professionals understand, like in every single country, you are not going to capture every case, you do not capture every case now with PCR, and that is why we are moving to ensure that we could get that transfer from PCR tests to rapid antigen tests, for the sheer bulk, and for the states to put in place the best way they came to record as many of those cases as they can. That gives you the trends, gives you an indication of what the potential impact sell your hospital system, but I do not agree with the assertion that says it cannot be done, of course it can be done. It has been done in other countries, and that is what the state will put in place now. But what I stress is, what is more important than knowing how many cases there are, which frankly is getting less and less important, what matters is (people in hospitals, in intensive care, and on ventilators) that is the real measure of what the impact is. The real issue is that people are connected to care. That is what I am concerned about, I want to make sure that if somebody has Covid that they are connected to the care and support that are available, including the pandemic leave payments. Morrison emphasised that it’s not the case numbers that matter (as the testing regime changes). What matters is that “people are connected to care”. He has also been asked about workforce issues, with Covid absenteeism affecting healthcare, and leading to empty shelves in supermarkets. He said it was a “key discussion” at national cabinet yesterday. Many sectors of the economy have been affected by workforce shortages because of people being furloughed because they have Covid. Not even because they are close contacts, because they had Covid. With higher case numbers that is going to have an obvious impact on the workforce. Right at the moment we are very focused on distribution and the healthcare workers in aged care workforce, (we’re very focused) on distribution centres... food production, and transport. And that is one of the reasons why yesterday we agreed to remove that testing requirement for truck drivers. We need truck drivers to keep on trucking, that is what we needed to do to keep moving things around, and right now they are delivering vaccines, to GPs and pharmacists, and that system is of course under strain because of the high case numbers. But that is the nature of Omicron, you just have just got to keep pushing through. Back to prime minister Scott Morrison. He has been asked if Novak Djokovic had been subjected to harassment (Serbian president Aleksandar Vučić claimed earlier today that he was). Morrison said he didn’t believe he was at all: Australia has sovereign borders and clear rules that are non-discriminatory as so many countries do ... it has to do with the fair and reasonable application of Australia’s border protection laws. It is not appropriate for me to go into Mr Djokovic’s own medical history. That would not be a fair thing for us to do. That is a matter for him to discuss in terms of his own medical history. But all I can say is that the evidence medical exemption that was provided was found to be insufficient. Prime minister Scott Morrison is still talking, I’ll catch you up on that in a second. In the meantime, Queensland has recorded 10,332 new Covid cases, and one person has died. There are 284 people in hospital, and 12 in intensive care, including two on ventilators. Tennis star Novak Djokovic could not prove the medical exemption he claimed he had, Morrison said: It is on them to have the proof to show why they would not have to be vaccinated. He was unable to furnish that proof to Border Force officers at the airport last night and they are the rules and it happens on many occasions and that is what has now happened. He goes on to wade into the argy bargy (mentioned below) about the role of the Victorian government: There were inquiries being made about whether quarantining was going to be waived and to my knowledge I still don’t know whether the Victorian government were proposing to waive quarantining, I am not making any comment on that. That was not the basis of any decision taken. And he’s reading a letter from the federal government to Tennis Australia from back in November: People must be fully vaccinated as defined by Atagi to gain quarantine-free entry into Australia. That means people who do not meet the definition will not be approved for quarantine-free entry. In relation to the specific questions raised by Tennis Australia, this is from the minister for health, I can confirm that people who have contracted Covid-19 in the past six months and seek to enter Australia and have not received two doses of a TGA approved or recognised vaccine are not considered fully vaccinated. That was the clear advice given by the minister for health to Tennis Australia and that letter is dated at the end of November of last year. So this is why I make the point to travellers, whatever people might tell you, what matters is what you are responsible for when you arrive at the border. Morrison is using the Djokovic situation to talk about his government’s handling of the pandemic: We were one of the first countries to move to shut our border. We were criticised at the time, but it was the right decision, and we have maintained those important border controls over the entire period of the pandemic. We have tightened them even further on occasion, again we were criticised for doing that, it was the right decision. We will continue to make the right decisions when it comes to securing Australian borders in relation to this pandemic. Our government has strong form when it comes to securing our borders. Getting on a plane is not an assurance you’ll be able to get into Australia, Morrison says. He says people are welcome to come to Australia, but if you’re not double-vaccinated and you’re not an Australian citizen, “you can’t come”. Now we’re getting there. Prime minister Scott Morrison is talking about how tough on borders he is, using the Novak Djokovic case as an example. He said: On the issue of Mr Djokovic, rules are rules. And there are no special cases, rules are rules. It is what I said yesterday, that is the policy of the government ... stronger border protection policies, and particularly in relation to the pandemic. Morrison said getting kids back to school is very important, as is getting them vaccinated: Parents want to know that the vaccines that their children are being given are safe, and we have had the best regulatory expert panel in the world (giving) that assurance... that program will begin next week. That enables us, the program that we have, to have schools come back, stay back, day one, term one. On boosters, Morrison said: Some 22,565 boosters were provided yesterday. To put that in context, that is more doses of a booster than has been given in one day, that was achieved on first dose in any one day, or second dose in any one day. He said Australia is “on track” for the vaccination rollout for children aged five to 11 that starts next week. Prime minister Scott Morrison is kicking off a press conference now, talking about the new defence strategic partnership with Japan (probably not what everyone’s hanging out to hear about) ... Guardian Australia understands that Tennis Australia was told in writing more than once that a recent Covid infection is not an acceptable reason not to be fully vaccinated if you want quarantine-free entry into Australia. Atagi did not endorse the process that the Victorian government or Tennis Australia put in place, Guardian Australia has been told. A travel exemption from the Australian Border Force was not requested and the commonwealth was not engaged. Tasmania has reported 751 new Covid cases, which is a drop from the record 867 cases reported yesterday. One person has been admitted to hospital. Experts have been reacting to the announcement on the changes to testing. University of Melbourne epidemiologist Prof Tony Blakely said surveillance numbers would no longer be accurate. He told Seven: The horse has bolted, this is the biggest policy failure so far in Australia. We also haven’t thought about how you can load up that data to the surveillance system, so we won’t get that in place in the next couple of weeks. Infectious disease expert Prof Peter Collignon said the situation had changed, according to AAP: What you need to do is stay home for the seven days, keep away from others and decrease the chance of spreading it to them as much as possible. If you’re vaccinated and are a 30- to 40-year old, your chance of coming into grief is really low. We have support if you need it but don’t get on the (PCR) queue and delay the older people who may need to be in front of you. More than 72,000 new cases have been recorded so far today, from New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, South Australia, the Australian Capital Territory, the Northern Territory, Western Australia and Tasmania. NSW had 34,994 new cases and six deaths – and about 31% of those tested were positive, which is an alarming proportion. Six people died, and there are now 1,609 people in hospital, and 131 in intensive care units. In Victoria there were also six deaths, and 21,997 new cases. Victoria also has a positivity rate from testing of about one in three. 631 people are in hospital with 51 in intensive care. Queensland has recorded 10,332 new Covid cases, and one person has died. There are 284 people in hospital, and 12 in intensive care, including two on ventilators. Tasmania has reported 751 new Covid cases, which is a drop from the record 867 cases reported yesterday. One person has been admitted to hospital. South Australia has recorded 3,070 cases, with 123 people currently in hospital and 12 in ICU. The ACT has recorded its highest ever daily number of cases, reporting 992 new cases overnight. The Northern Territory has recorded 256 new cases, and a Territory-wide lockdown has begun. WA had nine new cases, one of which was local. I’ll keep adding results here as they come in. Here’s Sarah Martin with all the details on those free rapid antigen tests (for some): There’s an ongoing barney about whether it was the federal or the Victorian government making decisions about Novak Djokovic’s (attempted) entry into Australia. State Labor minister Jaala Pulford had tweeted yesterday: The federal government has asked if we will support Novak Djokovic’s visa application to enter Australia. We will not be providing Novak Djokovic with individual visa application support to participate in the 2022 Australian Open Grand Slam. But home affairs minister Karen Andrews says that’s not the case: Labor leader Anthony Albanese has been on the ABC this morning, talking about access to rapid antigen tests and the federal government’s plan to give them to concession card holders for free. He said: Well, this is too little, and it of course is too late. The [Australian Medical Association] were saying we should prepare for this from last September, which is when the [Therapeutic Goods Administration] granted approval. And what we have here is a federal government that once again has been caught being complacent, not putting in place the plans. If you fail to plan, you’re planning to fail. And that is what we are seeing here. We are seeing Australians are anxious, they are concerned about the health of themselves and their families. They just want to do the right thing, as they have been doing for two years. And the easiest and simplest way is to make free tests available for all, just like PCR tests are available and free. But, of course, the reason why we have moved to rapid antigen tests is because of the failure to plan properly to stop the long queues that formed that caused such frustration in Australia. “We’re used to people using us as Uber drivers but it’s never been this absurd.” It was the Australian Border Force who stopped the tennis star coming in, but... Cait Kelly has been meeting Novak Djokovic’s fans at Melbourne airport (see below for what they had to say): Video: When asked how many tests he had personally paid for, prime minister Scott Morrison suggested his wife, Jenny, had purchased them when needed for private purposes, but otherwise he had used stock provided by the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. Have a read of this from Peter Hannam: “Tweed hospital has no Covid diagnosis equipment, is operating a makeshift triage tent and has nurses doing ‘double shifts every day’ as local cases triple.” Novak Djokovic fans Slobodan Bendjo and Krstomir Dusanovic have been waiting at Melbourne airport since midnight, ready to welcome the tennis star. Armed with an accordion and Serbian flag, the pair have been walking around the airport playing music. “We are here to await the champion,” Dusanovic said. The pair said they were not deterred by the fact the tennis star was being told to leave Australia. Bendjo said: We’ve still here to welcome him, he’s just here somewhere behind these walls, he’s not far way from us. We always, when he comes here, welcome him with music. It’s a traditional thing you do. We think it’s important we continue with the tradition. The pair said there has been a lot of negative news lately and they hoped to bring some positivity. “Obviously we are disappointed but that’s something we can’t change. We have no influence,” Bendjo said. Cait Kelly is at Melbourne airport, so she’ll help keep us all up to speed. In non-Djokovic news, Elias Visontay has written about fury and frustration with the aged care sector: The scene at Melbourne airport, where Novak Djokovic is currently being detained, is very quiet. The arrivals lounge is largely deserted, aside from the waiting media and a few members of the public here to meet family and friends. Tennis Australia did have several cars waiting for the star, but they have since left. It is expected Djokovic and his team will be transported to a hotel soon. Karen Andrews, home affairs minister, did give a hint of how things might play out. AAP reports that, before Novak Djokovic’s arrival, she said that while the Victorian government and Tennis Australia may allow a non-vaccinated player to compete in the Australian Open, it was the federal government that dealt with border entry requirements. “No individual competing at the Australian Open will be afforded any special treatment,” she said on Wednesday. Rather droll. Tasmanian senator Jacqui Lambie said Novak Djokovic should be send home. AAP reports she told the Nine Network: I really don’t care whether you have power or money. If your visa is not satisfactory and you haven’t got the right one, send them home. He might be a tennis great but he has to play by the rules and regulations for other Australians and people coming here. Hey – if you’re just tuning into the wild twists and turns in the Novak Djokovic story, here’s how it all began: Richard Colbeck, the aged care minister, was asked on ABC’s Radio National this morning about Novak Djokovic’s border wrangle. He said: The prime minister said no special treatment, that’s the perspective we are applying here as we should. Anyone coming to Australia has to have the documentation to demonstrate that they can meet the eligibility criteria to come into Australia. Here’s confirmation that Novak Djokovic’s visa has been cancelled – the Australian Border Force has put out a statement: The ABF will continue to ensure that those who arrive at our border comply with our laws and entry requirements. The ABF can confirm that Mr Djokovic failed to provide appropriate evidence to meet the entry requirements to Australia, and his visa has been subsequently cancelled. Non-citizens who do not hold a valid visa on entry or who have had their visa cancelled will be detained and removed from Australia. The ABF can confirm Mr Djokovic had access to his phone. Health minister Greg Hunt told Nine’s Today show that the Australian Border Force was reviewing his exemption: I don’t have specific details. I apologise. The general proposition is this ... We have taken a very strong approach to ensuring equity of the rules for everybody. Unvaccinated people, as a general rule, cannot come into Australia unless there is a medical exemption. That process has been led by the Victorian government. My understanding is that the Border Force is reviewing that. I don’t have details beyond that. Serbian president Aleksandar Vučić says on Instagram that he has spoken with Novak Djokovic today. Here is the Google translation: I just finished a phone conversation with Novak Djokovic. I told our Novak that the whole of Serbia is with him, and that our authorities are taking all measures to stop the harassment of the best tennis player in the world in the shortest possible period. In accordance with all norms of international public law, Serbia will fight for Novak Djokovic, for justice and truth. Good morning – Tory Shepherd here with you. Well, to be honest, not all here yet. But getting there. The big story this morning is Novak Djokovic. People have many feelings about this one. The world tennis No 1’s flight landed around midnight and he’s still being held at Melbourne airport. He flew to Australia after announcing he had been granted an exemption from strict Covid vaccine requirements, but there is some kind of hold-up. The Age reports a source saying there were questions about whether the Serbian player had adequate documentation to back up his exemption. His father Srdan is there and is not happy. He has reportedly told Serbian media: I have no idea what’s going on, they’re holding my son captive for five hours. This is not a fight for the libertarian world, this is not just a fight for Novak, but a fight for the whole world! If they don’t let him go in half an hour, we will gather on the street, this is a fight for everybody. So he’s taking it calmly, then. We’ll bring you all the latest on Djokovic. And of course we’ll have all the latest Covid news with testing changes kicking in, and calls for more free rapid antigen tests to be made available. The ball’s in play, let’s get into it.‘Unseasonably warm weather has fooled a great deal of species’ I saw this young palmate newt emerging on the evening of 1 January. Newts should be overwintering in leaf and log piles, compost heaps and other suitable refugia from November until late February or early March, when they start moving toward breeding pools. It is troubling to spot this individual within the overwintering period. The unseasonably warm weather fooled a great deal of species into early emergence: it places them in great peril if they expend energy in an attempt to feed out of season, burn fat reserves and expose themselves to short daylight hours and cold nights that could result in their deaths. Jonathan Davies, 32, certified passive house designer, St Fagans, Cardiff ‘We’ve seen butterflies early in previous years but never daisies’ One of several daisies in my garden, photographed on New Year’s Day. I’ve never seen this before. The part of the garden where the daisy is growing doesn’t get much light as it’s shaded by a tall hedge to the south and west. Usually the grass is all that’s on show until much later (March). I’m curious about the early appearance of this species – we’ve seen butterflies very early in previous years, but never daisies. I don’t know what to think about this occurrence in relation to the health of the environment. We have had an exceptionally mild winter, the soil is not especially cold or hard, but the absence of activity in other species seems strange. Anonymous, Redlynch, Wiltshire ‘The bees are using up their winter stores’ This photo was taken in my garden on 29 December. Usually in winter the bees form a cluster around the queen while flexing their flight muscles, without beating their wings, to generate adequate heat. With minimal movement their stores of honey and nectar are usually sufficient till the weather warms up in spring. It’s mid-winter in Ireland and yet the bees are surprisingly busy and returning to the hives with pollen and nectar. It’s more like what one would expect in mid-spring at the earliest. This level of activity unfortunately leads the bees to use up their winter stores too quickly, and if late spring brings cold and frosty weather right into May (as happened here last year), then starvation becomes a serious threat to the bees. Of course, as beekeepers we can intervene by providing food for our bees to help them along. Unfortunately this can’t be done for bees of all kinds in the wild who are struggling to survive as the climate changes. All of this is concerning as pollinators of all kinds are in decline and this has huge negative implications for food production worldwide. Niall Keogh, retired teacher, Killarney, Ireland ‘I’ve never seen daffodil shoots this early’ This picture of a daffodil shoot was taken at a sheltered spot under a bay window in our front garden in Sutton Coldfield, Birmingham. I’d just been on my traditional New Year’s Day walk with friends in Sutton Park and I spotted these exceptional shoots of spring on our return. I was very surprised to see the shoots. I’ve never seen them this early; they usually appear in March. As an active member of our local Eco Sutton group, my surprise was undercut with a deep concern at what is happening to the environment in front of our eyes. Antony Whitehead, retired architect, Sutton Coldfield ‘Coming across a bee this early is part of a pattern’ In the Duke’s Garden at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, we saw this bee, on 3 January, tucking into a winter flowering shrub. Snowdrops and narcissi were coming out last week, the magnolias are in bud, but a bee? Elsewhere in Kew we could see buds and catkins, much earlier than in previous years. Most walks in January see us muffled up against a biting chill, but today was very pleasant with a little sunshine. Last year, I recall seeing goslings in February on a snowy morning. So, yes, seeing a bee at this time is not normal, but it is part of a pattern. While any sign that the winter is coming to a close is welcome, the implication that this is evidence of climate change – a process which appears to be accelerating – is worrying. Tony Hutchinson, 67, working in social housing and regeneration, Brentford, London ‘I was expecting them to sprout much later’ I planted some bulbs and seeds in pots on our terrace in November, and to my surprise they had already started sprouting by New Year’s Day. I suppose I was expecting them much later, perhaps in a few weeks at the earliest. The funny thing is I have no idea what I planted, so we’ll be looking out for a surprise display of flowers in a couple of months. I’m a bit worried they might not do so well if there’s a frost later in the month or in February. Vita Moltedo, 48, Islington, London ‘I was worried the ducklings might not survive through cold and lack of food’ On 28 December, I saw ducklings at Bingham’s Pond in the west end of Glasgow. Last year, the ducklings hatched in April. I was surprised to see so many in winter and worried that they might not survive due to lack of food and low temperatures. I wonder if it was the very mild weather that prompted the early laying and hatching. If the milder winter becomes more common, or the temperature drops later into winter, will it have an impact on duck and wild fowl numbers? Hopefully she’ll have another clutch in the spring anyway. Mhairi Maclennan, GlasgowNovak Djokovic is awaiting his Australian Open fate in a Melbourne immigration hotel as the world No 1 mounts a legal challenge against Australia’s a decision to cancel his visa Djokovic’s lawyers succeeded in a bid to stop him from being deported on Thursday with a full hearing in the federal circuit court now scheduled for Monday. The tennis champion spent eight hours detained at Melbourne airport overnight before Australian Border Force officials announced he had been denied entry into the country on Thursday morning. They cited a failure to meet Australia’s Covid vaccination exemption requirements. It is understood the reigning Australian Open champion was relying on a previous Covid infection as the basis for his exemption to compete – but that is not recognised by the federal government. After unsuccessfully pleading his case at the airport, Djokovic was transported to an immigration hotel in the inner Melbourne suburb of Carlton. As the political and diplomatic ramifications unfurled, Djokovic’s lawyers were working to obtain an interim injunction to stop his deportation. In a snap hearing before judge Anthony Kelly on Thursday evening, it was agreed a full hearing between the player and the home affairs minister would be heard on Monday. Djokovic cannot be deported before that hearing. The parties are due to submit evidence and submissions over the weekend. The court heard Tennis Australia had said it would need to know whether Djokovic could compete by Tuesday for scheduling purposes. The judge asked whether Djokovic could be moved to a hotel with a tennis court so he could practice. Kelly said he would try to accommodate the parties to come to a resolution but stressed the court would not be rushed. “The tail won’t be wagging the dog here,” Kelly said. “If Tennis Australia decides to do what it wants to do in running its enterprise, it will. All I can do is provide every facility available to this court to assist these parties to resolve it in the best way possible.” The legal challenge could go all the way to the high court but there are just 11 days before Djokovic is due to start his campaign for a record 21st grand slam title at Melbourne Park. “People must be fully vaccinated as defined by Atagi [the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation] to gain quarantine-free entry into Australia,” the Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, said on Thursday. “That means people who do not meet the definition will not be approved for quarantine-free entry. “I am advised that such an exemption was not in place and as a result he [Djokovic] is subject to the same rule as anyone else. This is nothing about any one individual, it is simply a matter of following the rules, and so those processes will take their course over the next few hours and that event will play out as it should.” The ABC reported on Thursday night that border force officials were also investigating another tennis player and an official granted medical exemptions by Tennis Australia. Djokovic’s predicament has become the epicentre of a political tit-for-tat between Morrison’s federal administration and Daniel Andrews’s state government in Victoria. The Serbian travelled to Australia after receiving an exemption from Tennis Australia and the Victorian government to compete. It was granted following a process that included assessment by two panels of health experts. Djokovic had expected that exemption would – along with his federal government-issued visa – allow him to play at the Australian Open. On arrival, however, border force officials at the airport said Djokovic was unable to justify the grounds for his exemption. Morrison said on Thursday that Tennis Australia had been advised several months ago that a recent infection did not meet the criteria for an exemption to enter Australia unvaccinated. Tennis Australia and Victorian government officials said Djokovic, who has won nine titles at Melbourne Park including the last three, received no preferential treatment, adding he was among “a handful” of the 26 people who applied who were approved in an anonymous and independent process. Later on Thursday, the Victorian health minister, Martin Foley, said Djokovic’s visa was not the state’s responsibility. “Someone issued Novak Djokovic a visa and it wasn’t the Victorian government,” Foley said. “What the Victorian government has done, what Tennis Australia has done, is acted within the law of the land.” Mary Anne Kenny, an associate professor of law at Murdoch University, said entry into Australia required a visa and an individual exemption as an unvaccinated person. “Our laws are very byzantine, they’re very difficult to navigate and how they interact is pretty unclear,” Kenny said. “I do think it’s unfortunate it wasn’t sorted out before he got here. The minister has very broad power for [visa] cancellation. They can cancel for all sorts of reasons.” Carina Ford, an immigration lawyer who has represented the Biloela family, suggested there were three things Djokovic needed to enter the country. “He needed a visa, he needed a travel exemption at the commonwealth level and he needed a travel exemption from Victoria because of the fact he is unvaccinated,” Ford said. “Victoria might have granted an exemption from hotel quarantine … but the travel exemption is a commonwealth issue.” The saga, fuelled by domestic political point-scoring about the country’s handling of a record surge in new Omicron infections, has created an international incident, with the Serbian president, Aleksandar Vučić, claiming harassment of its star player. “I’ve just finished my telephone conversation with Novak Djokovic,” Vučić posted on Instagram. “I told our Novak that the whole of Serbia is with him and that our bodies are doing everything to see that the harassment of the world’s best tennis player is brought to an end immediately. In line with all norms of international law, Serbia will fight for Novak, truth and justice.”François Truffaut’s sublime autobiographical debut is now rereleased, a portrait of the artist as an unhappy child. He deserved every prize going simply for those heartstopping images of the children’s faces as they watch a Punch and Judy show. This is its first release in the UK since 2009, but maybe 62 years is now enough perspective to see fully how the grim scenes of home life and school life, which would have been accepted as contemporary realism in 1959 and for years afterwards, now look like historical documents. The title itself, from faire les quatre cent coups, means to hand out punishment, raise hell, sow wild oats – but this is an ironic upending. Truffaut’s alter ego, Antoine Doinel, is receiving the blows. They rain down on him. Cruelty and humiliation and desperation – and defiance – are this kid’s destiny. Jean-Pierre Léaud played the 12-year-old lead in this and the five successive Doinel films, a role which was to define his entire life. Like Truffaut, Doinel is a truant, a delinquent, a kid from an unhappy home and a thief: he steals money, a bottle of milk, a typewriter and, most importantly of all, a piece of writing. For a class assignment, he plagiarises, or at any rate paraphrases, a passage from Balzac’s Quest of the Absolute from 1834, about the death of the alchemist Balthazar Claes, repurposing it for the supposed death of his own grandfather. Doinel even has a candlelit shrine to Balzac in the cramped family apartment, which almost burns the place down. But Doinel has a tyrannical and narrow-minded schoolteacher (veteran player Guy Decomble, resembling Maigret with his coat and pipe) who is nicknamed petite feuille – little leaf – and is a petty little pedant. Instead of applauding Doinel’s good taste and even conceding that this semi-larceny shows audacity and imagination, this man is simply satisfied with his own cleverness at spotting the borrowing and punishes the boy. It is the ultimate mortification. Doinel knows that his mother, the brassy Gilberte (Claire Maurier), is unfaithful to his jokey, affectionate stepfather Julien (Albert Rémy); he has seen her kissing a man in the street and knows that gifts of money may be involved. So when he pretends that his mother is dead as a bizarre excuse to explain one truancy – a grotesque lie for which Julien comes to school with his still living mother and slaps Doinel’s face in front of his class – it is clearly an act of matricidal wish-fulfilment of some sort. Doinel bunks off school, roaming all around town and of course going to the movies. But despite what is perpetually written about The 400 Blows, movies are not overwhelmingly important to Doinel. They do not “save” him the way they really did save the young cinephile Truffaut, whose friendship and mentorship with critic and intellectual André Bazin meant that he was spared dire punishment for desertion during national service. Doinel spends more of his time ranging far afield outside the cinema: in real life, in the streets of Paris. But there is one in-joke: his parents take him to the movies to see Jacques Rivette’s Paris Belongs to Us (which was not actually released until 1961, two years after The 400 Blows). Maybe Doinel is Truffaut’s alternative-reality version of himself: a self without the redemption of cinema, his abortive Balzac homage standing for the loss of art. With Gilberte’s shrugging permission, Doinel is sent to juvenile detention, put in police custody with grownup criminals and ladies of the night and then the psychological “observation unit” out in the country near the coast. That brings us to the final, almost apocalyptic scene on the beach, where Doinel has ended up after running away from reform school. We know that he has never seen the sea. So how does he feel on seeing it now the first time? Does it look like freedom to him? Or another blank wall? When Truffaut freeze-frames on Doinel’s face at the very end, it shows him looking careworn and haggard for the first time: the freeze-frame has captured the moment at which the boy has become a man. This is the 401st blow – aimed at us. • The 400 Blows is released on 7 January in cinemas.Each page of Sara Freeman’s debut novel holds a slim paragraph, two at most. And if there are two paragraphs on one page, then these are divided by the symbol of a crescent moon, so that at no point is any section of text close to touching another. At all moments, the writing in Tides has to contend with an expanse of vacant space. The experience of reading such a novel is like travelling through a series of expertly designed studio flats. You marvel at every interior you come to: a whole unto itself, not a foot wrong in the design. But then you turn the page and enter yet another four walls, the last beginning to fade from your mind. Only at the end are you able to conceive of all these paragraphs at once, imagine a whole tower block of crafted text. Prior to the novel’s start, Mara, the main character, underwent the tragedy of a stillbirth. After that, she could no longer endure any of the relationships that bordered that terrible experience – not with her husband, nor her brother, his wife and their new baby, who lived on the floor below her apartment, “their joy so firmly lodged beneath her grief”. And so she boards a bus that will take her far away, to an American seaside town: 2,353 inhabitants, a few shops, hostels, then the bay and the water beyond that. For much of the novel, she drifts from place to place, staying at various hostels, spending nights passed out blind drunk on the beach or with strange men – before she finds more permanent residence in the disused attic of a wine shop, where she has got herself a temporary job. Freeman’s chosen form, then, acts as a visual manifestation of her protagonist’s state: her refusal of proximity, her abnegation of all those people and places that had previously been contiguous to her life. Now, nothing can touch her, nothing must last. All the places she ends up in feel as interstitial as the paragraphs themselves, the attic “a square of dispossessed land” from which, after each night, “she sets to work on erasing the signs of her own presence”. This mirroring of structure and plot is smart. It can be very effective. But it also feels too artificial, too neat, to the extent that it draws attention away from the plot and towards its own ingenuity. It is an example of American literary critic and poet Yvor Winters’s “fallacy of imitative form”, his attack on modernist poetry wherein the “form succumbs to the raw material of the poem”, weakening both the poem’s ability to convey its meaning and the form itself. Freeman has suggested that Tides started as an exploration of intense sibling relationships and the way these come to seem abnormal if they continue into adulthood. As children, Mara and her younger brother Paul were inseparable (character names, as well as events occurring before the time of the novel, are drip-fed to the reader, Mara’s life a landscape under fog gradually burning away until the past is at last a clear day). Paul’s first word was “Mara”. Hers was “mine”. She carried him everywhere she went. As such, Mara has found it hard to accept Paul’s marriage, the way “every bit of life has been collectivised, their knowing too. Two skulls pressed together: two wills collapsed.” The subtle violence of the imagery perfectly expresses her abject horror at seeing her brother wrenched from her and becoming conjoined with another. Throughout Tides, there is play between singular and plural pronouns – Mara’s fear of becoming a “we” once more, and her equivalent terror at remaining an “I”. The slow revelation of the depth to which Paul and Mara were previously enmeshed is the strongest, most disturbing aspect of the book, and what makes it live in spite of its fragmented form. Freeman hammers her paragraphs down into perfected, indivisible units, without any bulk or extraneous matter. When it works, her images are light as gas. Naturally, there is an abundance of water-related imagery. After several months in the town, Mara realises no one has come to save her. “The fact solidifies beneath her, a layer of black ice under every thought.” And then, as she begins to come back to herself, in part because of a relationship with someone new, “there is summer right beneath, a current of it under a thin layer of ice”. This lover describes to her the inner workings of the tides, their “rush and release of water”, but she knows what she will remember from the conversation is not the tides’ mechanism, but “the tendon in his neck straining as he talks, the clavicle lifting like a lock”. Each image is eloquently expressed, but when it becomes the only thought on a page, without other images to jostle against, it loses its vitality. In a 2010 interview, Don DeLillo described how he limits himself to one paragraph per page when drafting his novels. It allows him to see more clearly the shape of the words. But in their final form, those paragraphs are brought back into colloquy with one another. As with stanza breaks, readers intuitively make something of these divisions; they do not require the separation of a whole page to understand the rupture that might have occurred in time, in thought, in feeling. In Tides, the splitting of paragraphs between pages does not become more than a formal pretension, one that slows down and makes less coherent an otherwise very strange and poignant novel. • Lamorna Ash’s Dark, Salt, Clear: Life in a Cornish Fishing Town is published by Bloomsbury. Tides by Sara Freeman is published by Granta (£12.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Novak Djokovic’s Australian Open journey started in comfort, and excitement. A photo showed the tennis star with a huge grin on his face, bags packed, as he boarded his Emirates flight from Dubai. “Let’s go 2022!” he posted to Instagram. But it ended with him trapped in an immigration hotel infamous for detaining refugees, caught in the middle of a diplomatic stoush between Serbia and Australia and a fight over his deportation playing out in the federal court. The news that the world No 1, who refuses to reveal his vaccine status, was en route to Australia enraged many. Melbourne was one of the most locked down cities in the world, and the Covid vaccine is mandated in the majority of its workplaces. Many residents questioned why Tennis Australia and the Victorian government were allowing an unvaccinated sports star to play. But after touching down in Melbourne about 11.30pm local time, Djokovic never made it through arrivals. Australian Border Force officials stopped him after it emerged that his team had applied for a visa that does not allow medical exemptions. In a statement, the ABF confirmed Djokovic did not meet the entry requirements and his visa was cancelled. “Non-citizens who do not hold a valid visa on entry or who have had their visa cancelled will be detained and removed from Australia,” the statement said. As Djokovic waited alone in an airport room, the arrivals lounge filled up with media and a small number of fans. One stood in the middle of the arrival gate, waving a Serbian flag. Slobodan Bendjo and Krstomir Dusanovic had been waiting at Melbourne airport since midnight, ready to welcome the tennis star. Armed with an accordion and a Serbian flag, the pair were walking around the airport playing music. “We are here to await the champion,” Dusanovic said. They were not deterred by the fact the tennis star was being told to leave Australia, they said. “We’ve still here to welcome him,” Bendjo said. “He’s just here somewhere behind these walls – he’s not far away from us. “We always, when he comes here, welcome him with music. It’s a traditional thing you do. We think it’s important we continue with the tradition.” A young fan, Andrew Mitrovic wandered in with his mum. He held a makeshift sign that said “free Nole”. They had brought tickets to see Djokovic play and were devastated he hadn’t been allowed in. About 10am, he was moved to the Park hotel in Carlton, an infamous immigration detention hotel. It houses 36 refugees – some of whom have been detained for nine years. The windows in the hotel can’t be opened – they have been sealed shut and there was recently a Covid outbreak among the detainees. An unusual crew of Djokovic supporters, refugee advocates and anti-vaxxers gathered outside the hotel. Husband and wife Ziggy and Billy Misovic came down to show their support for the tennis star. Waving a flag from Djokovic’s home town, Belgrade, they yelled “free Novak”. “We came to support the number one,” Billy said. “It’s ridiculous, he’s got an exemption, why not let him in?” Asked about his vaccination status, Ziggy said: “It’s a private matter. Do I ask if you have Aids? It’s private.” Billy said they understood the frustration of Victorians but that Djokovic had been “humiliated”. “My father passed away two years ago. He was in Serbia. The borders were closed, I understand [the frustration],” she said. Refugee Advocate Jenny Leah said she came every day to show her support and had never seen this many members of the media. “There are dozens of media here today, we are here every day – we get a lot of support from passing motorists, tram drivers, but never any media,” she said. “To us, it says something about the priorities of the media, and public.” The refugees are not allowed on the roof for fresh air and have recently reported finding maggots and mould in their food. Some of them have recently been released on bridging visas but the future of those left inside is unknown. Leah said Djokovic would receive very different treatment: “He’ll get to leave.” As the afternoon wore on, a slow stream of Djokovic’s supporters from Australia’s Serbian community came out to show their solidarity. They played Serbian music, danced and one zoomed around on a scooter yelling. Sandra Milisic, draped in a Serbian flag, said Djokovic deserved “respect”. “If this was an issue to begin with, they should have knocked him back beforehand. He deserves the respect, considering he has given support to Australia during the bushfires,” she said. During a lull in festivities from Djokovic supporters, refugee advocates climbed on top of the roof and, with huge banners, chanted “free the refugees”. A refugee in the window above them holds up nine fingers, for the number of years he has been detained. One Djokovic supporter cut through the crowd to say: “I feel so ignorant. I came here for him, and find out they’ve been locked up for nine years. It’s so wrong.”US troops in Okinawa prefecture will be subject to additional Covid tests and have been reminded to wear masks off base amid criticism that military authorities failed to tackle a fresh outbreak among service personnel that has taken hold among the local civilian population in Japan. Okinawa is at the centre of the country’s latest outbreak, with cases surging in recent days from 51 on Saturday to at least 980 on Thursday – a record daily caseload for the southern island. Those figures omit infections among American troops but include those among Japanese citizens who work at US bases. An off-base mask requirement was already in place for personnel – irrespective of their vaccination status. But local US forces issued a strong reminder amid reports that servicemen and women had been spotted without face coverings, along with new measures in an attempt to prevent virus transmission. The move came after the foreign minister, Yoshimasa Hayashi, called for US personnel to be confined to their bases in a telephone call with the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken. Hayashi “strongly requested the strengthening of measures to prevent an expansion in infections”, according to Japan’s foreign ministry, adding that he had asked Blinken to consider restricting outings by US troops “to ease worries among local residents”. The chief cabinet secretary, Hirokazu Matsuno, said he was “gravely concerned” about outbreaks at American military facilities. Japan’s government is poised to announce new Covid-19 measures in Okinawa in the coming days after a request on Thursday from its governor. “If we all work together, we hope cases will come down,” Denny Tamaki told reporters. Tamaki said this week he was “furious” at US military authorities over the “alarming rise” in cases – including those involving the Omicron variant – on Okinawa, host to more than half of the 47,000 American troops based in Japan. The expected quasi-state of emergency in Okinawa could include shorter opening hours for bars and restaurants. Tamaki has promised financial aid for businesses that comply with the restrictions. The measures would be the first in Japan since late September, when restrictions were lifted after a dramatic fall in new Covid-19 infections. Officials in Hiroshima prefecture said they would also request a quasi-state of emergency. The mask requirement – in a country where most people voluntarily wear face coverings – applies to other US bases in Japan, home to more than 100,000 service members, dependents and contractors. Late last year, Japan banned all overseas arrivals apart from Japanese citizens and returning foreign residents in an attempt to prevent the spread of Omicron. But US forces are able to enter the country and move about freely under a bilateral security agreement. US Forces in Japan (USFJ) has reported a total of 1,784 cases among personnel and their families, with about a third of them in Okinawa. The Iwakuni marine corps base in south-western Japan has reported 529 cases. USFJ said personnel must test negative for Covid-19 before leaving their base, adding that masks must also be worn on base until a negative test result is confirmed. Until recently, the US military did not adhere to Japan’s policy of testing incoming travellers for the virus on arrival and requiring them to quarantine for two weeks. The USFJ said it “now requires no less than three negative Covid-19 tests upon travelling to Japan” including one within 24 hours of arrival. “The mitigation measures we have instituted throughout USFJ are intended to protect our force’s readiness, the wellbeing of our families, and the health of Japan’s citizens,” it said. “We recognise we all have a part to play in keeping our communities safe.” Japan’s infection rate remains comparatively low, with just over 2,600 cases reported on Wednesday. But the numbers are rising, and Wednesday marked the first time that cases had exceeded 2,000 for more than three months. This article and headline was amended on 11 and 12 January 2022 to clarify that US military personnel had already been required to wear masks off base before US Forces in Japan announced additional measures, and to change some references from “soldiers” to “troops”. Agencies contributed to this reportOne of the few black female QCs in England and Wales has said the time has come for action and “no more talk” when it comes to tackling race inequality in the legal profession. Barbara Mills, who is co-chair of the Bar Council’s race working group, said the next 12 months would be “critical” to tackling systemic obstacles at the bar. These were identified in the group’s landmark Race at the Bar report, which found that there were just five black female QCs (senior barristers, also known as silks) in England and Wales (another two were announced in the latest appointments, published on 22 December). Another stark statistic was that a black female junior barrister with the same level of experience as a white male junior billed £18,700 a year less on average, and an Asian woman £16,400 less. Elsewhere, the judiciary said only 1% of judges in courts and tribunals were black, a figure that is unchanged since 2014 Mills says there had been “well-meaning people” in the profession but a more strategic approach was required to boost diversity. “If, in a year’s time – I shouldn’t say if – when, in a year’s time, we have … all sorts of stakeholders with clearly defined targets, which we can then work to and then hold them to account, that would be real progress,” said Mills. “The system didn’t get like this overnight and none of us can hope that the change will be overnight but what the race working group members and our brown and black colleagues are expecting is a sense, a feeling of visibility, that it’s changing – no more talk, just change it and let me see that it’s changing. So, I think the next 12 months are critical.” Mills said the fact that the race working group even existed, and racial inequality was being talked about openly within the profession, showed progress since she was first called to the bar in 1990. But the next step required targets – not to be confused with quotas – to pave the way for tangible action, she said. She shied away from discussing her own experience, instead focusing on “holding my hand out as I climb up”. But Mills is under no illusions about her own visibility as a black female QC, given that by comparison there are 1,303 white men and 286 white women who are silks, according to the report, which used figures calculated before the latest round of appointments. “I was really struck when I took silk,” she said. “My inbox was flooded with messages from black women who I didn’t know who were either students or young barristers, who said: ‘Oh, my God, it’s possible. Thank you, thank you for making it look and be possible.’” Targets for QCs from minority-ethnic backgrounds, as well as for appointments to the judiciary and panels, are one of a raft of recommendations in the Race at the Bar report, which focuses on access to the profession, retention, progress and culture. Mills said those asking if there was really a problem were in the minority and she “can’t understand or believe that anybody doubts the value of diversity any more”. She said: “You can’t have a system whereby in something as fundamental and as important to people as the legal system, there are those in society who think there’s an ‘us and them’ going on. It can’t be. You can’t have a system where people think: well, the person who will represent me, has no idea of my life, my culture, my heritage, what makes me me, the person who’s going to make a life-altering decision, has no idea of my culture, of who I am. That just doesn’t instil the sort of confidence in the decision-making that we require.”A witty retelling of a classic that leaves no buckle unswashed and no wink to the adults unwinked, this is the kind of production that, in a normal year, would have played to packed houses over the festive season. That this isn’t a normal year means that vacant seats in the auditorium and masks on the faces of those in seats that are occupied create a more subdued atmosphere than this hugely energetic and entertaining production deserves. But it is still a show that will surely make theatre lovers out of youngsters experiencing the art form for the first time. Adapter Ella Hickson wrings out the humour in every corner of the script, from an unrequited love story between Smee and Captain Hook to near-the-knuckle jokes about the anatomical logistics of how exactly a fairy might end up on top of a tree and, more importantly, stay there. Taking JM Barrie’s original story and centring Wendy Darling in it is a smart move from Hickson and one that Amber James exploits to the full, playing the Darling girl like Dawn French in her pomp. Her counterpart, Pierro Niel-Mee, gives us a Peter Pan that is one part Rik Mayall’s Lord Flashheart with a generous helping of Robin Williams as he played the role in Hook, Steven Spielberg’s 1991 telling of the story. It’s a modern sensibility that works for a script that is Pixarian in its ability to appeal to all ages: those who grew up with The Simpsons will look at Smee and think Smithers, while the youngsters on whom those jokes are lost will surely simply marvel at the spectacular stage fights. Jonathan Munby, who directed the original version of this for the RSC in 2013, throws everything at this, alongside co-director Rupert Hands, staging the piece with huge bombast while not shying away from the story’s dark undertones of death and grief. The production, which was staged at the Tokyo Olympics, has been hit by delays to the set arriving from Japan and cancellations caused by cases of Covid among the cast over Christmas. It has been entirely worth the wait. Wendy and Peter Pan is at Leeds Playhouse until 22 January.Pope Francis, during a general audience at the Vatican, said: “Today … we see a form of selfishness. We see that some people do not want to have a child. Sometimes they have one, and that’s it, but they have dogs and cats that take the place of children. This may make people laugh but it is a reality.” Whether you have chose to have pets instead of children, or have both, we would like to hear your thoughts on his comments. What are the advantages and disadvantages of both? Share your experiences You can fill in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Plans to tackle the “catastrophic impact” of the Covid pandemic on patients in England waiting for NHS treatment could be derailed by emergency care demands and a lack of staff, MPs have said. With about 6 million people already waiting for planned treatment, the backlog caused by the pandemic is a major and “unquantifiable” challenge as more people seek care, according to the cross-party health and social care committee. A record number of 999 calls and long waits to be seen in A&amp;E, coupled with an increase in the number of people waiting for planned care could result in an “entirely predictable staffing crisis” as burned-out staff quit the NHS. In its report, the committee calls for a wide-ranging national health and care recovery plan encompassing emergency care, mental health, GPs, community care and social care. The committee chair, Jeremy Hunt, also called for short-term measures to tackle the crisis. “We need to go a lot further. We’ve got 6 million people on the waiting list, we’ve got a crisis in our A&amp;E departments, a record number of 999 calls, double the referrals to children and young people’s mental health in some areas,” he told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme on Thursday. “We don’t have […] a workforce plan that says how we are going to get these 4,000 doctors, and unless we do that we’re going to find this incredible frustration from taxpayers’ point of view that they’re putting the money in but they’re not getting the results out that they were promised.” The report states that of the 5.8 million patients who were waiting to start treatment in September 2021, 300,000 had been waiting more than a year and 12,000 more than two years. MPs said government promises to carry out 9m extra checks, scans and operations would not be deliverable “without better short and long-term workforce planning”. The report noted that there were 93,000 vacancies for NHS positions and “shortages in nearly every specialty”, while there were 105,000 vacancies and a turnover rate of 28.5% in social care. Although the health secretary, Sajid Javid, had promised a plan would be produced by the end of November 2021, the report said NHS England had yet to publish details. “We remain unconvinced there are sufficient plans for recruitment and retention of staff,” said the report. MPs had previously called for short and long-term workforce projections, but plans to enshrine the requirement in law had been voted down by the government, and without that information it was “impossible for anyone” to know if enough doctors, nurses and care staff were being trained. “This creates a gap between ministerial rhetoric about supporting frontline staff and refusal in practice to do the biggest single long-term change that would relieve the pressure they face,” the MPs said. While use of the private sector to tackle the backlog was broadly welcomed, the report noted that it risked exacerbating existing health inequalities, as private hospitals tended to be in more affluent areas, whereas waiting lists were biggest in more deprived areas. The report warned against a target culture which could compromise quality and patient safety, and the efficacy of encouraging people to call 111 for urgent but non-life threatening medical need as no evaluation had been carried out. Dr David Wrigley, the British Medical Association’s deputy council chair, said the report exposed the “gargantuan challenge” facing the NHS. “The biggest barrier to tackling the backlog caused by the pandemic is a severe staffing crisis and our calls for improved workforce planning have thankfully been heard. It’s now time for the government to listen too.”More than one in six NHS trusts across England have declared a critical incident due to Covid pressures, a cabinet minister has revealed, saying the Omicron variant was putting “very real” pressure on the health service. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said ministers were trying to find the right compromise between imposing further restrictions and not allowing hospitals to be “overrun” given new cases of the virus have reached historically high levels. Of England’s 137 NHS trusts, at least 24 have declared a critical incident, Shapps said, meaning they have reached an alert level signalling priority services may be under threat. He added it was “crazy” some people were still not getting vaccinated given the increased protection a booster jab offers against the Omicron variant, but that the government would not take the “draconian approach” of making vaccines mandatory. Shapps told Sky News it was “not entirely unusual” for NHS trusts to “go critical over the winter – often with things like the flu pandemic”, but conceded “there are very real pressures which I absolutely recognise”. Plan B, which came into force last month across England with a return to work-from-home advice, face coverings and the introduction of Covid passes, was still the right way forward, Shapps said. He faced down criticism that England is out of step with the three other UK nations, which all imposed tougher restrictions in the light of the more transmissible variant. Shapps said: “What we want to do is steer the country through the Omicron wave, and I think plan B has so far been shown to be the right way forward – not shutting down the country yet again with all the costs to people’s mental health and elsewhere.” Hospitalisations have been slower to rise than Covid cases, with ministers buoyed by the booster rollout. A further 967 people went into hospital with the virus, according to the latest daily figure published on Wednesday, taking the total to 17,276 – the highest since last February. However, the issue has been compounded further by NHS staff being among the hundreds of thousands of people self-isolating due to the rapidly increasing number of Covid cases. A further 194,747 infections were reported on Wednesday, one of the highest on record since the pandemic began. Jon Ashworth, the shadow work and pensions secretary, said it was vital key workers – including NHS staff – got access to lateral flow tests that enable double-vaccinated people to end their isolation early from day seven if they test negative twice. He said there had been “problems with the supply” and added: “Ministers have really got to get a grip of that.” Some restrictions on travel have been lifted, with the requirement for all those arriving in England to get a pre-departure PCR test now scrapped. Shapps said travel restrictions were always temporary and that PCR-testing everyone who entered the country to check if they had Omicron was no longer necessary, given it is now the dominant variant in the UK and spreading fast in many other parts of the world. He said the previous testing rule had “effectively outlived its usefulness when it comes to travel”. • This article was amended on 7 January 2022 to remove a graphic.While Florida has experienced a record number of Covid-19 cases and sharp increase in hospitalizations in recent weeks, there is disagreement between Republicans and Democrats over whether the Omicron surge has actually overwhelmed the state’s healthcare system. For example, Florida Republican senator Marco Rubio posted on Twitter that there “is no Omicron hospital ‘surge’ in Florida. People admitted for non-Covid reasons get tested. If they test positive they get counted as a ‘Covid patient.’” Infectious disease experts and Florida hospital leaders say that – while there is some validity to the assessment that data showing an increase in Covid hospitalizations and cases can in part be attributed to increased testing – the state’s hospitals still face potentially serious staffing shortages. One hospital in the state had to close its maternity ward because of a Covid outbreak among staff. But in short, Florida has become a focal point of the often politicized debate over whether the Omicron variant is dangerous enough to overwhelm hospital systems and requires precautions taken earlier in the pandemic. “I think there are certainly pressure points because of staffing challenges,” said Dr Joshua Lenchus, chief medical officer of Broward Health. “There has been a tremendous shift with nurses and respiratory therapists that have migrated to areas in greatest need and some areas that may compensate them better than other areas.” Florida, which its rightwing Republican governor, Ron DeSantis, touts as a place free of federal and other states’ draconian Covid-related restrictions, has seen a 566% increase in Covid cases over the past two weeks and a 246% increase in Covid hospitalizations during that time, according to data from the New York Times. Sixty-four percent of the state has been vaccinated against the virus, which is slightly higher than the country’s vaccination rate. DeSantis on Monday at a press conference described other states as “letting hysteria drive them to doing really damaging things”. While acknowledging a shortage in Covid tests, the governor and Florida’s surgeon general also said that people were testing themselves for the virus too much and that the state would issue new guidance on testing. “Without it, we’re going to be sort of stuck in the same cycle. So, it’s really time for people to be living, to make the decisions they want regarding vaccination, to enjoy the fact that many people have natural immunity,” said the state surgeon general, Joseph Ladapo. Florida Democrats blamed DeSantis for the fact that state residents have recently waited hours in line to get a Covid test. “We have not received any assistance from the state of Florida at our testing sites,” Mayor Jerry Demings of Orange county, a Democrat, said, according to NBC News. “Local governments have been left to figure it out and respond on our own. We are doing our best.” The testing shortage has also prompted some Florida residents to visit emergency rooms in search of tests. The Florida Hospital Association last week on Twitter urged people with mild or no symptoms not to visit emergency rooms for tests and instead find a testing site. “While facing the strain of workforce challenges, ERs are being put under increased pressure to provide care,” the organization stated. Lenchus, of Broward Health, attributes the demand for tests in emergency rooms to the long wait at testing sites and the fact that people don’t first turn to their primary care provider. “They show up at the emergency rooms thinking they are going to get a test,” said Lenchus. “Our hospital, as well as other hospitals, are not community testing sites. We have a limited supply of tests … like others do, and those tests should be reserved for people who are symptomatic and admitted to the hospital.” Still, Broward Health tests all patients who are admitted. While Rubio described some of the Covid hospitalization data as misleading, those tests are still important because not everyone presents with classic Covid symptoms – even though the virus could be the reason for the hospitalization – and the virus can complicate other diseases, said Dr Aileen Marty, an infectious disease expert at Florida International University. Even if a patient comes to the hospital for a different issue, a positive Covid test is important because “we have to treat that patient differently”, said Marty. The personal protective equipment “we use is different even if that person’s symptoms are not directly related to Covid”. Regardless of how representative the Covid infection and hospitalization numbers are of the scale of the problem in Florida, the virus continues to upend normal care and staffing. On 2 January, Holy Cross Health in Broward county had to shut down its labor and delivery unit because of staffing shortages due to people who became sick with the virus. Five patients have been transferred to Broward Health, and a number of other patients proactively changed their plans to physicians at the hospital, according to a Broward Health spokesperson. “There are still staffing challenges, and I think we as a healthcare community work together to ensure that the care of the community is still addressed,” said Lenchus. He and Marty both said they expected the wave to peak in the coming weeks. They are also waiting on state or federal government to provide additional monoclonal antibody treatments and Pfizer’s new antiviral pill. “I would imagine things perhaps could be better if the governor and the president played nicer together, but I would hope that as two professionals, they understand that protection of the public – which is in the oath that they swore when they took office – should take precedence over everything else,” said Lenchus. “And to their credit, when push comes to shove, when we do get into a crisis, perhaps there is some politicking, but they do come to the table and do what is right.”In January 2021, the Malawian rights activist Paul Msoma wrote that he was in Kamuzu central hospital, struggling to breathe. The hospital had oxygen cylinders but no flowmeters – the necessary instrument to connect him to them. I was left wondering where the funds that had been released for the country’s Covid-19 response were going. “My situation is getting bad and l desperately need oxygen,” Msoma wrote on Facebook. “Anyone who can urgently help out there please help by donating this very gadget.” Kamuzu central hospital is one of the biggest referral hospitals in Malawi and it did not seem right for such a big hospital not to have oxygen flowmeters, which are very basic medical equipment costing around £18 a piece. This was at a time when the government had released more than £5.6m for the Covid-19 response effort. Tragically, Msoma died a few days later. His call for help opened a can of worms and caused many to realise that these funds were being abused. Influential Malawians organised a citizen-led Covid-19 response and the government was brought to its senses, opening an inquiry into Covid-19 spending. An eventual report by the country’s office of the ombudsman following Nsoma’s comments indicated that 79.8% of the funds were misused, including money spent on non-Covid items like allowances for government officers. A later audit by the country’s auditor general confirmed the extensive abuse. But, to date, none of the officers involved in the abuse of the funds have been charged, despite the president, Lazarus Chakwera, promising that all those abusing these funds would face the law. The common belief on the street is that some of the people who misused the funds were politically connected government officials who could have been sharing the spoils with politicians. Meanwhile, as people were learning how the previous funds were used, Chakwera ordered another £15.8m – mostly from the Global Fund Covid-19 response mechanism and the IMF’s Rapid Credit Facility to help address the effects of the coronavirus – to be released. As it stands, people are still dying and the country doesn’t have vaccines to give its entire population. Malawi had, as of 2 January of this year, a total of 1,494,459 (7.6%) people with at least one vaccination, while just 712,848 (3.6%) have been fully vaccinated. Cumulatively the country has recorded 76,295 Covid-19 cases and 2,378 deaths, a 3.1% case fatality rate. The Covid response in Malawi has been greatly affected by rampant corruption. This affected not just procurement of vital items, but also areas like public awareness and outreach. Vaccine hesitancy is a massive problem. Currently, almost every major government hospital in Malawi including those in hard-to-reach areas has some vaccines but there are fears that even the current supply might not be fully utilised because of hesitancy. In May 2021 the country destroyed close to 20,000 doses of expired Covid-19 vaccines. This could have been better managed if funds for the epidemic response were properly used in the early stages of the disease’s spread. Much of the vaccine hesitancy in Malawi is being driven by religious beliefs, with some religious leaders telling followers the vaccines are prophesised in the Bible and are the starting stages of the branding of a “666” mark – the mark of the beast. They say every global citizen shall be required to have a mark in order to engage in any business. There is another myth that has been taking turns, where many women believe that the vaccines will make them infertile. It is difficult to reach and counter local misinformation, as 82.57% of Malawi’s population lives in rural areas, and about 65.8% of the population is literate. There currently seems to be more commitment by the country’s leadership to get the population vaccinated. The government, with support from different health organisations, has embarked on a nationwide campaign where people are being reached with mobile clinics within their communities and the result has been an uptick in vaccination. The country’s health minister also recently announced that Covid-19 vaccination will become mandatory for some public servants such as police officers, health workers, teachers and journalists. But this has not gone down well with some rights groups, including the Malawi Human Rights Commission, which has argued against mandatory status on the grounds that vaccination should be a personal choice. The recent rise in vaccination is welcome and overdue. But there is still a need for active citizen participation to hold leaders accountable on how every penny of the country’s Covid response fund is being used, and to educate others on the dangers of the virus. This, however, isn’t going to be attainable until the country’s Anti-Corruption Bureau is adequately empowered, and Chakwera commits to full transparency for all Covid spending. Madalitso Wills Kateta is a freelance journalist based in Lilongwe, MalawiAt the temple of regret, you can have your mistakes burned away by a smiling practitioner, if you are willing to pay a hefty fee. I’m at an unremarkable office block near Monument tube station in central London, watching the remorseful have their body art erased at Pulse Light Clinic, which offers state-of-the-art tattoo removal using laser technology. As penitents of all ages, walks of life and ethnicities walk through the door, one thing becomes clear: there are a lot of terrible tattoos out there. In a spotless treatment room beside a £6,500 tattoo-removing PicoSure laser machine, senior practitioner Cherry Brierly is recounting her clients’ stories. “I had one lovely guy,” she says brightly. “He had a tattoo on his head. He was in his 60s, newly divorced. He came in and said: ‘It’s not me any more. I need to find a new wife.’” The tattoo said: “Made in London”. It disappeared in a single session. Probably the worst tattoos Brierly has removed were the terrible jokes: “‘Tupac’ written across the stomach,” she says. “Or ‘Brexit’ on the bum. Or camel drawn on a toe.” As a tattoo remover, Brierly has a direct line into the shifting vagaries of the human psyche. “One guy did practically his whole body,” she says. “Everything was tattooed. He’d gotten divorced and was a Muslim.” As some Muslims believe tattoos are forbidden, she thinks they were his way of declaring he didn’t want to be a Muslim any more. There was just one problem: he rediscovered his faith. “All that was within six months.” The most common tattoos Brierly removes, however, are tribal designs out of favour since their 90s heyday. “Tramp stamps” – a tattoo on a woman’s lower back – are also routinely sandblasted away, as are dolphins, another relic of the 90s. (Samantha Cameron has one on her foot.) More recently, Brierly has had clients coming in to have full sleeves removed, as the 2010s trend beloved of footballers and social media influencers burns itself out. And then, of course, there are names – heartbreak is always good business for the tattoo-removal trade. “We’re impulsive,” says Brierly when asked what she has learned from her career. “Very impulsive.” In an adjacent treatment room, Candice Smith is having a youthful indiscretion scrubbed clean. “I remember I was walking down the street,” says the 30-year-old social work student, from east London, “and someone said: ‘She’s got a strawberry on her leg!’ I think that did it for me.” I contemplate the offending soft fruit, on Smith’s left calf. It is the size of a baby’s head, badly rendered in wobbly fluorescent pink. In all honesty, she’s making the right call. “It was only a small tattoo I wanted,” Smith sighs. “But it ended up being massive.” Smith can’t even remember why she got the strawberry tattoo – she is not particularly keen on the fruit but was 18 at the time, a wannabe Camden scene kid with tattoos, a face full of piercings, and an extreme haircut. “The regret kicked in as I got older,” Smith says. She’s having it lasered off so that she no longer has to worry about covering it when the weather gets warm. “Over the years,” she says, “it has just ruined every summer. I’m forever trying to cover it with the perfect length dress, and midi dresses aren’t my thing. Or culottes, which I don’t really like, but I wear because they cover the tattoo.” She is halfway through a course of six treatments, at a cost of £600, and her tattoo is much faded, although still visible. (Most tattoos take a number of sessions to be removed.) “I was shocked at how much it cost,” Smith says. “But I felt like getting this removed was very worth it for me.” Astonishingly, despite all this, she doesn’t regret the tattoo, and says it serves as a learning curve for her children. Beside her, practitioner Rene Cazzetta is programming the laser to the correct setting. Cazzetta is a smiling and ebullient presence with more than a decade’s experience in laser tattoo removal. Tattoos like Smith’s, she explains, pose a challenge, because pink is especially tricky to remove. “The way tattoo removal works,” Cazzetta says, “is that the laser breaks down the ink into very small particles, and the blood that flows under the skin takes away the ink.” The laser works on all skin types with black ink, but it can cause pigmentation – a permanent change to the colour of the skin – with coloured tattoos on black skin. Pink, yellow, and white are the most stubborn colours to remove; a practitioner may be able to fade them considerably, but a trace will remain. “They will go down in potency,” says Cazzatta, “and look like a bruise.” Some clients choose to cover up these faded remnants with a new tattoo; others are simply happy for their old ink to be barely visible. Visitors to the clinic are increasingly seeking to have their old tattoos removed and replaced by handiwork from artists more talented than the one who did the original tattoo. With darker inks, the laser can have phenomenal results: the tattoo simply vanishes, as if it was never there. Cazzetta, who is heavily tattooed, knows this first-hand: she had an ex-boyfriend’s name tattooed on her body, then had it lasered off after the breakup. “I wanted to join all my clients with their experiences,” she says drily. “I felt as if I was missing out.” As her ex-boyfriend’s name was written in fine black ink, it was soon gone. “He was removed in the space of 12 weeks,” Cazzetta smiles. She relishes the challenge of a tattoo like Smith’s strawberry. “Every tattoo can be extremely different from another,” she says. “Some tattooists put cheaper ink in, which is harder to remove. I’ve been doing this for a decade. And still, sometimes, when a client walks in, I think: ‘OK, how will I do this?’” It is a skilled job that requires practitioners to understand how best to programme the laser for each pigment colour and skin type. The most difficult tattoo she has ever removed? A beauty spot, “because the ink was pushed so deep into the skin”. Smith has prepared for her session by rubbing anaesthetic numbing cream on to the tattoo – a must for anyone contemplating laser tattoo removal. Without it, says Brierly, “the pain is horrific. I’m not going to lie. It’s a feeling you can’t describe. Like burning hot oil.” The cream “takes the pain off,” Brierly says. “You can sit through it. It’s fine. You can still feel it, but it’s nothing like what it would be without it. Without it, it’s horrible.” The treatment itself takes less than two minutes: Cazzetta zaps the tattoo with a PicoWay laser, which flashes and looks a little like a soldering iron. (Practitioners switch between the two machines, the PicoSure and PicoWay, depending on the type of tattoo being removed.) “The only way I can explain it,” says Smith, “is that it feels like someone is stretching an elastic band and flicking you with it, without stopping.” At the end of the session, her strawberry is further faded: a berry stain, rather than a succulent fruit. What becomes clear, after only a few hours in the clinic, is that there are a lot of tattoos out there that are not what the client had in mind. “I knew what I wanted,” says the hairdresser Roy Sword, furiously. “I drew it, and I knew exactly where I wanted it placed.” But his tattooist – Sword practically spits when he says his name – did not get it right. “I’m annoyed I didn’t go back to the woman who did my other tattoos,” says the 45-year-old, from south London. “I should have just stuck with her.” Today, he is getting two arrows, tattooed on his wrists, removed – they are too big. “I hated them the minute they were finished,” he says. Cazzetta’s next client is also someone who didn’t get the tattoo that she had in mind. “I had this whole idea of what I wanted it to look like,” says Gem Clay, a 26-year-old who works at a Lego Store and has travelled to London from Maidstone for the day. “But the artist didn’t do it like I thought it would be done. It was my first tattoo and I got really shy and said: ‘That’s fine, I love it.’” The tattoo in question is an orange maple leaf on her upper arm. Clay then added a rose to it, thinking she would like it more, but now she regrets that too, and wants both removed. This, says Brierly, is a common error. “My advice for anyone is that if you don’t like a tattoo, don’t cover it. Just get rid of it. Because it escalates. Some people get two cover-ups and then blackout over the top, and then take it off.” It’s best to treat a bad tattoo like a recipe that’s beyond saving: toss out the entire meal and start afresh, rather than trying to salvage it with additions. Clay is in for a patch test, a legal prerequisite before she books an appointment. Cazzetta uses a laser on a portion of the tattoo, a small leaf. The laser bathes the room in a fluorescent gleam. The effect on the tattoo is remarkable: the green ink almost seems to foam, turning a cloudy yellow. Clay flinches as the laser drags the green ink to the surface of her skin: as it is her first session, she forgot to apply numbing cream. “It’s probably the most expensive tattoo I’ll ever have,” she says, “and I’m getting it removed.” Britain’s unquenchable enthusiasm for tattoos means Pulse Light Clinic is, for now, doing a roaring trade. Unless the tattoo is particularly large, most people are in and out within 15 minutes. The laser process itself takes barely any time at all – seconds, in some cases – and afterwards the area is dressed in bandages, to prevent infection and promote healing. Some people come to the clinic to have tattoos removed for professional reasons. Members of the army, cabin crew and makeup artists at upmarket department stores are all forbidden from having tattoos on display. “Sometimes clients don’t like it,” says the 30-year-old Venezuelan model Rotceh Perez, “and they have to Photoshop it out. But I didn’t really like the tattoo enough to keep it.” She’s having an angel removed from her ribs: this is her fourth session, and only a few traces of ink remain. Perez got the tattoo when she was 16. “I saw it as a kind of protection at the time,” she says. Her parents, predictably, were not thrilled. “Of course, they were mad,” she says. Now, she understands. “I will do the same with my children,” she says. “I’ll tell them: ‘Please don’t get a tattoo until you are at least 25. Then you can decide.’” Not everyone has the excuse of youth. Although a global pandemic is not a bad second. “I had coronavirus at the time,” says Tom (not his real name), a 25-year-old PR worker from London who prefers to remain anonymous, for reasons which will become clear. “I was locked in the house with the woman I was seeing at the time. And it was just a spur-of-the-moment decision. I think I was suffering from being in the house for 12 days.” Tom’s then-paramour tattooed the word ‘gravy’ on his left arm, using a needle. “I honestly can’t even remember the whole conversation [leading up to it],” says Tom. “I think it was more to do with the phrase ‘It’s all gravy’. Then I realised afterwards everyone will think I’m a northern boy – because northern boys love gravy.” Cazzetta zaps his gravy into oblivion. “You see that blanching?” she says casually. “It’s because the laser is hot and it hits the ink and makes the ink hot. And then the steam comes up and blanches the skin white. It will go down after a few minutes.” Tom slinks off into central London once more, gravy diluted. Leaving the clinic, I can’t help but wish there was a PicoSure for all of our mistakes. Terrible boyfriend? Scald him away with a burst of concentrated light. Working in a career you hate? Laser those bosses into oblivion. Your regrets almost instantly fixed; vanished, as if they never happened. Until that day comes, tattoo removal is an option for our most visible errors of judgment. Just don’t forget the numbing cream.1. Romain Saïss Morocco Maybe Saïss can no longer be described as underrated after his manager at Wolves, Bruno Lage, proclaimed him to be “the Moroccan Maldini” but the 31-year-old still tends not to get a mention in discussions of the Premier League’s most reliable and inspirational defenders despite his continued excellence this season. His quality has long been recognised in Morocco, whom he has captained since 2020 and hopes to lead on a better campaign than their disappointing past two appearances in the Cup of Nations. They will certainly not be allowed to ease their way into the 2022 edition, since they face Ghana in the first group game. While Saïss drives his team on from the rear, assisted by the wonderful Paris Saint-Germain full-back Achraf Hakimi, Morocco are likely to look to Ryan Mmaee to make the difference for them up front. The 24-year-forward, who plays for Ferencvaros, has made a thrilling impact since declaring for Morocco last year, his speed and dribbling helping him to score four goals – and create another four – in four matches. Born in Belgium to a Moroccan mother, he – and his brother Samy, who could partner Saïss in central defence – will be aiming for glory in Cameroon, the birthplace of their father. That would be a lovely family story and also help vindicate the decision of the manager, Vahid Halilhodzic, to leave out Chelsea’s Hakim Ziyech for a perceived lack of commitment. 2. Ismaël Bennacer Algeria Djamel Belmadi was a hothead as a player but his serene leadership since becoming his country’s manager in 2018 is the chief reason why Algeria are the favourites to win the tournament and retain the crown they claimed in 2019. The manager has brought order where there had been disarray, finding a way to turn an array of gifted individuals into a powerful collective. There is much more to Algeria than Riyad Mahrez. Milan’s Bennacer, voted player of the last tournament, is not as spectacular as the Manchester City magician but is a dynamic, clever and constant influence in midfield, where Saïd Benrahma can also be expected to create regular problems for opponents – and chances for Youcef Belaïli, a striker who is seeking a new club after being let go last month by his Qatari employers a day after, coincidentally, scoring for Algeria to knock Qatar out of the Arab Cup. 3. Sébastien Haller Ivory Coast This striker is not defined by the past. He was a youth international for France and a flop for West Ham. Now, with Ajax, he is top scorer in the Dutch league and he set a record this season by scoring 10 goals in the Champions League group stage. He hopes to take that form into the Cup of Nations with Ivory Coast, whose attack he has been leading since scoring on his debut in November 2020. In addition to one of European football’s most in-form strikers, the Elephants boast, with Franck Kessié and Ibrahim Sangaré, one of the strongest central midfields at the tournament. They could seriously complicate things for Algeria, whom they meet in the group stage and maybe later, too. 4. Hannibal Mejbri Tunisia The midfielder, who turns 19 this month, has made one senior appearance for Manchester United, a fact Ralf Rangnick has suggested he hopes to change after Mejbri returns from his latest international adventure. He impressed at last month’s Arab Cup, where he helped Tunisia to finish as runners-up. There he demonstrated not just his technical finesse but also his personality, as he fended off occasional attempts to rough him up and took plenty of creative initiative. Reaching the final in Cameroon will be much harder but with Mejbri helping Wahbi Khazri to add ingenuity to a well-drilled side, Tunisia could go far. 5. Steven Caulker Sierra Leone Caulker’s only appearance for England, in 2012, is not easy to forget: the defender scored by heading in a free-kick from Steven Gerrard, who was making his 100th appearance, but that was rather overshadowed by four goals from one of the forwards he was tasked with subduing, Zlatan Ibrahimovic (although Caulker was on the pitch for only one of them). That was all in a friendly, however, and since Caulker did not appear again for England, he is free to celebrate his roots by representing Sierra Leone, where his paternal grandfather was born. When he makes his competitive debut at the Cup of Nations, it will be a moment to savour for the 30-year-old, who has overcome mental illness to continue to enjoy his career. The former Liverpool and Tottenham defender plays for Gaziantep in Turkey, on loan from Fenerbahçe. Sierra Leone are underdogs in a difficult group but making it to the tournament is a commendable achievement for the country and for Caulker. 6. Chidera Ejuke Nigeria Nigeria’s spluttering performances over the past year led to the dismissal of Gernot Rohr, who had been the country’s longest-serving manager until being jettisoned last month. The preparations of the interim coach, Augustine Eguavoen, have been hampered by the loss of key forwards: not just the brilliant Victor Osimhen but also Emmanuel Dennis and Odion Ighalo, whose Saudi club, Al Shabab, refused to let him go on similar grounds to those that enabled Watford to keep hold of Dennis. All of which is likely to increase the pressure on Kelechi Iheanacho to provide goals. He can expect high-class assistance from the wonderful winger Samuel Chukwueze but also from central areas if Eguavoen’s plan to deploy the CSKA Moscow wideman Ejuke as a No 10 pays off. Ejuke’s extravagant skills and impressive speed make him a delight when on song and suggest he could run the Super Eagles’ show, which starts with a blockbuster against Egypt on Tuesday. Paul DoyleDogs may appear to have selective hearing when it comes to commands but research suggests they are paying attention to human chit-chat. Researchers – who arranged for headphone-wearing dogs to listen to excerpts from the novella The Little Prince – revealed the brains of our canine companions can tell the difference between speech and non-speech when listening to human voices, and show different responses to speech in an unfamiliar language. The team said the findings supported other studies that suggest animals may share some human skills. “Our capacities to process speech and languages are not necessarily unique in all the ways we like to think they are,” said Dr Attila Andics, senior author of the study at Eötvös Loránd University in Hungary. The research involved 18 dogs of various ages and breeds that were trained to lie in an MRI scanner without restraint or sedation, but with headphones on. They were then played recordings either of humans reading excerpts from The Little Prince by Antoine De Saint-Exupéry or those same recordings cut up into small pieces and put back together in a different order so it sounded unnatural. The results, published in the journal NeuroImage, reveal the dogs’ brains showed a different activity pattern in the primary auditory cortex for speech compared with non-speech, with the findings similar regardless of whether the language used – Hungarian or Spanish – was familiar. Curiously, the longer the dog’s head was, the better their brain could distinguish speech from non-speech. The team also found the activity pattern was stronger for non-speech. “In humans, you typically see stronger response to speech,” Andics told the Guardian, adding it appears a different mechanism is at play in dogs and they are not “tuned in” to speech. “Probably what they detect is that the normal, natural speech sounds natural. And the other one sounds surprising, strange, not the typical pattern we hear,” he said. The research also revealed familiar and unfamiliar languages gave rise to different responses in the secondary auditory cortex and precruciate gyrus – but only for speech. That was important, said Andics, as it suggested the ability to distinguish between languages was not simply down to the speakers being different. Instead, the team said, the differences seen between languages for speech are probably down to exposure to the familiar language and a sensitivity to language-specific regularities. “This is also supported by the observation that older dogs show the stronger differentiation between the two languages,” said Andics. He said it made sense to explore response to human speech in dogs, since they shared our environment. But questions remained. “Whether this is something that only dog brains can do or not, or whether dogs indeed became better at detecting speech as a result of certain brain changes during these tens of thousands of years of domestication, we are not sure,” he said. Sophie Scott, professor of cognitive neuroscience at University College London, said she welcomed the research. “[It is a] very nice demonstration of just how much dogs are listening to our voices and how much information they’re pulling out, even if that is not necessarily speech that is directed to them or containing words they might recognise,” she said. “Almost everything that you can find about human speech and human language and you say, ‘ah this is unique to humans’, you find an animal somewhere that can do it.”There was a moment early in the second day at the Sydney Cricket Ground when Steve Smith looked nailed on for a hundred. Sure, it was a dot ball, and sure, he was on seven at the time. But there was something about the way he stepped into a straight drive back at Stuart Broad, the feet moving perfectly, the timing crisp with no attempt at power, the line so straight that the bowler bent to scoop up the ball. At the ground where Smith made three international centuries in the previous Australian summer, he looked like Smith looks when he is most switched on. Yet a few hours later, it was Usman Khawaja raising his bat to the cheers of a home crowd. Broad had got the better of Smith for 67, to an uncharacteristic push at a ball that didn’t require one. Khawaja had left the bowling impeccably, defended it resolutely, and taken it on when given the opportunity, in an innings that showed all of the best parts of his game built over the course of his lengthening career. It was the shortcomings in his game that led to Khawaja spending most of the past two and a half years outside the national team, having been dropped after the third Ashes Test at Headingley in 2019. Khawaja had not had a terrible series batting at first drop, making 40 in an important partnership at Edgbaston and 36 in another at Lord’s. But he hadn’t made a compelling score, and then ran into some bad luck or bad timing. Australia pulled the trigger on the opener Cameron Bancroft early, replacing him with Marcus Harris after two Tests. Marnus Labuschagne impressed in the third Test as Smith’s concussion replacement, and had to be retained when Smith returned. Had Australia given Bancroft one more match, he could either have succeeded and kept his spot, or been replaced by Khawaja moving up the order. But with Harris having played only once, selectors had to keep him for a stint that was ultimately worse than Bancroft’s, while Khawaja returned home to a poor Sheffield Shield season and floated out of the reckoning entirely. Since then the reasonable conclusion has been that Khawaja’s time is done. He turned 35 just before Christmas, while Labuschagne has cemented himself in Khawaja’s old spot at No 3, and Will Pucovski emerged as the young tyro most likely to accompany David Warner’s final years at the top. Warner and Smith are also moving deeper into their 30s and overall the Test team has needed to be refreshed. But just as things change quickly in one direction, they can go quickly in the other. Khawaja had a good half-season, Pucovski was ruled out with another concussion injury, Travis Head returned a positive Covid test, and suddenly there was a spot that needed to be filled, and a job that needed to be done. Khawaja is no stranger to solving problems for Australia. During the one-day World Cup in 2019 he was thrown in at No 5 despite never having batted there in List A cricket. In the current match he was asked to bat there despite never having done so in Tests. By this point of his career the details such as where he bats don’t seem to faze Khawaja. He walked in on the first evening with Australia 117 for three, with trouble looming for the team if he failed, and instead made sure that he didn’t. He first batted through to stumps, then through the first session of the next day with Smith, before assuming the senior role once Smith was gone. Through those hours, and his 260 deliveries, his patience and concentration shone through. At times in his career Khawaja’s innings have been ended by lapses in either. After a long first session with an extra half-hour, as he moved beyond his half-century, he opened up his repertoire of strokes: that lavish cover drive, a back cut, the pull. But they were careful selections for the right occasion, not extravagances for their own sake. Through he went past tea, towards sunset, taking Australia to a point where his eventual dismissal for 137 prompted a charge towards a declaration rather than a rearguard. Of course, there is the question of what is next. But Khawaja before this match said that he was filling in for the match in Head’s spot. He is probably right, with the longer-term holder having been anointed and having made his own match-defining century in Brisbane. Head will return for the fifth Test in Hobart. Khawaja’s assignment was short-term and it has been fulfilled immaculately. It doesn’t need to lead to anything else for it to be a triumph in its own right, a player showing that he still has what it takes years after he stopped getting that chance. Beyond Hobart, Australia will play nine Tests in Asia in the coming year. On his last visit in 2018 Khawaja made his masterpiece 140 to save a Test in Dubai. There is every likelihood that more chances will arise, and Khawaja has shown himself ready.Motorists paid £5m more a day for fuel than they should have last month after petrol station owners refused to pass on a drop in wholesale prices to consumers, the RAC has claimed. The motoring organisation called December a “rotten month” despite the price of unleaded petrol falling by 2p per litre, after estimating that petrol retailers should have reduced the cost by 12p. The RAC said that instead of pocketing the traditional long-term margin of 6p a litre, retailers took an average of 16p a litre on petrol and 12.5p on diesel. Across December, the RAC estimates that drivers collectively lost out on £156m, or £5m a day, from the wholesale price cuts not being passed on by retailers. “December was a rotten month for drivers as they were taken advantage of by retailers,” said Simon Williams, fuel spokesperson at the RAC. “In the past when wholesale prices have dropped retailers have always done the right thing – eventually – and reduced their pump prices. “This time they’ve stood strong, taking advantage of all the media talk about ‘higher energy prices’ and banked on the oil price rising again and catching up with their artificially inflated prices, which it now has done.” The Petrol Retailers Association (PRA), the body which represents independent filling stations in the UK, said that the retail fuel market was“extremely competitive” and that drivers were likely to have benefited more than the RAC’s figures indicated. “December’s pump price data is less reliable because it is taken from fuel card transactions, and there have been far fewer of these transactions because of the reduction in business activity between Christmas and New Year,” said Gordon Balmer, executive director of the PRA. “The costs of running petrol stations rose all year, with electricity up 19%, vastly reduced margins from fuel cards as well as increased national insurance and wage inflation.” In September, the PRA chair, Brian Madderson, said he did not “condone profiteering” as petrol prices rocketed and filling stations ran dry due to panic buying. The RAC said in December it cost drivers £6 more to fill up a typical family car than if petrol retailers had stuck to taking the traditional 6p margin and passed savings on to motorists. Diesel vehicle owners paid £4 more than they potentially could have. The RAC said at the end of last year Asda had the cheapest petrol, followed by Sainsbury’s, while motorists in Northern Ireland have the cheapest petrol on average in the UK.French MPs have passed the government’s controversial vaccine pass bill after three days of an angry stop-start debate. The legislation, which requires people to be fully vaccinated to enjoy social, sporting and cultural activities, was approved by a large majority in the assemblée nationale in the early hours of Thursday morning. The bill was passed by 214 votes against 93 and 27 abstentions. It will now be presented to the upper house, the sénat, to be debated on Monday. Ministers had hoped to introduce the controversial measure on 15 January, but the often heated parliamentary debate was suspended twice this week. The law was first held up when MPs voted to go home just before midnight on Monday, then again on Wednesday after a row erupted over language used by the president, Emmanuel Macron’s when he promised to make life difficult for unvaccinated people. While more than 90% of French adults have been fully jabbed, one of the highest rates in the world, the remaining 10% – estimated at around 5 million people, including Brigitte Bardot, the actor turned animal activist, have refused to have the Covid vaccine. Until now they have been able to use a passe sanitaire (health pass) that required either vaccination, recovery from Covid or a negative Covid test for everyone over the age of 12 to access restaurants, bars, museums, theatres and other public places. In October, the government put an end to free Covid tests for unvaccinated people, but the new legislation goes a step further in requiring people to be fully vaccinated to access such places. Macron said the measure was intended to coerce vaccine-hesitant people to get inoculated by further restricting their everyday activities. The law also introduces hefty fines and prison sentences for anyone caught using or supplying fake vaccine passes and for establishments that fail properly to check visitors’ vaccine status. The pass will not be required for shops or medical facilities such as hospitals and clinics. Vaccination is currently compulsory only for health workers, but the new law would extend this to those who work in venues where they are in contact with the public. Macron, who is expected to be re-elected in April, has ruled out making the vaccine obligatory for everyone. About 66,000 people had their first vaccine on Wednesday after the president’s controversial comments, the highest number in 24 hours since the beginning of October. The prime minister, Jean Castex, told the French news and weather channel BFMTV he hoped the vaccine pass could come into force on 15 January as originally planned and described the Covid situation in France as “extremely worrying”. Castex defended Macron’s controversial use of the verb “emmerder” (widely translated as “piss off”) in his vow to put pressure on those French people who refused to be vaccinated, saying the former president, Georges Pompidou, had used the same word. Macron also angered critics by calling unvaccinated people irresponsible, adding: “Someone irresponsible is not a citizen.” “Let’s not play with words, of course the non vaccinated are still [French] citizens,” Castex said. “What the president wanted to say is that when you are a citizen of our beautiful republic, you have rights, but also duties. It’s called civic-mindedness, it’s called a sense of responsibility.” On Thursday, it was revealed Bardot was among those facing Macron’s ire: the 87-year-old actor said she had not been vaccinated as she was “allergic to all chemical substances”.There were cheers from the public gallery of Bristol crown court when the verdicts of not guilty were returned. Eighteen months after Bristol’s now infamous statue of the slave trader Edward Colston was sent crashing to the pavement, the four young people who had been charged with criminal damage were acquitted. The strategy that the prosecution appears to have adopted – in a case that some now argue should never have been brought to trial – seemed to centre on asking that the jury be blind to history. Who the statue venerated, they argued, was irrelevant. This, they claimed, was an open-and-shut case of criminal damage, one in which the defendants did not even deny their role in the toppling of the statue or, in one case, helping to roll it to Bristol harbourside, from where it was cast into the water. The contention of the prosecution was that the crimes of Edward Colston, shareholder and ultimately deputy governor of the Royal African Company, the most prolific slave-trading entity in British history, should simply be set aside. That the statue depicted a man whose wealth was based on the enslavement of 84,000 men, women and children was immaterial. As was the fact that he was complicit in the deaths of 19,000 of them, who died, squirming in agony, chained to the decks of the Royal African Company’s slave ships. That should be of no concern to the jury. Their suffering, their deaths, their very existence was irrelevant to the issue at hand. In adopting such a strategy the prosecution was merely asking the jury to occupy the same stance of wilful, moral blindness that Colston’s defenders have occupied for decades. That strategy failed because the lawyers defending the so-called Colston Four were able, through their own legal arguments and the striking eloquence of the four young defendants, to place history at the centre of this trial. In this I played a small part, appearing as an expert witness for the defence. They successfully demonstrated that the real offenders were not the Colston Four, but the city of Bristol and those who have done everything in their power to burnish the reputation of a mass murderer. The keepers of Colston’s legacy had rendered his historic crimes live and present through the erection of a statue to him. By allowing that edifice to stand for 125 years, even as Bristol became home to thousands of black people whose ancestors had been victims of the trade that the Royal African Company had pioneered, they had, so argued the defence, permitted the statue to become an “indecent display”. Having established these arguments Liam Walker QC, representing Sage Willoughby, the youngest of the defendants, argued that the Colston Four “were on the right side of history”. Jurors were invited to join them there. In the aftermath of this verdict those who now have questions to answer are Colston’s defenders. In particular the Society of Merchant Venturers, a grouping that for decades dismissed and discounted appeals for the statue to be removed or contextualised. Its strategy of muddying waters and maintaining the status quo fostered indecision and inaction. Decades of inertia were brought to an end in just under three hours – the time it took for the jury to arrive at its verdict. The merchant elite of late Victorian Bristol who erected the statue of Colston, many of them members of the Merchant Venturers, did so in the full knowledge that the man they sought to elevate to civic sainthood had been a trader in human flesh. The details of his grim career had been obscured but not obliterated. Despite what they knew they expanded the bizarre cult of rituals, religious services and exclusive dinners that had been built around him, but their most public triumph was the erection of the statue. To validate the imposition of the cult of Colston on to the wider city they falsely implied that the statue had been paid for through popular, public subscription. They did all of this confident in the belief that no one would ever question their decisions, as no one would ever come to care about Colston’s crimes or his victims. Their confidence sprang from their collective inability to envisage a future moment in which the Africans who had perished in the bellies of the Royal African Company’s ships, or on the plantations of Barbados or Jamaica, would matter to anyone in Bristol or beyond. The moment they were unable to conceive of is now. The generation for whom the lives of Colston’s victims matter deeply is the generation from whom the four defendants in this case were drawn. In the months since the murder of George Floyd millions of people across the world have examined their nations’ official histories, and the history lessons they were taught at school. They have discovered missing chapters, half-truths and lost connections between the crimes of then and the inequalities of now. As Rhian Graham, one of the Colston Four, noted in the impromptu speech she made from the pavement outside court, the dethronement of Colston was not a stand-alone event, but part of a global movement. I am writing this from Covid isolation in a hotel on the southern coast of Barbados. From my window I can see the approaches to the island, the sea lanes along which the ships of the Atlantic slave trade once passed, before docking to unload their human cargoes. To the north of me is a place called Speightstown, its nickname in the 18th century was “Little Bristol”, so firmly was it connected to the slave traders and sugar merchants of that English city 4,000 miles away. The global shift of consciousness that inspired the toppling of Colston was also a factor in the decision made by the people of this island to break decisively away from that history and become a republic. This shift in consciousness, translated into action across the world by the young, will be strengthened by this verdict; and by the very fact that when made aware of long obscured historical and moral truths, an English jury chose to placeitself – and the city of Bristol – on the right side of history. David Olusoga is a historian and broadcasterIt was just after sunrise on New Year’s Eve when climate scientist Daniel Swain paused outside his home in Boulder county, Colorado. Snow was beginning to fall and a strong acrid smell – “like burned plastic”, Swain said – hung on the newly chilled breeze. A fast-moving wildfire had torn through the area the day before, leaving devastation in its wake. Driven by winds of more than 100mph, what started as a small brush fire swiftly consumed nearly 1,000 homes within 24 hours. While relatively small in size – just 6,000 acres – the wildfire was the most destructive in Colorado’s history, a feat that speaks to the growing danger of what Swain calls the “urban fire storm”. Areas where suburban sprawl meets landscapes primed by drought and other climate conditions to burn – known as the wildland urban interface (WUI) – are growing, posing new threats in places once considered safe from wildfire. The Colorado fire engulfed neighborhoods and commercial districts alike, forcing 35,000 people to flee their homes. It torched a Target, a Tesla dealership, and a Costco, not long after unsuspecting Sunday shoppers were evacuated. Two people are still missing. “The wildland urban interface extends over a far broader area than many folks realize – and it is also dynamic,” Swain said. “Most of the time it is true that these areas are safe from wildfire but given conditionally extreme wind conditions and extreme drought, they became part of that interface.” That the fire also happened in December, a time once considered well outside of fire season, has also raised alarm. “It was strange to have the snow start falling,” Swain said, “and to have that smell of the remnants of almost 1,000 homes wafting through the air.” The area had had one of its warmest winters. This year, the 30in of snowfall Boulder typically gets by December failed to appear. The region saw just 1.6in of precipitation since the beginning of August. “That’s natural variability,” atmospheric scientist Matthew Cappucci noted on Twitter, “but in warmer world, it’s easy to evaporate more of what little water falls.” When the fire ignited, drought levels in the area were classified as “extreme” by the US Drought Monitor. It’s long been clear that what’s considered “fire season” is stretching longer, covering more months of the year. And, while that increases the number of days when a fire could start it also brings conditions in line with winter weather patterns – like dry wind – that vastly increase the danger. Strong gusts aren’t unusual in Colorado, especially in the Boulder area, but without snow and rain to dampen the risks, disaster was able to strike. “A lot of these events – from fires to mudslides – are just a consequence of extreme events many months in the making,” said Andrew Hoell, a meteorologist for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s physical sciences laboratory, noting the compounding effect drought and heat has had on fires. Record-low precipitation was intensified by record-high temperatures. It’s a recipe for disaster, and one that Hoell is familiar with. “I am used to talking about extreme events,” he said. But, based in Boulder, this one hit close to home. His house was spared, but many in his community, both colleagues and friends, lost their homes. “It always gets you down. But when it’s your friends, your neighborhood, your community – it is a whole different ball game.” Thousands without homes are searching through the rubble and trying to put back the pieces. Recovery is expected to take years. The cause of this blaze is still under investigation. The Boulder county sheriff, Joe Pelle, told reporters that downed power lines, which were initially suspected as the ignition source, have been ruled out. Most fires are still started by people, intentionally or not, and with more people living in high-risk areas, the dangers only continue to mount. “What the science said is that growth is occurring faster in the wildland urban interface than anywhere else” said Carrie Berger, fire program manager of the forestry &amp; natural resources extension fire program at Oregon State University. “That’s where people are moving most rapidly.” A third of US homes currently stand in the WUI and that number is only going to grow as the construction march into the wildland continues, and as higher temperatures increase the boundaries of burnable land. That’s why scientists and disaster experts are pushing for a shift in focus from suppression to preparation. “We live in a fire landscape,” Berger said. “I don’t think there’s any place that is safe from wildfire.” She emphasized the need for a community approach to fire safety, complete with home hardening techniques like reducing vegetation that brushes up to buildings, crafting and coordinating plans, and using fire-resistant building materials. Climate scientist Daniel Swain echoed her calls. While this disaster hit close to home, he emphasized that the next one could occur anywhere. “This is not a unique problem to Boulder county. This is not a unique problem to Colorado. This is not even a unique problem to the American west – and I think this comes at a surprise to most people,” he said. As temperatures rise and aridification spreads into other landscapes, big blazes could erupt out of the forested areas in the upper midwest. They could spread through Florida, burn in Georgia, or blacken suburban New Jersey the way they do now in California and Colorado. “All of a sudden you have conditions that really aren’t all that different from what they would be like in the west,” Swain says. “That might make things possible that were simply impossible before.”A ghost orchid that grows in complete darkness, an insect-trapping tobacco plant and an “exploding firework” flower are among the new species named by scientists in the last year. The species range from a voodoo lily from Cameroon to a rare tooth fungus unearthed near London, UK. A new tree from the ylang-ylang family is the first to be named in 2022 and is being named after the actor and environmentalist Leonardo DiCaprio. He campaigned to revoke a logging concession which threatened the African tree, which features glossy yellow flowers on its trunk. The highlighted plants are among the 205 new species named in 2021 by scientists from the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, and their collaborators around the world. All are vital parts of the planet’s biodiversity and some may provide food and medicine. However, several are already extinct in the wild and many threatened by the destruction of forests, expanding palm oil plantations and mining. There are 400,000 named plant species and two in five are threatened with extinction. The scientists said it was a race against time to identify new plants before they disappeared for ever. In total, scientists across the world have named about 2,000 new plant species each year for at least a decade. “It’s almost bewildering that we’re still discovering so many,” said Dr Martin Cheek, at RBG Kew. “But now is our last chance to find unknown species, name them and hopefully protect them before they become globally extinct.” The new ghost orchid is one of 16 new orchids from dense and remote forests in Madagascar. It was named Didymoplexis stella-silvae by Kew’s Johan Hermans, meaning “star of the forest” as it grows in complete darkness and has star-like flowers. It has no leaves or chlorophyll for photosynthesis and gets all its nutrients in symbiosis with underground fungi. The flower only pokes through the forest-floor humus for a day to attract pollinators, which may be ants. Three of the new orchids are already thought to be extinct in the wild due to destruction of their forest homes, including one tree-dwelling species that was probably eradicated due to the demand for geranium oil used in aromatherapy. “Sadly, Madagascar’s many unique plants are under threat from deforestation and droughts, floods, and fires caused by climate change,” said Hermans. “It really is a race against time.” The unusual tobacco plant was among seven new species found near a truck stop in Western Australia and is covered in sticky glands that trap and kill insects, most likely as a defensive measure. “The arid parts of Australia, which include most of the continent, have been thought of as almost barren, but in recent years these poorly studied areas have yielded many new and unusual species,” said Prof Mark Chase, at RBG Kew. The tropics are known hotspots for biodiversity and a spectacular new species of primrose found in Borneo was named Ardisia pyrotechnica because its shower of white flowers resembles exploding fireworks. However, it is already assessed as critically endangered, as only a few plants have been found in two locations and it is under threat from palm oil plantations. “Who knows how many thousands of plant species it will be revealed in future to have likely become extinct due to palm oil plantations,” said Cheek. “It’s sickening.” The new pink voodoo lily has a 30cm-tall flower spike and was found in a small corner of the vast Ebo Forest of Cameroon. The tree named after Di Caprio was also found in the Ebo Forest. But despite the cancelling of logging permits in August 2020 by the president of Cameroon, Uvariopsis dicaprio remains critically endangered because its habitat remains unprotected from potential future logging. The new fungus was first found in the UK’s Windsor Great Park under a sweet chestnut tree in 2008, but not named until now as DNA analysis of a suite of species had to be completed together. It is one of a group of unusual fungi that form mushrooms with elongated teeth under their caps, rather than gills, and are becoming rarer due to nitrogen pollution from agriculture. Another new species, a blue-berried bush from the coffee family found in Borneo, took even longer to be scientifically named. It was first seen by scientists in a painting by the eminent botanical artist Marianne North, made in 1876 during a stay by the Sarawak river. One new species was discovered not in the wild, but in the laboratory. The microscopic fungus was found lurking in a wild banana seed from Vietnam kept at Kew’s Millennium Seed Bank in Sussex. Fusarium chuoi, which has a coral colour and a velvety texture, is an “endophyte”, a fungus that lives inside a plant without causing it any visible harm. Distinguishing these from pathogenic fungi is crucial for protecting plant health, the scientists said. Among the other new species highlighted were a periwinkle from the Andean valleys in Bolivia, which has kiwi-like fruits that are edible when roasted and may also have medicinal properties and five pretty Cape primroses from the Democratic Republic of the Congo that are threatened by copper mining. “So many of our medicines come directly from plants, or are inspired by compounds that come out of plants,” said Cheek. “If we make species extinct before we can even look at what chemicals are inside them, isn’t that bonkers?” • The main photo on this article was changed on 7 January 2022. An earlier photo of Aerangis bovicornu incorrectly said it was the ‘ghost’ orchid; it is one of the other 16 new orchids from Madagascar named in 2021.Climbing, says Anna Fleming, is “a form of dance”, an intensely physical ballet between self and rock. This book charts her stony path to mastering the craft of traditional climbing, from being a “terrified novice” to a “competent leader”. Unlike sport climbing, where bolts are left in the rock for others to use, traditional climbing involves a lead climber who inserts metalware into cracks in the rock, to which safety ropes are attached. These are then collected by the climber’s partner. Leading, Fleming admits, used to terrify her. But what she describes as the “electrifying charge” of risk is an essential part of learning to climb. Falling and being caught by the rope is a necessary experience. Climbing the Cuillin on Skye in her early 20s, she was saved by her rope from “the brink of a mortal abyss” when a large block she caught hold of came loose. “I walked away feeling deeply humbled, carrying an enhanced respect for the gravity of these heightened places,” she writes. Only when she returned four years later to complete the route did she feel that her “mountain apprenticeship” had been truly served. As an undergraduate she began climbing indoors: “On the wall I became a network of muscles, limbs, senses, nerves, cells and neurons; an active, thinking, sensing being.” Climbing gave her “a new map of my body”. In the early 2000s, a woman could find herself alone among men on an indoor climbing wall. Now they are full of women and girls, and the climbing community feels different: “It seems like a quiet revolution has happened in the last 10 years.” Rock climbing was a different challenge, with its changeable conditions and the need for absolute attention. It demanded an intense focus on the world at her fingertips – cracks, surface texture, flakes of rock – to find a route to the top. In this heightened state of awareness, “thousands of years vanish and I hear the acute sensitivity of my ancestors”. But at the summit a new perspective opens up, revealing distant landscapes and wildlife. These two viewpoints – the micro and the macro – offer a transformative sense of one’s place in the scheme of things. For Fleming, climbing is not about “reducing huge landscapes and environments to peaks that must be conquered”. It’s a more personal and profound experience, offering “a direct route into the spellbinding potency of place”. Nan Shepherd described “walking out of my body and into the mountain”. Fleming, too, finds that while climbing, the self disappears, “lost to movement and environment”. She describes how the “physical contact and bodily perception” of climbing offers her both a “journey into the rock” and a profound connectedness to the landscape, an existential rootedness in nature that echoes the current writing of Elizabeth-Jane Burnett and Robin Wall Kimmerer. Fleming has written a wonderfully intimate account of climbing, filled with the rough texture of rocks and the hard-won elation of reaching for the skies. This is a book about geology and place, selfhood and nature – a rich celebration of “stony matter” and our relationship to it across the ages. • Time on Rock: A Climber’s Route into the Mountains is published by Canongate (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Winning tip: Staircase of light, Berlin On a trip to the Urban Nation Museum in Berlin in 2018 I could not have foreseen the restrictions on travel that were to come. Looking through the photographs, I see that my shot of the staircase of coloured light “to describe what we take for granted” could not have been more apt. The museum is a gallery of contemporary street art that extends into the surrounding streets. It’s fantastic for photographers to visit as the works are so creative and inspiring, and photography is welcomed inside the gallery. Entry is free and it’s open again. Free entry, open Tues-Sun, urban-nation.com Jude Bytheway SUPrise in Barcelona If you want to avoid the hustle and bustle of the beautiful Barcelona city, join “supsuprise” at 5.30am for a stunning sunrise. Bruno, a local resident, runs morning sessions before his day job and offers a wonderful way to start the day. I’ve done it four times and it still amazes me each time I’ve watched the sun rise over the warm waters. An unforgettable experience. Katy Dixon A saunter in Sutherland I took this photograph looking ahead at the Bealach na h-Uidhe pass as we walked from Inchnadamph en route to Glencoul bothy and back again. We had hiked this path as part of the Cape Wrath trail several years ago, in glorious sunshine, and we never thought it possible to get the same incredible conditions again. Yet we did! In the midst of this ongoing pandemic we were reacquainted with space, peace and the most incredible views – exactly what we needed, two humans and our two gorgeous rescue dogs out in the wilds of beautiful Scotland. It was magical. Sarah Lapping it up in Llandudno Llandudno has it all for a visit: seaside attractions, brilliant walks (uphill) and cycle paths (flat) along the seafront. Every year we visit Llandudno to celebrate my birthday by marching over the Great Orme headland. Orme is my mother’s family name and 5 June is also Saint Tudno’s day at the lovely church on the Orme (Saint Tudno is the patron saint of Llandudno). Good to follow with Fish Tram Chips for a delightful chippy dinner. We often stay at the Empire Hotel (doubles from £65 room only) which makes a brilliant contribution to the celebration, with lovely rooms and perfect breakfasts. Dining at Dylan’s, in the magnificent Grade-II listed former Washington Hotel building on the promenade is a lovely way to finish the day. Alison A trek and a trot in Mongolia In 2015 I took a two-week solo trip to Mongolia. While there I went on seven-day horse group trek with Stepperiders. It was under £500 for the week. Having just been through a difficult breakup it was enormously cathartic galloping over the steppe with new friends, camping by night, and enjoying homecooked food every day. I truly felt as if I was away from it all. Staying in Ulaanbaatar itself was safe, affordable and friendly. I met so many female solo travellers on my trip too, some of whom I’m still in touch with. I am not someone who normally travels alone, but I came back feeling very much empowered by it. Nadia Zuberi-Clow Peak Patagonia This is Mount Fitz Roy, in the southern Andes. We started our trip at El Chalten, a frontier town full of walkers and climbers; beyond that there is only the mountains then the Southern Patagonian Icefield, stretching to the Pacific via Bernardo O’Higgins and Torres del Paine national parks. The eternal winds blowing off the ice field mean bad weather is frequent, and we had prepared for the possibility that in our three-day stay we might not be able to see and do anything much. But we got lucky. Pictured is our first view of the mountains, on the long drive across the Argentinian steppe. It perhaps captures a bit of our awe and excitement, but not the fierce wind that made simply getting out of the car challenging. And the next two days’ walking were magnificent. Marian Michie A storm in the Atacama, Chile And we thought it never rained in Atacama. Marian isn’t posing in this picture, in the Tebenquiche nature reserve near San Pedro de Atacama. She had just bought the white hat – for about £5 – to protect her from the endless searing desert sun. Made of paper, it was not suited to the mother of all thunderstorms approaching. Marian had been trying to photograph lightning, unsuccessfully as it happened. The generally apocalyptic air suited the times – it was March 2020, Covid was sweeping the globe, and the locals were despondent about the total collapse of the tourist trade. All the more reason to return one day, spend freely, and see the heat haze shimmering over the sun-baked salt flats of Atacama. John Main Megalith rays, Lewis, Outer Hebrides I travelled with two camera buddies, exploring the Outer Hebrides. We chose late November to avoid midges and to hopefully have the place to ourselves. The Callanish standing stones are a world-famous series of megaliths on the west coast of the Isle of Lewis. We arrived before dawn to plan our position and to set up our tripods and cameras. I ensured there were visible gaps in the stones before waiting patiently for a sunburst that I could only dream about capturing. I waited and I was rewarded. Diane Le Count Desert varnish, Namibia This photo brings back memories of an amazing trip, exploring and camping in the deserts of Namibia. To some, this photo is empty, but not to us. This at least 55-million-year-old desert is the oldest in the world, and the landscape narrates its past. The shine on boulders is desert varnish: they’re polished by centuries of sand-laden wind. Distant mountains are inscribed with stories from pre-historic bushmen. A barely perceptible area of green reveals where the Huab river occasionally flows, and in which we watched a herd of elephants. The photo depicts our love affair with the abundance of deserts. Frances Valdes Bath time for Tara, India Meeting Tara, the heroine of Mark Shand’s epic tale Travels on My Elephant, was an unforgettable experience. Tara is a resident at Kipling Camp, in Madhya Pradesh’s Kanha national park. We followed her and her two mahouts, Lavkush and Diva, on their daily 20-minute walk to the river, amazed at how quickly she walked for someone of her size. Nearing the water, she raced ahead and eventually we heard a huge splash and saw ripples. After luxuriating in the water, Tara was led to a shallow section where we had fun scrubbing her with stones before being rewarded with a trunk shower. Roy MessengerA new year! 2022! A chance for a new beginning! A chance to put it all behind you! Everything is renewed! But not here at the Thursday quiz, where it is the same old gubbins as ever, or as one excited commentator put it last week: “Sheesh Martin, the Sparks shoehorn? Again?” Ahead of you lie 15 topical and general knowledge questions, sprinkled with a generous helping of Ron from Sparks, a hidden Doctor Who reference, the wonderful Kate Bush and all your favourites. It is just for fun and there are no prizes, but let us know how you get on in the comments. The Thursday quiz, No 37 If you do think there has been an egregious error in one of the questions or answers, please feel free to email martin.belam@theguardian.com but remember, the quiz master’s word is always final, and his new year resolution was to ignore all his work emails.Nicolas Cage has said actors need to be able to use a gun as it is “part of the job”, in comments responding to the fatal shooting on the set of Rust in which cinematographer Halyna Hutchins was killed. Cage was speaking as part of a wide-ranging roundtable discussion for the Hollywood Reporter with fellow actors including Peter Dinklage, Jonathan Majors and Andrew Garfield. On being asked whether guns should be banned from film sets in the wake of the Rust shooting, Cage responded by saying that “movie stars” needed to know how to perform certain activities that may be outside the experience of workaday actors. “You need to know how to fight. You’re going to do fight scenes. You need to know how to ride a motorcycle. You need to know how to use a stick shift and drive sports cars, and you do need to know how to use a gun. You do. You need to take the time to know what the procedure is. Those are part of the job profiles.” Cage also added that these can overlap with the role of a stunt performer, in a mutually beneficial way. “The stunt man and the movie star are two jobs that coexist. Every stunt man needs to be a movie star, and every movie star needs to be a stunt man.” Hutchins died, and director Joel Souza was wounded, on the Rust set in October 2021, after a live round was discharged from a gun carried by actor Alec Baldwin, as Baldwin was rehearsing for a scene. Police investigations into the incident are ongoing.After thousands of posts appeared for weeks on a website called TheDonald.win detailing plans for the 6 January attack on the Capitol, including how to form a “wall of death” to force police to abandon defensive positions; after Gen Mark Milley, chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, warned his senior aides of “a Reichstag moment” like the 1933 burning of the German parliament that Hitler used to seize dictatorial power; after insurrectionists smashed several ground floor windows of the Capitol, the only ones out of 658 they somehow knew were not reinforced, that allowed rioters to pour inside; after marching to the chamber of the House chanting “Hang Mike Pence!”; after pounding on the locked doors; and as the Capitol police led members in a run through the tunnels under the Capitol for safe passage to the Longworth Building, Congressman Jody Hice, a Republican of Georgia, raced by a Democratic colleague, who told me Hice was screaming into his phone: “You screwed it up, y’all screwed it all up!” (Hice has denied the incident occurred, but the Democratic congressman stands by his account.) Hice, an evangelical minister, professor of preaching at a Southern Baptist seminary, and radio talkshow host before his election in 2014, has notably declared that freedom of religion should not apply to Muslims and that the Sandy Hook massacre of 26 people at an elementary school by a deranged shooter occurred because liberals were “kicking God out of the public square”. He was tasked to present a challenge to Georgia’s electors before the joint congressional session convened on 6 January to certify the electoral college victory of Joe Biden. Hice performed his assignment as part of the far-rightwing Republican faction, the Freedom Caucus, directed by Congressman Jim Jordan, of Ohio, who was in constant touch that day with Mark Meadows, the Trump chief of staff and former Freedom Caucus member, and a watchful Trump himself. Just as the violent insurrection launched, and paramilitary groups spearheaded medieval style hand-to-hand combat against the police and burst into the Capitol, Hice posted on Instagram a photo of himself headed into the House chamber, with the caption, “This is our 1776 moment.” To whom was Hice shouting that “y’all” had screwed it all up? It seems likely it was Meadows. And what had they screwed up? They had screwed up the coup that led to the insurrection. The insurrection was not the coup itself. It was staged as the coup was failing. The insurrection and the coup were distinct, but the insurrection emerged from the coup. It has been a common conceptual error to consider the insurrection alone to be the coup. The coup, however, was an elaborate plot developed over months to claim that the votes in the key swing states were fraudulent, for Mike Pence as the presiding officer of the joint session of the Congress to declare on that basis that the certification of the presidential election on the constitutionally mandated date could not be done, to force that day to pass into a twilight zone of irresolution, for House Republicans to hold the floor brandishing the endless claims of fraud, to move the decision to the safe harbor of the House of Representatives, voting by states, with a majority of 26 controlled by the Republican party, to deny both the popular vote and the electoral college vote to retain Trump in office, for protests to breakout at federal buildings, and for the president to invoke the Insurrection Act to impose law and order. Presumably, any gesture to forestall the coup by the joint chiefs would be communicated at once to Trump from his agent, Kash Patel, a former aide to far-right representative Devin Nunes), sworn enemy of the “Deep State”, embedded as chief of staff to the acting secretary of defense, and presidential orders would be issued to countermand. The rally on 6 January – “will be wild”, Trump promised – was a last-ditch attempt to intimidate the vice-president with the threat of violence into fulfilling his indispensable role in the coup, to lend support to the Republicans objecting to certification, and to delay the proceedings into a constitutional no man’s land. The insurrection may also have been intended to provide a pretext for precipitating clashes with anti-Trump demonstrators, following the example of the street violence and multiple knife stabbings perpetrated in Washington by the neo-Nazi Proud Boys chanting “1776” on 12 December, and which would then be an excuse for invoking the Insurrection Act. In the criminal contempt citation of Meadows for his refusal to testify before the select committee investigating the US Capitol attack, the committee noted that Meadows sent an email the day before the assault to an unnamed individual “that the national guard would be present to ‘protect pro-Trump people’ and that many more would be available on standby”. From whom would “pro-Trump people” be protected? In the midst of the attack, the House minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, managed to reach a preoccupied Trump, who was riveted viewing the unfolding chaos on television at the White House, closely monitoring whether the coup would finally succeed, taking phone calls from Jim Jordan and a host of collaborators, and fending off urgent pleas to call it off from his daughter Ivanka. Trump’s first reply to McCarthy was to repeat “the falsehood that it was antifa that had breached the Capitol”, according to the Republican representative Jaime Herrera Beutler. McCarthy argued: “It’s not Antifa, it’s Maga. I know. I was there.” “Well, Kevin,” said Trump, “I guess these people are more upset about the election than you are.” “Who the fuck do you think you are talking to?” McCarthy inquired in an uncharacteristic display of testosterone that soon was replaced with his regular order of servility before Trump and Jordan. The absence of antifa, and McCarthy’s refusal in the heat of the moment to lend credence to the phantom menace, may have condemned any false-flag thought of invoking the Insurrection Act. Meanwhile, the bayonet-ready national guard idly awaited orders for hours to quell the actual insurrection. The coup was thwarted by the justice department’s rejection of Trump’s strong-arm tactics, the Pentagon’s denunciation of any hint of imposing martial law, the rebuff by state election officials to Trump’s claims of fraud, and, finally, Pence’s refusal to utter his scripted lines. At the 6 January rally, Trump said: “I hope Mike is going to do the right thing. I hope so. I hope so. Because if Mike Pence does the right thing, we win the election.” But Pence had already stated that he would do no such thing. Then, Trump said: “And if you don’t fight like hell, you’re not going to have a country any more … So, we’re going to, we’re going to walk down Pennsylvania Avenue. I love Pennsylvania Avenue. And we’re going to the Capitol …” The insurrection was on. The coup was hardly Trump’s full-blown brainchild. It was packaged for him. It was adapted, enhanced and intensified from longstanding Republican strategies for voter suppression. The coup was a variation on the theme from a well-worn playbook. Trump eagerly grasped for the plan handed to him. More than a year before the election of 2020, in August 2019, conservative operatives in closely connected rightwing organizations began preparing a strategy for disputing election results. A “Political Process Working Group” focused on “election law and ballot integrity” was launched by Lisa Nelson, the CEO of the American Legislative Exchange Council (Alec), heavily funded by the Koch brothers’ dark money syndicate, the Donors Trust. Nelson is also a member of the secretive Council on National Policy (CNP), composed of more than 400 rightwing Republican leaders, a roster that includes Ginni Thomas, the ubiquitous rightwing zealot and wife of supreme court justice Clarence Thomas, and Leonard Leo, vice-president of the conservative Federalist Society and the Judicial Crisis Network, “a $250m dark money operation” to pack the federal courts and deny Democratic appointments to the bench, according to the Democratic senator Sheldon Whitehouse. The investigative reporter Anne Nelson, in her book Shadow Network: Media, Money, and the Secret Hub of the Radical Right, describes the CNP as a nexus of “the manpower and media of the Christian right with the finances of western plutocrats and the strategy of rightwing Republican political operatives”. A board member of the CNP, Cleta Mitchell, a lawyer at the center of a host of rightwing groups, assumed control over the Alec-originated project and moved it forward. She is also a board member of the Bradley Foundation, which is a major funder of conservative organizations, including Alec and the CNP. Most importantly, she has directed the Bradley Foundation to serve as the chief funder of a group of which she is chairman, the Public Interest Legal Foundation (Pilf), a principal conservative organization seeking to purge voter rolls of minorities and immigrants, file suits that accuse local election officials of “fraud”, and attempt to overturn election results. At a February 2020 meeting of the CNP devoted to election tactics, the Pilf president, J Christian Adams, advised: “Be not afraid of the accusations that you’re a voter suppressor, you’re a racist and so forth.” Mitchell was instrumental in devising the blueprint for the coup. On 10 December 2020, 65 leading members of the CNP signed a succinct step-by-step summary of the completely elaborated plot that went little noticed except on the coup-friendly rightwing website Gateway Pundit: The evidence overwhelmingly shows officials in key battleground states – as the result of a coordinated pressure campaign by Democrats and allied groups – violated the constitution, state and federal law in changing mail-in voting rules that resulted in unlawful and invalid certifications of Biden victories. There is no doubt President Donald J Trump is the lawful winner of the presidential election. Joe Biden is not president-elect. Accordingly, state legislatures in the battleground states of Pennsylvania, Arizona, Georgia, Wisconsin, Nevada and Michigan should exercise their plenary power under the constitution and appoint clean slates of electors to the electoral college to support President Trump. Similarly, both the House and Senate should accept only these clean electoral college slates and object to and reject any competing slates in favor of Vice-President Biden from these states. Conservative leaders and groups should begin mobilizing immediately to contact their state legislators, as well as their representatives in the House and Senate, to demand that clean slates of electors be appointed in the manner laid out in the US constitution.” Mitchell was by then a Trump campaign legal adviser, with direct access to Trump and working on the Georgia challenge to the results. The Trump campaign had filed a lawsuit a week earlier, on 4 December, claiming there were “literally tens of thousands of illegal votes”. On 30 December she sent the petition to Meadows with 1,800 pages of exhibits of supposed fraud, which Meadows promptly forwarded to the acting attorney general, Jeffrey Rosen, who was under tremendous pressure from Trump to intervene on his behalf to throw out the election results. “Pure insanity,” the acting deputy attorney general, Richard Donoghue, told Rosen. Meadows pressured Rosen again on 1 January. “Can you believe this?” Rosen wrote Donoghue. “I am not going to respond …” The next day, Trump called the Georgia secretary of state, Brad Raffensperger, a Republican, to instruct him to “find 11,780 votes, which is one more than [the vote deficit] we have, because we won the state”. Cleta Mitchell was on the call with Trump. “Well, Cleta, how do you respond to that? Maybe you tell me?” asked Trump. She accused Raffensperger of withholding records that would prove there were more than 20,000 fraudulent votes and rigged voting machines. “All we have to do, Cleta, is find 11,000-plus votes,” said Trump. On 4 January, Trump brought Pence to the Oval Office to be pressured not to certify the results by a former Chapman University law professor, John Eastman, who was also a director of the Pilf that Mitchell chaired, and had been recruited to play professor to the slow-learning Pence, the Pygmalion of the putsch. Eastman had written a memo, “January 6 scenario”, laying out precisely how Pence should conduct the stoppage of the electoral college count to “create a stalemate that would give the state legislatures more time to weigh in to formally support the alternate slate of electors …” Eastman’s memo filled in stage directions for Pence that followed the well-developed coup plot. All Pence had to do was repeat the lines he was given: the rain in Spain stays mainly on the plain. His general counsel, Greg Jacob, however, informed him that if he obeyed Trump he would “betray his oath to uphold our laws and the constitution of the United States. That was a fool’s errand.” Trump electors in the swing states had already met on 14 December to prepare to usurp the Biden ones. That day Trump summoned William Barr to the White House to demand his support for claims that the election returns in the swing states were fraudulent. Barr would have undoubtedly been aware of the meeting of the Trump electors rehearsing their part in the coup. Long having done Trump’s bidding from consciously lying about the Mueller report on Russian interference in the 2016 election to aid Trump onward, he now reached a line he would not cross and told Trump that his assertions of fraud were “bullshit”. And then he resigned. He would have no part of the coup. In came Rosen, who was subjected to rounds of coercion. When Mitchell’s role was disclosed, the Washington law firm of Foley &amp; Lardner where she was a partner forced her to resign on 5 January, the day before the insurrection. She had neglected to tell her partners of her work for Trump. The Senate judiciary committee, in its report, released on 7 October 2021, Subverting Justice: How the Former President and His Allies Pressured DoJ to Overturn the 2020 Election, recommended that Mitchell’s activities “warrant further investigation”. The sweeping nature of the coup, involving Republican operatives, major Republican donors, organizations and members of the Congress is starkly laid out in documents the House investigating committee has obtained under subpoena. The production of documents from Meadows revealed a 38-slide PowerPoint presentation entitled Options for 6 JAN, prepared by Phil Waldron, a retired army colonel expert in psychological warfare and proliferator of conspiracy theories who worked with Trump’s lawyers. Waldron said he spoke with Meadows “maybe eight to 10 times” and briefed members of Congress. Besides reiterating the basic elements of the coup – “VP Pence rejects the electors” – Waldron added that China and Venezuela had “INFLUENCE and CONTROL over US Voting infrastructure in at least 28 States”. He urged that all electronic ballots be declared “invalid” and that Trump should “Declare National Security Emergency”. Bernard Kerik, working with Trump’s attorney Rudy Giuliani to spin fantasies of fraud, turned over to the House committee under subpoena a document, Strategic Communications Plan, “to educate the public on the fraud numbers” and “to disregard the fraudulent vote count and certify the duly-elected President Trump”. Replete with fallacious assertions (“Fulton County, GA, video of suitcases of fraudulent ballots”), it detailed the extensive reach of the “big lie” campaign, encompassing “Identified Legislative Leaders in each swing state”, legal teams in the key states, and ranked social media influencers to spread the message: “YOU CANNOT LET AMERICA ITSELF BE STOLEN BY CRIMINALS.” Kerik, a convicted felon, guilty of numerous crimes from tax fraud to lying under oath, rose from Giuliani’s driver to New York City police commissioner and incredibly the minister of the interior of Iraq, before serving a four-year sentence in Rikers Island jail. Like convicted felons Mike Flynn and Roger Stone – and Steve Bannon, whose trial for various felonies was ended with a preemptive pardon before a judgment – he was granted a pardon by Trump that allowed him to participate in the coup with impunity. Though under subpoena, Kerik refused to turn over to the House committee a document entitled “DRAFT LETTER FROM POTUS TO SEIZE EVIDENCE IN THE INTEREST OF NATIONAL SECURITY FOR THE 2020 ELECTIONS”. The date on Kerik’s letter, 17 December 2020, was the day that former general Mike Flynn, Trump’s disgraced national security adviser, gave an interview to the far-right Newsmax calling on Trump to “seize every single one” of the voting machines “around the country”, and “take military capabilities” in the key states to “basically rerun an election”. Flynn’s notions were echoed in the Waldron PowerPoint and in the Kerik letter. On 18 December, Flynn met at the White House with Trump at which he proposed invoking the National Emergency Act. (Flynn had circulated a call for “Limited Martial Law To Hold New Election” weeks earlier, on 1 December.) The army secretary, Ryan McCarthy, and the army chief of staff, Gen James McConville, issued a statement on the day Flynn met with Trump disavowing Flynn and any suggestion of martial law. “There is no role for the US military in determining the outcome of an American election,” they stated. The criminal citation of Meadows for contempt from the House committee to the justice department notes that he was in “nonstop” communication “throughout the day of January 6” with Kash Patel at the Pentagon, and “among other things, Mr Meadows apparently knows if and when Mr Trump was engaged in discussions regarding the national guard’s response to the Capitol riot.” The House resolution also references Meadows’ contacts with Republican state legislators, “private individuals who planned and organized a January 6 rally”, and members of Congress prepared to object to the election certification – a panoply of people involved in the coup. The committee also released texts from Fox News personalities to Meadows on 6 January imploring him to get Trump to stop the insurrection. “This is hurting all of us. He is destroying his legacy,” wrote an anxious Laura Ingraham. The familiar relationship suggested the intertwining of Fox News as the chief outlet for Trump messaging about the “big lie” up to the insurrection. But the ties went further. On 4 January 2022, the House committee requested the voluntary testimony of Sean Hannity as a “fact witness”. The committee wrote him that it had in its possession dozens of texts from Hannity to Meadows “indicating that you had advance knowledge regarding President Trump’s and his legal team’s planning for January 6th”, and “that you were expressing concerns and providing advice to the president and certain White House staff regarding that planning”. On the evening of 5 January, Hannity texted Meadows: “Pence pressure. WH counsel will leave.” He also appeared to have had “a conversation directly with president on the evening of January 5th (and perhaps at other times) regarding his planning for January 6th”. What did Sean Hannity know and when did he know it? When the riot was finally subdued and the Congress reconvened to certify the election, the House Republicans still rose to object. Hice, with QAnon proponent representative Marjorie Taylor Greene standing at his side, declared: “Myself, members of the Georgia delegation and some 74 of my Republican colleagues object to the electoral votes from the state of Georgia on the grounds the election conducted on November 3 was faulty and fraudulent due to unilateral actions by the secretary of state to unlawfully change the state’s election process.” Of the thousands involved in the Capitol riot, 725 so far have been charged with various crimes. But those sentenced, mostly true believer foot soldiers of the Trump mob, were not the originators of the coup, the most dangerous sedition against the constitutional order since secession. Nor were the leaders of the militias, of the Proud Boys, the Oath Keepers and the Three Percenters, present at the creation. The 6 January attack was a spawn of the coup; it was its effect, not its alpha and omega. Only those incited to sacrifice themselves in the Pickett’s Charge of the insurrection have paid the price, but none of those who conceived the coup a year earlier have been brought before a federal grand jury, charged, or apparently are even being investigated by the Department of Justice. It would be as if only the Watergate burglars were prosecuted and that was the end of the affair. All of the higher-ups involved in the scandal – chief of staff Bob Haldeman, his deputy John Ehrlichman, attorney general John Mitchell, the entire cast of complicit characters and President Richard Nixon – would have remained untouched in power. There will be more to know about the coup from the House investigation. The committee has gathered more than 30,000 documents and interviewed more than 300 witnesses. Two, three, many John Deans may testify before the cameras. Criminal referrals will probably be made. The coup of 2020 gestated within the central organizations of the Republican right, and it was a learning experiment for the Republican party as a whole. Hice has announced he will run in the Republican primary against Raffensperger for Georgia secretary of state. He is only one of the Republicans focused on taking over the states’ electoral apparatus to ensure that the next time there will be no obstacles. By December, Republicans had proposed 262 bills “to politicize, criminalize, or interfere with the non-partisan administration of elections”, with 32 becoming law in 17 states, according to the non-profit Protect Democracy group. The threat of intimidation, coercion and intimidation hangs over American politics. The coup may have failed, but it rolls on. • This article was amended on 16 and 30 January 2022. A previous version misnamed Senator Sheldon Whitehouse as Whitehead. And detail was added to clarify that Steve Bannon was pardoned before his trial on fraud matters took place. Sidney Blumenthal, former senior adviser to President Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton, has published three books of a projected five-volume political life of Abraham Lincoln: A Self-Made Man, Wrestling With His Angel and All the Powers of EarthAmericans are not exactly known for nuance. Maybe it shouldn’t surprise us then that the rightwing protests that turned into a riot at the US Capitol building on 6 January 2021 were immediately described as a coup attempt. For most Democrats, the participants were at the very least insurrectionists guilty of sedition, or perhaps even domestic terrorists. Wall-to-wall coverage at the time on broadcast television and magazine thinkpieces waxing eloquent about the attack on “the people’s house” confirmed the assessment. For establishment Republicans, the protesters were the worst slur they could think of: they were “foreign”. George W Bush compared them to people in a “banana republic” and the Republican congressman Mike Gallagher agreed that “we are witnessing absolute banana republic crap in the United States Capitol right now.” The Florida senator Marco Rubio described the events in a tweet as “3rd world style anti-American anarchy”. But despite all the fears, the pro-Trump rioters on 6 January didn’t exactly look like hardened fascists. Most wandered disorganized to the Capitol, looked on from a distance, took selfies and then trotted back to their hotel rooms after they got bored. These weren’t the street fighters we’ve come to associate with the rise of the far right internationally. Perhaps the strongest sign that the United States wasn’t actually in danger of falling to fascism that day was the response to 6 January from American elites. It is well established that big business interests have historically aligned both with fascism, as was the case in the 1930s, and rightwing authoritarianism, and authoritarianism more generally, during moments of crisis. As the Columbia law professor Tim Wu wrote in his recent book on monopolies: “The monopolist and the dictator tend to have overlapping interests.” Trump, of course, has something in common with fascists. He uses mass communications to stoke already widespread disaffection, directing anger not at economic power brokers but at minorities and perceived cultural elites. He has encouraged violence and threats of violence against his enemies, culminating in the mobilization one year ago today. But what he didn’t have was elite buy-in. Trump gave business what it wanted while he was in power, deregulating and cutting taxes while keeping the power of labor in check. But unlike in 1920s Italy or 1930s Germany, major commercial interests didn’t feel nearly threatened enough by workers’ organizations and the left to allow the president to overturn democratic norms. Indeed, by 6 January, they seemed to see an unstable White House as a bigger threat to their profits. In the aftermath of the Capitol riot, the pro-Trump National Association of Manufacturers called for the president to be impeached. The highly influential Business Roundtable, which represents the country’s largest corporations, issued a condemnation of the actions almost as strong. Finance capital, that great historic ally of fascism in its initial variant, wasn’t too far behind. Jamie Dimon, chairman and CEO of JPMorgan Chase, said on 6 January itself: “Our elected leaders have a responsibility to call for an end to the violence, accept the results, and, as our democracy has for hundreds of years, support the peaceful transition of power.” None of this is to impute intrinsic democratic motives to the American elites. They are, after all, helping to bankroll gerrymandering efforts across the country that dilute democracy and skew results in their favor. They are pouring in millions to support the campaigns of politicians who would roll back voting rights. And they are rallying their resources to oppose legislation that would give working-class people greater power in the economy. But, for all their anti-democratic efforts, they are far from ready to openly abandon liberal democratic norms. Why risk the turmoil when their slow dismembering of democracy from the inside is protecting their profiteering even better than shock troops would? In other words, US politics is indeed in crisis – but the crisis is a slow-moving one. It’s not as dramatic as a fascist storming of a Capitol building or a military takeover. But it’s almost as harmful to democracy in the long run. ••• This brings us to the question of institutional reform. In the United States, a party doesn’t just win an election and then govern (either alone or in coalition). Rather, after a successful election they often must deal with a myriad of veto points. Due to the Senate filibuster, 60 votes (derived undemocratically with two senators from each state, including the least populated ones) are necessary to pass most legislation. And in the House of Representatives, the more democratic lower house of the legislature, elections are held every two years, often making it out of sync with Senate elections, held every six years, and presidential elections, held every four years. A two-party system with this kind of structure all but guarantees that divided government is the norm rather than the exception – and that’s not to mention the role of a powerful judiciary. It was a political arrangement built by America’s founders to muzzle popular passions and ensure elite rule and that changes to the constitution through amendments are almost impossible to bring about. Contrary to myths about American stability, it hasn’t actually worked out that well. In the 19th century, the structure of US government, particularly its devolution of power to states, protected slavery and the power of plantation owners, which led directly to a bloody civil war. In the 20th century, things were more stable, but this required an unusual amount of elite consensus and cross-party cooperation. But that consensus became harder to maintain after the exodus of northern liberals from the Republican party and southern Dixiecrats from the Democratic party created a more ideologically coherent system. We had a center to center-left party incorporating some business interests, as well as the labor movement and a disproportionately racial-minority base of workers, on the one hand, and on the other a rightwing party of business with a solid popular base among conservative southern whites. The resulting level of polarization was not unusual by world standards, but the American political system was uniquely ill-equipped to handle polarization. In a rational system, elections would have consequences, the winning party would be able to govern, and if people disapproved of their actions, they would be voted out to allow the opposition to do the same. In the American system today, elections almost always result in divided government and the opposition can use the system’s many chokepoints to hamper the ruling party’s attempts to govern. It’s no wonder so many Americans lack faith in the ability of politics to change their lives for the better. ••• Polarization has happened in both directions, and as Ezra Klein argues in his 2020 book Why We’re Polarized, we shouldn’t follow standard talking points and denounce it as inherently bad. The anti-democratic political system in the United States functioned only with labor and Black Americans, in particular, muzzled in the last century, and some of the political tension decried by observers is coming from oppressed people asserting their rights and interests more vocally. However, it’s clear that the Republican party has moved rightward at a much faster speed than the Democrats have moved leftward. Republican distrust of state institutions – reflected both in their skepticism of election results as well as vaccine safety – has grown more intense. Tens of millions of Trump voters justified the 6 January riot at the Capitol, think the 2020 vote was stolen, and fear the same will happen in the 2022 midterms, in which Republicans are expected to make major gains. If Trumpism was the counter-revolution inaugurated by eight years of tepid liberalism under President Obama, what kind of response would a more confident leftwing government inaugurate? That’s a question that every progressive should ask themselves, especially as they attempt to push Biden to become “the new FDR”. After all, we can expect reactionary forces to become even more aggressive if faced with a more assertive leftwing foe. How does one defuse the situation? To begin with, Democrats need to focus less on conjuring nightmares about the future (even if some of those fears are warranted) and more on offering dreams that people can believe in. That means clearer bread-and-butter messaging about the material gains that politics can offer people. They should lead with this program, while being willing to take measures to pursue institutional reform to carry out this program once in power, such as eliminating the Senate filibuster and weakening the power of the courts. The future of US politics is bleak: it’s hard not to imagine, as Vox’s Zack Beauchamp does, continued instability, a lack of trust in elections, a gridlocked Congress, and the growth of extremist groups. 6 January 2021 may have been a riot and not a coup, but there will be far more riots to come until the left figures out a way to resolve the contradictions that plague US society. And if we don’t, the specter of the right breaking the impasse through authoritarian measures will become far more present. For now, however, the problem isn’t that American democracy is about to be overthrown; it’s that America isn’t much of a democracy to begin with. We need to create one people can believe in. Bhaskar Sunkara is the founding editor of Jacobin magazine and a Guardian US columnist. He is the author of The Socialist Manifesto: The Case for Radical Politics in an Era of Extreme InequalityStuart Broad declared the fire was burning once more after a five-wicket haul that raised further questions about his peripheral role during England’s failed Ashes bid. The 35-year-old had begun to doubt his international future after a low-key 2021 that was damaged by injury and ended with him missing out on the seamer-friendly pitches witnessed during the defeats at the Gabba and the MCG. But after his five for 101 on the second day in Sydney helped stem the bleeding as Australia amassed 416 for eight declared, not least with Ben Stokes unable to bowl due to a side strain, such thoughts appeared to have melted away. Broad, who missed the back-end of the summer with a calf injury and dropped below Ollie Robinson in the pecking order, said: “I can’t say I wasn’t disappointed to miss out in Brisbane and Melbourne. But when you miss out in Test matches that actually makes you realise how special it is. “I’ve still got a burning desire to play the sport. I must admit, a few years ago I was umming and aahing and I spent a lot of time talking to my dad [former England opener Chris Broad] about it. He had a great belief that you should play the sport you love for as long as you can, while the fire burns. Because nothing replicates it in life. “I think 2021 was my worst year, with the intermittent cricket – I had a play one, miss one type experience – but bowling today made me relight that fire again. It’s a great stadium, good atmosphere and I’m bowling at the world’s best – this is what it’s about.” Meanwhile Australia’s Usman Khawaja was in an emotional mood after stroking 137 on his return to the side to win a 45th cap. Given a hero’s reception in Sydney, the city where he grew up after his parents emigrated from Pakistan when he was five years old, the left-hander reflected on the wider significance. Khawaja said: “Honestly, it was the most touching, humbling, amazing feeling out there today, getting that hundred and the roar that went up and chanting ‘Uzzie’. It’s stuff you dream of. I never expected that to happen. “To have that it was unbelievable. They talk about the American Dream, I call it the Australian Dream. I joke about it, but I’m quite serious. I’m living the Australian dream. “My parents came over here from Pakistan to give me and my family a better life. They’ve come all the way out here and I’m representing Australia in the national sport. “I’ve gone through hard times, broken down barriers to get to where I am right now and I think at some level people can relate to that and they can see it, and I love them for it. The love I got out here today is something special and something I’ll never forget.”Tottenham have criticised homophobic chants by their fans at Chelsea on Wednesday night. The club issued a statement saying there was “no place for discrimination” at Spurs, the morning after a 2-0 defeat at Stamford Bridge in the Carabao Cup semi-final first leg. “The club is extremely disappointed by homophobic chanting from sections of our support at Stamford Bridge on Wednesday night,” they said. “We work closely with our LGBTQ+ fan group Proud Lilywhites to create a welcoming and inclusive environment at our club and are proud to display the Progress Flag in our stadium on matchdays. “No one should suffer discrimination because of their sexual orientation and/or their gender identity and we urge supporters not to use this chant.” Proud Lilywhites also called on Spurs supporters to “think before you chant”, adding in a statement: “We know most fans don’t sing this with any intent to discriminate, ostracise or demean us but the impact it has shouldn’t be underestimated-it has been used to victimise young gay men for years. Think before you chant, please. We’re Spurs and we’re better than this.”Ed Woodward will step down as Manchester United’s executive vice-chairman on 1 February, with Richard Arnold, the group managing director, to replace him as the club’s CEO. Woodward announced last April he would leave his role in the wake of United’s joining of the failed European Super League, though he did not offer a date. Thursday’s news formalises his departure and ends nearly nine turbulent years as United’s most powerful executive, Woodward having superseded David Gill in May 2013. Woodward endured a fractious relationship with a constituency of fans who blamed him for United’s failure to compete for a 21st title after Sir Alex Ferguson left at the same time as Gill with the club as champions. It is understood Woodward’s greatest regret was Ferguson’s retirement after an unprecedented 26-and-a-half-year reign that included a record 13 Premier League titles. The 50-year-old also accepts that fundamental mistakes were made in the recruitment of players and managers. Woodward believes Louis van Gaal, who was made manager in summer 2014, was given too much freedom to decide signings, and is conscious that United might have been more successful if he had made Pep Guardiola or Jürgen Klopp the No 1. Woodward appointed David Moyes as Ferguson’s successor but the Scot lasted only 34 league games, despite signing a six-year contract, before being sacked. Woodward subsequently recruited Van Gaal, José Mourinho and Ole Gunnar Solskjær, with Solskjær’s replacement, Ralf Rangnick, as interim manager his final appointment. Van Gaal’s 2016 FA Cup and Mourinho’s 2017 League Cup and Europa League triumphs were the major trophies claimed under Woodward, who also sanctioned the £89.3m purchase of Paul Pogba, then a British record. Joel Glazer, the executive co-chairman, said: “I would like to thank Ed for his tireless work on behalf of Manchester United during his nine years as executive vice-chairman and 16 years with the club. We are now looking forward to Richard and his leadership team opening a new phase in the club’s evolution, with ambitious plans for investment in Old Trafford, the strengthening of our engagement with fans, and continued drive towards our most important objective – winning on the pitch.” Arnold, who was appointed by a process independent of Woodward, said: “I am honoured to have the chance to serve this great club and its fans. I am determined to return that honour in any way I can.”Scroll down the Wombats’ Spotify page and you come to the section headed “Fans also like”. It features a selection of their mid-00s contemporaries, fellow strivers in the league of what was cruelly dubbed “landfill indie”: the Pigeon Detectives, the Kooks, the Enemy, Scouting for Girls. As everyone knows, fashion is cyclical and this stuff currently lurks at the foot of fortune’s wheel: old enough to seem like yesterday’s news, not old enough to seem appealingly retro. Give it 10 years and they’ll be packing them in at 00s revival festivals, as their Britpop forebears are today, but for now, it’s strictly self-released albums and tours of venues euphemistically described as “intimate”. By rights, the Wombats should be in the same boat as those bands, more anonymous than their peers (close your eyes and try to visualise frontman Matthew “Murph” Murphy, let alone drummer Dan Haggis), they were dumped by their major label in the same year the NME became a free sheet in the face of slumping sales. But the Wombats’ recent interviews come peppered with unexpected phrases: “their studio in LA”, “forthcoming gig at the O2 Arena” and “produced by Jacknife Lee”, the latter fresh from working with U2. It’s not just that they now play far bigger venues than 15 years ago, it’s that the venues come packed – as every reviewer notes in astonishment – with kids too young to remember the Wombats’ first flush of fame. Last year, their 2015 single Greek Tragedy belatedly went gold in the US: between the original and a subsequent remix by Swedish producer Oliver Nelson in 2020, it’s racked up nearly 175m streams on Spotify. Greek Tragedy’s success was down to one of those weird TikTok blips that makes memes of unexpected songs, but you can’t fill the O2 Arena from a social media trend. Fix Yourself, Not the World provides some convincing explanations. Their relative anonymity appears to have worked in their favour, allowing them to repurpose their sound from the post-punk guitars of Moving to New York and Let’s Dance to Joy Division to something more pop-facing, without incurring the hysterical reactions provoked by, say, Kaiser Chiefs working with Girls Aloud mastermind Brian Higgins: the Wombats didn’t make enough of a lasting initial impression to be accused of cravenly abandoning their roots. With its guitars tethered to dancefloor-focused drums, bass smoothed with electronics and concluding title track an epic synthy ballad, the Wombats’ polished and snappy fifth album won’t shake anyone with its plethora of unanticipated thrills. However, it sounds resolutely like a product of the 2020s rather than a throwback to scrappier era. The moments where it most obviously recalls the mid-00s are its least successful, the leaden glam stomp of Don’t Poke the Bear a case in point. More prosaically, the Wombats write noticeably better songs than the current crop of artists who labour under the label “indie”. You can detect a degree of experience in their approach: the pounding opener Flip Me Upside Down and the subtly effective rhythmic shifts of Ready for the High are clearly the work of people who’ve done enough gigs to know what provokes a huge audience to jump up and down. The choruses are bigger and brighter – there’s a particularly great example on This Car Drives All By Itself – while the hooky immediacy of their melodies makes their recent TikTok trendsetter status less of a mystery than first appeared. So do the lyrics. They come unstuck when they feel obliged to tackle big issues – Work Is Easy, Life Is Hard offers a lumpy excoriation of cancel culture – but they’re good at one-liners, as evidenced by the title of If You Ever Leave, I’m Coming With You and its depiction of someone trying to rouse themselves from a melancholy, stoned torpor: “I’ll get out of bed / Stop listening to Radiohead.” The lyrics also have a tendency to sneer at the dictates of fashion. “Fuck your role play / No construction / I’ll build it my own way: no subscribing, no reviews,” sings Murphy on Method to the Madness. And understandably so. That the Wombats’ gigs are apparently filled with teenagers seems less surprising when you consider that said teenagers are too young to remember a time when music wasn’t accessed via the all-encompassing bran barrel of streaming, or when the music press had any gatekeeping power: the notion of a band being hip or déclassé is more of a moot point than it once was. Fix Yourself, Not the World isn’t going to change the face of music, but nor is it going to do anything to impede the Wombats’ latter-day progress. • Fix Yourself, Not the World is released on Awal on 14 January.Unrest in Kazahkstan is continuing, and the president, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, has called on a Moscow-led security alliance to provide “peacekeeping troops” to help him regain control. With a mobile reception and internet blackout across much of the country, reliable figures on casualties are hard to come by, but there have been violent clashes in Almaty and other cities. Tokayev has promised a ruthless crackdown and blamed “terrorists” trained abroad for the violence. What are the protesters angry about? The protests started at the weekend and were sparked by rising fuel prices in the west of the country. They quickly spread to encompass other regions and turned into a general protest against corruption, poverty and inequality. Protesters are angry with Tokayev and benefactor Nursultan Nazarbayev, who ruled Kazakhstan between independence in 1991 and 2019 and has remained powerful behind the scenes. What are their demands? The protesters want reform and better standards of living, but they are not coordinated and do not have an overall leader. There are no strong opposition politicians and there is no obvious alternative government in waiting, mainly because the authorities have not allowed any opposition politics in recent years. Where is Nazarbayev now? Nazarbayev has not spoken publicly since the protests started and there are rumours he may have left the country. Protesters in one city pulled down a statue of him. His image as the “leader of the nation”, a personality cult built over years, has unravelled dramatically in a matter of days. What is the CSTO and why is it intervening? The Collective Security Treaty Organization comprises Russia, Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan. It is a mutual defence pact but is not meant for internal issues. This is probably why Tokayev presented the protests as the work of “terrorists” who had been trained abroad, without giving any detail. How is Russia involved? Kazakhstan shares a long border with Russia and has a sizeable ethnic Russian population. The decision for the CSTO intervention came just as Russia has demanded security talks with the US over Ukraine and amid fears of a Russian intervention there. In the longer term, the situation will be alarming for Vladimir Putin, who may have looked at the “Nazarbayev option” as a way to leave office one day without fearing retribution. What happens next? The situation is extremely unpredictable, and with an internet and telephone blackout across much of the country on Thursday, much remains unclear. With the protest mood far from crushed and Tokayev issuing tough rhetoric, there is the potential for more violence.I moved to Hull in 1971 because it was the most unlikely place in the world to start an experimental theatre company – plus rents were cheap and social security were unlikely to find us any proper jobs. I was 23 and I believed that theatre could change the world. I still do. I wanted to make uncompromising, provocative, funny, tough, sexy plays about people you didn’t see in plays, for people who didn’t go to the theatre. I wanted Hull Truck to be a nuisance. Number 71 Coltman Street was cold and dark. On the ground floor was a room full of broken furniture and feral cats. We lived and rehearsed upstairs. The play Children of the Lost Planet was devised over 12 weeks. It was about a bunch of young people of our age living in Hull and trying to negotiate their way through the minefield of sex and drugs and rock’n’roll – always write what you know about. The winter of 1972 was freezing. We only had a small fan heater and rehearsed under a tent of blankets. The heater blew up so we burnt the broken chairs from downstairs. We bought a clapped-out Morris van for £35 and a lad from the youth theatre stole us a tax disc. We didn’t have many bookings, possibly because the administration office was the phone box outside. When we performed Children of the Lost Planet in York, the local paper wondered why we wanted to bring such disgusting people to the stage. On the way to our first London show the van broke down and we abandoned it in a pig farm in Gilberdyke. We hitched to the gig with the props and costumes. But we carried on. After Children of the Lost Planet came The Weekend After Next, The Knowledge, Oh What!, Bridget’s House, Ooh La La! and Still Crazy After All These Years. We performed countless kids’ shows, pub shows and musical cabarets. Our quest for always telling the uncomfortable truth often got us into trouble. Ironically The Knowledge getting banned in Manchester proved to be our biggest break. The theatre took exception to a rude line spoken by the ex-biker dope dealer Dooley. The day the show was pulled off there was a rave review in the Guardian, which the next day printed a piece about the ridiculous ban. We loaded up the van and headed straight for the Bush theatre in London where we performed an impromptu showcase gig. The word had got round, and we got a standing ovation. The theatre immediately booked us for a month in November. The run was a sellout. After that followed grants, wages, a proper van, rave reviews and a telephone. We toured the length of the country garnering accolades and abuse in equal measure. One particular scene from Bridget’s House in 1976 caused a lot of fuss. Bridget (Rachel Bell) and Mo (Cass Patton) are discussing their sex lives. At one point Bridget observes that most men wouldn’t know what a clitoris was if it jumped up and bit them on the leg. One night in Gainsborough a couple in the audience split up during the scene. He stormed out and drove off into the night. We had to give her a lift home in the truck. That same year we were invited to perform Bridget’s House at the new National Theatre. One of the few people who saw those early plays was a very young Richard Bean. When he told me he was going to write 71 Coltman Street, a dramatised story of Hull Truck, he said I would hate it. I don’t. Richard has written a terrific show. Not a word of it is actually true of course, but he has captured the spirit of what he thinks the spirit of Hull Truck was. That’s not an easy thing to do when most theatres seem to be giving in to neo-puritan censorship and politically confected culture wars. The bargain of real, proper theatre is when a group of human beings on stage get together with a group of human beings in the audience to fearlessly celebrate their human being-ness. Pass it on. 71 Coltman Street is at Hull Truck, 17 February to 12 March.Britain is not a country where “destroying public property can ever be acceptable”, a cabinet minister has said, as Conservative MPs vented their frustration at four people being cleared of tearing down a statue of the slave trader Edward Colston. Grant Shapps, the transport secretary, said the law would be changed to close a “potential loophole” limiting the prosecution of people who damage memorials as part of the police, crime, sentencing and courts (PCSC) bill. Four people – Rhian Graham, 30, Milo Ponsford, 26, and Sage Willoughby, 22 and Jake Skuse, 33 – were prosecuted for pulling down the statue during a Black Lives Matter protest on in June 2020. A further six were given “restorative justice” outcomes and ordered to pay a £100 fine, undertake unpaid work and fill in a questionnaire about their actions. Shapps said the PCSC bill would ensure that people “can’t just go round and cause vandalism, destroy the public realm, and then essentially not be prosecuted”. Under current legislation, criminal damage can attract a sentence of up to 10 years in jail. But where the damage is less than £5,000, the maximum sentence is three months’ imprisonment and a fine of up to £2,500. However the new bill, which is being scrutinised by parliament, would let courts consider the “emotional or wider distress” caused by damage to public property, and raise the maximum sentence to 10 years regardless of the costs incurred. The move would extend to flowers or wreaths placed at memorials, such as at a gravestone or the Cenotaph. Shapps avoided contradicting the jury’s decision, acknowledging that they had “seen all the facts”, but he added: “As a broader point, I would say we’re not in a country where destroying public property can ever be acceptable. “We live in a democratic country. If you want to see things changed you can get them changed, you do that through the ballot box, or petitioning your local council, etc. You don’t do it by going out and causing criminal damage. “We’ll always be on the side of the law and when necessary we will fix any loopholes in the law to make sure that’s always the case.” Robert Jenrick, another Tory MP and former cabinet minister, tweeted: “We undermine the rule of law, which underpins our democracy, if we accept vandalism and criminal damage are acceptable forms of political protest. They aren’t. Regardless of the intentions.” The view was echoed by other Conservative backbenchers. Lee Anderson said people should not use “mindless thuggish behaviour” if they were “offended by a statues” and instead “use the local democratic process to have them removed”. Tom Hunt, a vice-chair of the parliamentary Common Sense Group, said he was “deeply concerned by the precedent set here”, warning it “could give the green light for all sorts of political extremists to take matters into their own hands, shun the democratic processes for removing certain statues and to ransack our past”. One of the defendants, Graham, denied that toppling the Colston monument set a precedent for people to start pulling down statues. Speaking to Good Morning Britain, she said: “I completely understand people’s concerns and I really don’t think this is a green light for everyone to just start pulling down statues. “This moment is about this statue in this city in this time. I will leave the fate of monuments in other cities to the citizens of those cities.” Elsewhere the TV historian and author David Olusoga, who gave expert evidence for the defence during the trial, said the verdict showed that the jury were trying the case of the evidence and not the “culture war” around it. Speaking to Good Morning Britain, he said the jury had considered the information “directly rather than through tabloids or journalists or politicians”, enabling them to “actually react to the evidence rather than to the culture war drum beat that is built around it”. He continued: “Most people don’t understand the details of this history, of this statue, and the long campaign to have it removed peacefully. That statue standing there for 125 years was validating the career of a mass murderer. “And to people whose ancestors were enslaved by Colston and men like him, it is offensive, and you can talk to thousands of people in Bristol who found it offensive.”20. Surrogates (2009) This futuristic thriller about “surries” – artificial doubles who do the dirty work while their owners stay home – could have had heaps more fun riffing on the disparity between the grizzled older Willis and his blond synthetic doppelganger. Still, it is nice to see him bristling with Rosamund Pike, who plays his glassy wife, and being reunited briefly with his Pulp Fiction nemesis Ving Rhames. 19. The Sixth Sense (1999) Good performance, bad movie. Willis does subtle, judicious work as the child psychologist drawn into the confidences of a boy (Haley Joel Osment) who can see the dead around him. M Night Shyamalan’s sentimental ghost story sinks under the weight of life lessons about emotional closure, and a twist that renders laughable the action of the preceding 100 minutes. 18. Unbreakable (2000) In his second consecutive film with Shyamalan, Willis again produces moving results from portentous, low-grade material. There are shades of Christopher Walken in The Dead Zone in his portrayal of an ordinary Joe baffled by his extraordinary powers. He reprised the role briefly in Split (2016) and at length in Glass (2019). 17. The Siege (1998) Nearly three years before 9/11, writer-director Edward Zwick imagined a terrorist cell launching an attack on US soil. (Post-9/11, Zwick was one of the Hollywood figures consulted by the Pentagon on counter-terrorism matters.) Rightly criticised for the insensitive handling of its Arab characters, the film has some fruitful tension between Denzel Washington, urging caution, and Willis, personifying gung-ho military might. 16. The Last Boy Scout (1991) Misogyny runs through this nasty piece of action cinema from Lethal Weapon screenwriter Shane Black and the director of Top Gun, Tony Scott. What charm it has can be attributed solely to Willis, handling the wisecracks with aplomb as a former secret service agent turned private eye, and Damon Wayans as the ex-NFL star with whom he teams up. 15. Looper (2012) The thrill of seeing Willis working with an exciting young director (Rian Johnson) in this time-loop thriller, in which he and Joseph Gordon-Levitt play the same assassin at different ages, was dulled only slightly by the fact that he had ridden that merry-go-round before in 12 Monkeys. At least he seems more at ease here than steeped in the whimsy of Wes Anderson (who cast him in the same year’s Moonrise Kingdom). 14. Billy Bathgate (1991) Robert Benton’s gangster yarn kicks off with Willis facing death in a bow tie and tux. But what a way to go: Dustin Hoffman orders the execution, Steve Buscemi ties him up, Nicole Kidman looks on aghast. You’ve heard of “Garbo Laughs!” Prepare for something almost as rare: “Willis Weeps!” 13. Mortal Thoughts (1991) In the same year, Willis was once again killed off quickly by a quality film-maker – Alan Rudolph this time (who later directed him in a jumbled 1999 adaptation of Kurt Vonnegut’s Breakfast of Champions). Other bad-guy movie roles followed but Mortal Thoughts was his first: he plays a lout whose wife (Glenne Headly) plots his demise. Willis’s then-spouse Demi Moore is her bestie. 12. Fast Food Nation (2006) In Richard Linklater’s film of Eric Schlosser’s McIndustry exposé, Willis has a cameo as the VP of fictional burger chain Mickey’s, who shrugs off the discovery that his restaurant’s patties contain faecal matter. “We all have to eat a little shit from time to time,” says the owner of modern cinema’s finest shit-eating grin. 11. Die Hard With a Vengeance (1995) This threequel is the wildest of the four further adventures of John McClane, thanks to a killer opening 40 minutes in which he is sent zigzagging across New York on a string of perilous errands. Jeremy Irons, as the taunting brother of the original film’s villain, pulls the strings; Samuel L Jackson comes to the rescue. 10. The Player (1992)/What Just Happened? (2008) Bruce plays Bruce in this brace of Tinseltown comedies. In Robert Altman’s Hollywood comeback, Willis’s death-row rescue of Julia Roberts (“Traffic was a bitch”) at the end of the film-within-a-film signals the ultimate compromise. Meanwhile, in Barry Levinson’s adaptation of Art Linson’s memoir, Willis throws a tantrum when producer Robert De Niro asks him to shed his lovingly cultivated beard – a scene based on Linson’s real-life standoff with Alec Baldwin. 9. 16 Blocks (2006) Willis sports a bristly ’tache and extra worry lines as Jack Mosley, the sad-sack cop accompanying a murder witness to court. If only he had seen Clint Eastwood in The Gauntlet, Jack would realise that this is no cakewalk: bent cops with itchy trigger fingers are out to ruin his day. The lively rapport between Willis and Yasiin Bey (formerly Mos Def) makes this more fun for us than it is for the characters. 8. Last Man Standing (1996) Walter Hill’s Yojimbo remake casts Willis in the Toshiro Mifune role of the bodyguard-mercenary caught between two warring gangs. It is interesting to see him squaring off against Christopher Walken: not only are the two men diametrically opposed in acting style (Walken’s ostentatious quirkiness meets Willis’s shrugging resignation) and appearance (sharp angles versus doughy softness), but they had also recently played played characters connected across a generation by a gold watch in Pulp Fiction. 7. Bandits (2001) Willis is the stickup merchant who will lay on the charm even when he’s carjacking you (“Ma’am? Don’t forget your purse!”). He and partner-in-crime Billy Bob Thornton – nicknamed the Sleepover Bandits for their habit of moving in with the bank manager the night before a robbery – acquire a third wheel in the shape of Cate Blanchett. Highlights include her and Willis bonding over their mutual love of Total Eclipse of the Heart. 6. In Country (1989) Rising 1980s Brit star Emily Lloyd is the fatherless teen living with her uncle Emmett (Willis), a droopy-moustached Vietnam veteran prone to battlefield flashbacks. “Some think he’s gonna snap,” say the townsfolk, and Willis does well this early in his career to suggest unreachable corners of a damaged psyche. “There’s something missing and I can’t get it back,” he confesses movingly as his niece cradles him in the woods. 5. Pulp Fiction (1994) As the coiled slugger who is too proud to throw a fight, Willis has never been sexier than when he is purring silly sweet nothings to his “lemon pie” (Maria de Medeiros) as they hide out in a hotel room. Nor has he been more intimidating than when his mood flips a few moments later. Quentin Tarantino compared Willis to Sterling Hayden and Robert Mitchum, calling him “the only contemporary actor who suggests the 1950s”. 4. 12 Monkeys (1995) Terry Gilliam refused to allow Willis’s entourage on the set of this La Jetée-inspired brain-scrambler, and banned him from drawing on his usual repertoire of smug smirks. The result was an impressively destabilised performance from a man who tends not to do vulnerable. He plays a time-traveller escaping a future in which 99% of civilisation has been wiped out. Gilliam later said that Willis wanted “to show that he was a real actor”. Mission accomplished. 3. Nobody’s Fool (1994) Willis is sublime as part of the flawless ensemble cast in Robert Benton’s acutely observed small-town comedy. He plays Carl Roebuck, an ornery, philandering construction boss engaged in a war of attrition with his occasional employee (Paul Newman), who wants compensation for a workplace injury. Willis raises his game to match Newman, Melanie Griffith, Jessica Tandy and a young Philip Seymour Hoffman while still exuding effortlessness. Try hard? It doesn’t show. 2. The Fifth Element (1997) Breezy abandon with a top note of irascibility has long been Willis’s brand. Even so, he has rarely enjoyed himself as visibly, or had such a transformative effect on the rest of a movie, as he does in Luc Besson’s nutty science-fiction escapade. As a cab-driving everyman, his muddy platinum dye-job and clinging tangerine Gaultier vest show him at his most swoon-worthy. His chemistry with Chris Tucker (replacing Prince in the squealing sidekick role) is a special delight. 1. Die Hard (1988) If Moonlighting, the TV romcom on which Willis jousted winningly with Cybill Shepherd, represented the foundations on which his persona was built, then the first and finest Die Hard movie was the skyscraper that lifted it into the realm of the heavenly. As John McClane, the New York cop rolling his eyes at airy-fairy Los Angelenos, he would have had an appealing Sunday-morning sluggishness in any context. Stick him in a high rise, held hostage during Christmas party season, and he brings fresh comic sparkle to the shoot-’em-up genre. Head baddie Hans Gruber (a delectable Alan Rickman) mistakes McClane for a Rambo figure, but that couldn’t be further from the truth. Unlike Stallone’s brute, McClane isn’t gleeful about wreaking carnage; he would rather be having a brew in front of the TV. But if he really must bring down a crack team of terrorists singlehandedly, he’ll give it his all. Within 15 minutes of the opening credits, Willis is already wearing his trademark singlet, squint and lopsided smirk – the equivalent of Chaplin’s bowler hat, cane and moustache. Once the vest is caked with grime and gore, he is bare-chested, the dad-bod gleaming with sweat, the receding bedhead giving new hope to slobs and baldies alike. Yippee-kai-yay!Manchester City’s preparations for their FA Cup third-round trip to Swindon Town have been hampered after the manager, Pep Guardiola, tested positive for Covid-19 in an outbreak at the club. The Spaniard, along with his assistant Juanma Lillo, recorded the positive test on Tuesday and is in isolation. City report that seven players and 14 members of staff are isolating for Covid-related reasons. The assistant coach Rodolfo Borrell will take charge of Friday’s tie. Borrell said of Guardiola on Thursday: “He is fine. He has the virus but fortunately he hasn’t got a lot of symptoms. We are permanently in touch via Zoom call or calls like we normally do. “We have had a Covid outbreak and at the moment with seven players unavailable and 14 staff so there is quite a bit out. We are getting it day by day and we don’t know where it is going to end.” Borrell said City were “mentally prepared” for Friday’s game and, despite the numbers in isolation and an outbreak among the club’s elite development squad too, had no plans to request a postponement. “It has possibly been one of the most easiest lineups we have had to decide,” he said. “We are going to play with the ones we have available. We don’t really have much more. Our aim is to keep playing. At this moment we can fill the team. It’s an easy lineup to decide but I don’t know what will happen in the following days. We will play with what we have got, some first-team players and some players from our second team.” Meanwhile, Sean Dyche will miss Burnley’s FA Cup tie against Huddersfield on Saturday after testing positive for coronavirus. “Burnley Football Club can confirm manager Sean Dyche will miss this weekend’s FA Cup third-round tie at home to Huddersfield, after testing positive for Covid-19 on Tuesday,” a tweet said. “Sean will now follow the mandatory self-isolation protocols.” Dyche’s assistant Ian Woan later said he believed there were also four new coronavirus cases among the players. Dyche and Guardiola are the latest Premier League managers to miss a match because of the virus. In recent weeks Aston Villa’s Steven Gerrard, Newcastle’s Eddie Howe, Crystal Palace’s Patrick Vieira, Arsenal’s Mikel Arteta and Liverpool’s Jürgen Klopp have had to stay away from games. Liverpool, who had their Carabao Cup semi-final first leg at Arsenal on Thursday postponed because of a Covid outbreak, currently have no plans to request the postponement of Sunday’s FA Cup tie at home to Shrewsbury. Liverpool closed down their first-team training facility on Wednesday and will review whether to reopen on Friday.France’s data privacy watchdog has fined Google and Facebook a combined €210m (£176m) for hampering users’ ability to stop the companies tracking their online activity. The Commission Nationale de l’Informatique et des Libertés (CNIL) said on Thursday it had fined Google a record €150m for making it difficult for internet users to refuse cookies – small text files that build up a profile of a person’s web activity for commercial purposes. It fined Facebook €60m for the same reason. Internet users’ prior consent for the use of cookies is a key pillar of the EU’s data privacy regulation, and a top priority for the CNIL. “When you accept cookies, it’s done in just one click,” said Karin Kiefer, CNIL’s head of data protection and sanctions. “Rejecting cookies should be as easy as accepting them.” The watchdog said the facebook.com, google.fr and youtube.com websites did not allow the easy refusal of cookies. Citing the example of Facebook, it said: “Several clicks are required to refuse all cookies, as opposed to a single one to accept them.” It said the companies had three months to comply with its orders, including making it easier for French users to decline cookies, or face extra penalty payments of €100,000 for every day of delay. A Google spokesperson said: “People trust us to respect their right to privacy and keep them safe. We understand our responsibility to protect that trust and are committing to further changes and active work with the CNIL in light of this decision.” A spokesperson for Facebook’s parent company, Meta, said: “We are reviewing the authority’s decision and remain committed to working with relevant authorities. Our cookie consent controls provide people with greater control over their data, including a new settings menu on Facebook and Instagram where people can revisit and manage their decisions at any time, and we continue to develop and improve these controls.” In 2020, the CNIL strengthened consent rights over ad trackers, saying websites operating in France should keep a register of internet users’ refusal to accept cookies for at least six months. It also said internet users should be able to easily reconsider any initial agreement concerning cookies via a weblink or an icon that should be visible on all pages of a website.James, 24, Rochdale Occupation Student Voting record Labour in 2017; Brexit party in the European elections of 2019; Tory in the 2019 general election; Lib Dem in the most recent local elections Amuse bouche James is adamant that nothing amusing or unusual has ever happened to him Charlotte, 27, Wigan Occupation Statutory children’s social worker Voting record Voted Ukip once and Labour twice Amuse bouche Is in the habit of giving gifts with her face printed on them For starters James I thought she was going to be one of these over-the-top liberals, where every statement is a question. Charlotte Neither of us was what the other expected. We got on more than we thought we would. James I had shish kebab, mango chicken and some other thing … Charlotte We basically got small plates of street food, all kinds of picky bits. James … lemon lollipops! The big beef Charlotte James believes in small government, he’s very libertarian. That comes out in a lot of different ways. He went to boarding school, a fee-paying school, so I was giving him a bit of stick. He said, “No, my family aren’t wealthy – it was a school for blind kids. My mum and dad got the local authority to pay for it.” So I said, “How can you say you believe in small government, then, because you would never have got that opportunity?” James I would call myself a libertarian, but I’m not a full-on anarcho-capitalist. Education is different. I’m talking about where the state intrudes into your life – CCTV, privacy issues, Covid restrictions. The cost when it comes to people being able to maximise their economic potential and get forward in life was too high. Charlotte I said to him, “It’s not just about us – it’s about vulnerable people.” And he wasn’t having that. He’s a bit younger. With Covid, my life didn’t change much. His education stopped, his social life stopped. James I had quite a valuable internship cancelled because of Covid lockdowns. Ironically, it was with the WHO. I felt as if the world had become single track, the only focus was on Covid. Charlotte In lockdown, with my job, I was still in and out of people’s houses, little ones snotting and sneezing; that was scary. Early on, no one had PPE. We were told to avoid face-to-face work if possible but also: “Don’t wear a mask, because the kids will be scared.” James I understood that completely. Obviously some people were in a far higher-risk situation than others. Sharing plate James I supported leave and I’d vote leave again, but I also think Brexit hasn’t been a good thing for Britain. That’s about the way the government’s handled it – they’ve done it so badly, and it’s caused so many issues for the country, the labour and goods shortages. She didn’t have a problem with goods shortages, because she’s not a fan of massive consumerism. Charlotte It was funny that we both voted leave. I thought I was going to meet some big remainer. With the labour shortages, wages will have to rise – that was what I hoped to see. I see the EU as a capitalist institution. If somebody’s more well-off, I can see the benefit. If you’re on the bones of your arse, you’re not going to benefit from freedom of movement. James My ideal world would involve no borders between nations in terms of immigration. I saw the EU border system as discriminatory. There has to be a benefit to being an EU member, and one of those benefits has to be preferential treatment. It’s rare I will fall out with someone over politics, because my politics are so weird. For afters Charlotte We agreed on statues what’s the need to take them down? Nobody’s saying their behaviour was OK, but these people were of their time. But then we’re not people with black heritage. If your ancestors had suffered in the slave trade, you might feel differently. James We’re anti-racist. There should be more explanation of context, but we shouldn’t rush to take them down. Takeaways James She’s one of the closest people to my political views I’ve found in a long time. We talked for so long, we went to the pub down the road. Charlotte We’re a bit nerdy – we’re interested in stuff other people aren’t. • James and Charlotte ate at Bombay Brew, Rochdale Want to meet someone from across the divide? Click here to find out moreThe BBC has hired ITN’s chief executive to lead its news coverage, at a time when the broadcaster is struggling with substantial budget cuts and facing scrutiny over the impartiality of its coverage. Deborah Turness will inherit a newsroom that is halfway through an unpopular two-year restructuring process and has lost hundreds of experienced staff through redundancies and relocations. Its audience remains enormous across the UK and abroad but it is struggling with the transition away from traditional broadcasting formats and is regularly used as punchbag by politicians. Turness said that in an era of digital growth and innovation the BBC’s global reach gave it an edge. She said: “In the UK and around the world there has never been a greater need for the BBC’s powerful brand of impartial, trusted journalism.” She will be paid £400,000 a year – £60,000 a year more than her predecessor, Fran Unsworth. Her job title has also been upgraded from director of news to CEO of BBC News. Her background as an on-the-ground television producer could be helpful when working alongside the BBC director general, Tim Davie, who has no experience making programmes. Turness made her name during a decade-long stint as editor of ITV News, before moving to New York in 2013 to run the sprawling NBC News operation. The first woman to run a major US news network, she faced internal opposition as she dealt with the scandal over NBC host Brian Williams exaggerating claims about his experiences in Iraq. After four years in that job she returned to London to oversee two NBC-backed television channels that struggled to gain traction – a relaunch of Euronews and an abandoned plan to set up an international-focused version of Sky News. Last year Turness returned to ITN – who make news programmes for ITV, Channel 4, and Channel 5 – as chief executive, in what was perceived by many staff as a homecoming. Nevertheless, Davie persuaded her to jump ship and shape the future of the public broadcaster’s news operation – seeing off competition from internal BBC candidates such as Jonathan Munro and Jamie Angus. Her start date has yet to be confirmed but Turness’s first significant domestic decisions are likely to include finding a replacement for Laura Kuenssberg as political editor and managing the ongoing rotation of prominent on-air presenters. She will also have to work out whether any parts of the BBC’s news output will have to be shut down in order to meet looming budget cuts caused by years of below-inflation licence fee settlements. Any cuts are likely to cause anger among audiences and politicians, at the same time as the corporation tries to work out how to attract younger audiences who increasingly get their news from elsewhere. There are also ongoing issues around the BBC’s attempts to define impartiality in the modern media environment, with internal and external disputes over everything from coverage of transgender issues to Westminster politics and devolution matters.Plant Pioneers chorizo shroomdogs Sainsbury’s, £2.50 for eight, 280g Shaun: Different-looking from the rest. It’s much slimmer, like a chipolata. Very smoky, with a red pepper flavour. I wouldn’t have this. Score: 5/10 Craig: It’s got spice. The first taste was quite nice, but it’s quite plain. The texture isn’t good. 4/10 GRO sizzlin’ sausages Co-op, £1.45 for six, 350g Craig: I can taste the herbs, but the content is rubbery. I can see it being quite nice with beans in a breakfast, but on its own it would be quite plain. It tastes quite fatty. 6/10 Shaun: Looks like a sausage. Very bland, boring. The herbs overpower everything else. 5.5/10 Plant Chef herby bangers Tesco, £1.15 for six, 300g Craig: Very meaty texture. It looks like a chicken sausage. It’s got a better texture that the two before. It’s well prepared. I like this one. 6.5/10 Shaun: No flavour. I can’t put my finger on what it actually is. Not enough herbs. It’s got a good texture. It looks like a real good sausage. It could do with chilli and more herbs. 5/10 Plantlife mushroom and leek sausages Waitrose, £3 for six, 300g Shaun: This smells really good. It tastes fresh, herby and healthy. The leeks and mushrooms complement each other really well. 6/10 Craig: It smells very natural. I can taste leek – all the others were very blended. Not bad. 6/10 Plant Kitchen posh dogs M&amp;S, £3.50 for eight, 320g Craig: Very juicy. Definitely has the texture of pork-like meat. The skin is very good. The consistency is great. I love this one. 8/10 Shaun: Full, juicy, great texture. 8/10 Taste &amp; Glory sausages £2 for eight, 320g (frozen) Shaun: Looks like a proper pork sausage. Very good. This is the closest-tasting to a real sausage. 8/10 Craig: This is nice; it’s seasoned very well. 8/10 Linda McCartney’s vegetarian sausages £2.20 for six, 270g (vegan approved) Craig: It’s seasoned well. The texture is good; it’s not too fatty. This is nice. 8.5/10 Shaun: It’s very spongey, with a soft texture. It would soak up flavour. I’m enjoying this one. 8.5/10 Natural Flava: Quick &amp; Easy Plant-Based Caribbean Recipes by Craig and Shaun McAnuff is out now (Bloomsbury, £22). To support the Guardian and the Observer, order your copy at theguardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. Read more recipes at originalflava.com and follow the McAnuffs on InstagramNext rang up £70m more sales than expected over Christmas after a surge in online orders of party dresses and suits but warned that higher clothing prices are on the way as inflationary pressures grow . Next warned of a “tougher environment” for the year ahead with clothing prices set to rise by up to 6% in the autumn after significant increases in the cost of manufacturing, shipping and hiring staff for warehouses, shops and in its technology centres. Simon Wolfson, the chief executive of Next, said: “The key level of uncertainty is the inflationary environment. I have been in business for 30 years and I don’t think I have ever been through another period of economy-wide inflation on this scale. That’s an environment we are going to have to get used to trading in … How well we fare in that environment is difficult to see.” The fashion and homewares chain is the first retailer to report its Christmas trading results, potentially giving an indication of how the high street fared in the biggest sales period of the year. The group said it now expected to make £822m in annual profits, £22m more than previously hoped for and almost 10% ahead of pre-pandemic levels, in its fifth increase in guidance in less than a year. In the eight weeks to Christmas Day, Next said its sales rose 20% on 2019 – before the Covid pandemic – despite suffering “materially lower” levels of stocks than it had hoped for while its delivery service had struggled because of labour shortages in its warehouses and distribution networks. “The fact that our sales remained so robust in these circumstances is, we believe, testament to the strength of underlying consumer demand in the period,” the company said. Lord Wolfson said the surge in sales of suits, in particular, was “a measure of how little has been bought of those products over the last two years”. The group’s strong performance was underpinned by an 85% surge in full-price online sales compared with 2019 at its Label business, which sells brands such as Ted Baker, Nike and Mint Velvet. Online sales of Next goods in the UK and overseas were also up by more than 30% in the three months to 25 December, while sales in its UK and Irish stores fell 5.4% on 2019. Wolfson said sales in stores had been much better than the 10%-plus fall anticipatedprobably because the high street was beset by very heavy discounting two years ago. “A lot of those [businesses doing the discounting in the past] are not even trading today,” he said. “That’s likely to have helped in [Next] stores.” He added that shoppers had not been significantly deterred from coming into Next shops by the Omicron surge. Next said it was assuming there would not be further disruption fro the pandemic but it was unclear how much it had benefited from shoppers spending their savings built up during lockdowns and whether a return to spending on holidays and other social activities would hit sales of non-essential goods such as clothing. Sales are expected to rise by 7% in the year ahead, with growth slowing significantly in the latter part of 2022 as price rises force down the number of expected purchases. Next expects its prices to increase by almost 4% this spring and summer while the price of its autumn ranges would be 6% ahead of last year because of higher freight and manufacturing costs. The company said that average wages were also set to rise by 5.4% across the group driven by the April increase in the legal minimum wage as well as shortages of warehouse and technology workers. Richard Lim, the chief executive of Retail Economics, said: “These are mightily impressive results and demonstrate the growing strength of the brand and its agility to operate through the ongoing challenges posed by the pandemic. The results shine an optimistic light on the resilience of consumer demand and the effortless transition shoppers now make between buying online and in-store. “The outlook for 2022 looks more challenging. For many households, this year will be a ‘pinch point’ as the combination of tax hikes and a rise in the cost of living erode incomes.” Despite the concern about cost rises, Next said it would pay out £205m to shareholders, or 160p per share, in a special dividend at the end of January.The boss of one of the UK’s fastest-growing energy suppliers has said Britain must find £20bn to rein in soaring household bills that have compounded fears about a cost-of-living crisis in 2022. Greg Jackson, the chief executive of Octopus Energy, said his company did not know yet how much bills would rise in the run-up to 7 February, the deadline for when the regulator Ofgem sets a new cap on what suppliers can charge customers. The record wholesale gas prices across Europe has led to forecasts that average annual bills in the UK could leap from £1,277 to more than £2,000 when the cap comes into effect in April. Jackson said talks between energy suppliers and the government would have to find a way to avoid global gas prices being passed directly on to consumers. “We’ve got to recognise that as a result of the pandemic, every sector is asking the Treasury for help and there’s not an infinite supply of money,” he said. “The reality is that the UK buys most of its energy on a global market and we’ve had to pay about £20bn more than usual this year. So, in some way or another, the UK is going to have to pay that money.” Octopus, a renewable energy provider, is one of the fastest-growing companies in the sector, with 3.1m customers. It has been at the heart of industry talks with business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, who is said to be determined to avoid bailing out large energy companies. Jackson has been a leading proponent of an alternative £20bn loan scheme, under which a commercial lender makes a fund available that suppliers can dip into in order to refrain from hitting customers with sudden hikes in their energy bills. The suppliers could then pay the lender back over time with the money they make from staggered price increases, cushioning the blow to household finances. Jackson said the sector should explore the plan, which may need government oversight but not necessarily any state funding, “before we go looking for help from the public purse or elsewhere”. “The energy sector has always had large access to private finance,” he added. Asked whether a windfall tax should be imposed on North Sea oil companies that have made money from higher gas prices to help fund lower bills, Jackson refused to dismiss the idea. He added that it should be separate from broader efforts to reduce household bills. The expectation of rising gas bills adds to wider fears that 2022 will be characterised by a massive squeeze on the cost of living that could push more people into poverty and upend British politics. UK households face a hit of £1,200 this year, according to the Resolution Foundation thinktank, with more expensive energy bills piled on top of rising taxes and the effect of stalling wage increases.Vivian Li likes to grow things. Apart from cultivating vegetables and caring for her chickens, she’s been nurturing “mini-organs” – tiny versions of organs derived from a patient’s own stem cells – in her lab at the Francis Crick Institute in London. These cultures, known as organoids, mimic the way the tissues of a specific organ behave so that scientists can try to unravel the evolution of diseases, carry out drug research and refine personalised medicine. Crucial to the field of organoids is the ability of stem cells to develop into almost any kind of cell in the body, becoming muscle cells, brain cells or a variety of other cells. Using these, researchers can grow tissues and organ structures – organoids – giving them the ability to study how the organs actually function. Li, a stem cell scientist investigating the healthy gut and bowel cancer, first worked on organoids in the Netherlands at the Hubrecht Institute for Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research under Prof Hans Clevers, one of the original architects of the diminutive structures. She had made a beeline for the Clevers Lab in 2008 after wrapping up a PhD focused on bowel cancer in her native Hong Kong. The following year, the Clevers Lab, in Utrecht, created its first iteration of an organoid: a mini-gut. The advances came thick and fast after that, with researchers crafting a range of other mini-organs, including a liver, pancreas, bladder, and tear glands capable of “crying”. The Clevers team even graduated from mammals to reptiles, successfully growing snake venom glands. But given her previous work on cancer, Li was especially interested in the bowel, and eager to take this strand of work forward. So, in 2013, she moved to the UK and set up her own lab at the Francis Crick Institute, growing mini-guts with the ability to digest nutrients and secrete mucus in a bid to solve an assortment of medical challenges. The Crick is the ideal environment for this – collaborative, multidisciplinary, open. Cancer Research UK (CRUK), along with other key funders, supports more than 90 research groups, including Li’s lab, at the Crick – the largest biomedical research institute under one roof in Europe. As well as having raised £100m through its “Create the Change” campaign to help build the institute, CRUK invests around £50m each year so that the Crick can offer researchers such as Li reliable, ongoing core funding. This mitigates some of the pressure of applying for grants, allowing them to make ambitious long-term plans and pursue demanding research that will shape the future of human health. One of Li’s projects – in collaboration with the Great Ormond Street children’s hospital – involves work that could one day lead to the generation of organs for children with small-intestine failure who require transplants; at present this procedure is limited by a scarcity of donors, the risk of rejection and other complications. Early research has demonstrated that it is possible to grow a small piece of functional gut in the lab using a sick child’s own stem cells, raising the possibility of eventually scaling up to grow a larger segment of functional intestine. But it’s not only healthy tissue that can be grown into mini-organs. A tumour surgically removed from a cancer patient can provide the raw material to grow a mini-tumour in a dish. This can then be used to screen drugs to which the mini-tumour – and thus, in theory, the patient it came from – might be sensitive, says Li. The hope is that, one day, this might be used in real time, to find personalised treatment strategies for individual patients. A key longer-term avenue of research is an internal network of proteins that signal inside stem cells, keeping them growing and multiplying, known as the Wnt signalling pathway. Overzealous Wnt signals are thought to be responsible for many bowel cancers, triggering stem cells to proliferate furiously and form tumours. However, as the pathway is also integral to a healthy stem cell population, broadly targeting it would create new problems. Instead, Li’s lab has honed in on what appear to be tumour-specific targets on the pathway. “It usually takes decades to develop a drug. We’re nowhere near that, but finding a target is already a big step,” says Li. This research all came to a standstill when the pandemic hit, with the lab being forced to pause all activity. Undeterred, by day Li locked down with her young children (aged three and five), growing chillies, broccoli, tomatoes and courgettes. At night, between 10pm and 2am, she worked on papers chronicling insights from her work. The thing about starting her own lab, she says, is that much of her work is now computer based, with her time taken up reviewing grants and fellowship applications as well as writing papers. “You actually have to suddenly turn from a lab bench scientist to a manager … and an accountant as well because you have to manage your own budget.” As it happens, mathematical alchemy comes easy to Li. Her PhD experience in bioinformatics (computational tools employed to analyse swathes of biological data) was a key skill that made Li a strong candidate for the Clevers Lab. When she arrived there, Li met a cohort of confident male scientists who believed they were proficient at these complex mathematical calculations. She was better than them, says Clevers, and she felt she had to make that clear. “At one point, she basically told all of us that she was the one who knew bioinformatics and we’d better listen to her,” he says. “I remember that lab meeting, it essentially was more like a lecture … she went through the whole mathematical analysis. I think that was an interesting eye-opener for a few people in the lab.” Having just given birth to her third child, Li’s drive is undiminished. The one rule she lives by – and wants others, especially female scientists, to internalise – is to aim big, because waiting for the “right time” in terms of career and/or family goals can result in missed opportunities. In her experience of recruiting scientists, women are missing out on opportunities to take leadership roles because fewer put themselves forward, “yet at the PhD or postdoctoral level, applications are kind of evenly split, if not more women sometimes”. She adds: “You can always say: ‘Oh, I’ll do it after I’ve met this deadline, or maybe I’ll get to it next year,’ but, in fact, it will never be the right time – that’s what I’ve learned over the years. So do it now.” To find out more about the researchers that Cancer Research UK funds, visit cruk.org/our-research, or to donate to this life-saving work, go to cruk.orgThe former Scottish National party MP Margaret Ferrier will stand trial in August accused of travelling from Glasgow to London in September 2020 knowing she had symptoms of coronavirus and wilfully exposing others to the risk of infection. Ferrier pleaded not guilty to the single charge on Thursday morning at Glasgow sheriff court. The Rutherglen and Hamilton West MP, who referred herself to the police and the parliamentary commissioner for standards , was immediately suspended from her party after the alleged rule-breaking came to light. She has clung to her position despite vociferous and ongoing calls for her to quit, including from the first minister and SNP leader, Nicola Sturgeon. Prosecutors allege Ferrier “culpably and recklessly” put people at risk, making several journeys after having been told to self-isolate between 26 and 29 September 2020. The charge claims she wilfully exposed people to “the risk of infection, illness and death”, travelling throughout Glasgow and the surrounding areas as well as making journeys to and from London. Over three days, the 61-year-old is alleged to have visited a variety of local businesses and other locations within her constituency and beyond, including Lifestyle Leisure Centre, Vanilla Salon and Sweet P Boutique in Rutherglen, South Lanarkshire, St Mungo’s church in Glasgow and Vic’s bar in Prestwick, Ayrshire. The trial date was set for 15 August, with the case expected to last for four or five days, and a pre-trial hearing set for June. The prosecutor Mark Allan told the court: “Due to the pandemic, the trial will not be fixed for a number of months. There are number of civilian witnesses with significant commitments to parliament that will require to be worked around.”More than 40,000 people worldwide have been treated with the drug olaparib for ovarian, breast, pancreatic and prostate cancers. On its approval for use by drug regulators in 2014, it became the first of a new class of drugs called PARP inhibitors that kill cancer cells by undermining their ability to repair damage to their DNA. In one clinical trial, almost half of women whose advanced ovarian cancers contained mutations in one of two genes – BRCA1 and BRCA2 – saw no deterioration of their disease five years after being given olaparib. That compares with one in five (48.3% vs 20.5%) for those given a placebo. Olaparib is a very British success story. It is also one that shows how charities play a bigger role in the development of new medicines than many people realise. Cancer Research UK (CRUK) funded much of the basic research behind olaparib in Cambridge and London, and helped set up a biotech company to develop it, before it was commercialised as Lynparza by the Anglo-Swedish pharmaceutical giant AstraZeneca. “Without funding from charities like CRUK, there would be no olaparib today,” says Chris Lord, professor of cancer genomics and deputy director of the Breast Cancer Now Toby Robins Research Centre at the Institute of Cancer Research, London, who helped demonstrate the drug’s potential. Top: BRCA2, a human gene and its protein product. Certain variations of the BRCA2 gene increase risks for breast cancer; below: Prof Steve Jackson Olaparib’s origins lie in the 1960s when scientists began piecing together how cells repair damage caused to their DNA by things such as metabolic reactions and exposure to sunlight. The Swedish biochemist Tomas Lindahl, funded from 1981 by one of the two charities that later merged to become CRUK, was jointly awarded the Nobel prize in chemistry for his work on DNA repair in 2015. In 1992, Lindahl co-authored a paper in Nature that identified an enzyme called poly-ADP ribose phosphorylase, or PARP, as a key component of a cell’s DNA repair system, kick-starting research into how the enzyme worked. It was a field that Steve Jackson, the biologist whose research led to olaparib, found himself exploring through what could be called a scientific twist of fate. During his research on gene transcription, the process through which DNA is copied to produce the instructions to make proteins, he discovered proteins that only became activated in the presence of DNA. Follow-up work revealed that they became activated in response to DNA breakages, suggesting they were part of a cell’s DNA repair system. Jackson, now professor of biology at the University of Cambridge and head of CRUK’s laboratories at the Gurdon Institute, knew that chemo and radiotherapy worked partly due to cancer cells’ increased susceptibility to DNA damage. He wondered whether targeting their ability to repair this damage, by, for example, finding drugs that could block DNA repair activity, would enhance the effects of existing cancer therapies. Others however, weren’t convinced. DNA repair defends the body against cancer. “I approached pharmaceutical companies and venture capital groups, but there was no interest,” says Jackson. “They thought my reasoning was counterintuitive. Why would you inhibit something which protects us against cancer?” He was, however, not alone in his thinking. Researchers at Newcastle University were similarly working to target DNA repair enzymes to enhance existing cancer therapies – in this case, PARP, the enzyme highlighted by Tomas Lindahl in 1992. Faced with the same concerns from potential investors over the risks of tampering with DNA repair processes, both groups turned for support to the charity sector, and to the Cancer Research Campaign – one of the organisations that later merged into CRUK. With its advice and funding, Jackson set up KuDOS Pharmaceuticals in 1997. Key to its business plan was the concept of “synthetic lethality”. This is the idea that, when a cancer cell contains defects in a particular process, it often becomes reliant on a second “back-up” process to survive – making this second process very sensitive to targeting with drugs. “It’s like chopping one leg off a four-legged table,” says Jackson. “The table will wobble but still just about stay upright. But if you chop off another leg … that’s it. No more table.” KuDOS began identifying compounds to block the activity of DNA repair enzymes including PARP. Following a chance late-night meeting in a bar at a conference, Jackson began a collaboration with Prof Alan Ashworth, an expert in the BRCA genes and associated cancers at the Institute of Cancer Research, London. The BRCA genes had been identified only a few years earlier, with researchers funded by the Cancer Research Campaign playing a prominent role. BRCA genes are involved in DNA repair – so if a person inherits faulty, mutated BRCA genes it increases their risk of cancer, especially ovarian and breast cancer. Ashworth’s team, with funding from CRUK, had been working to find ways to kill BRCA mutant tumour cells while sparing healthy cells. Joining forces, Ashworth and Jackson decided to see what happened when BRCA-mutated cells were exposed to KuDOS’s new DNA repair-blocking compounds – including one that targeted PARP. “It was exciting; a bit of a eureka moment,” says Jackson. “The BRCA-deficient cells dropped dead and the normal ones were fine.” KuDOS swiftly started a clinical trial of this compound, which would later become olaparib, with positive early data leading to the company’s purchase by AstraZeneca in 2005. Regulators in the US and Europe approved olaparib, sold as Lynparza, to treat women with BRCA-mutated ovarian cancers, which had stopped responding to standard therapies, in 2014, and later against some breast, prostate and pancreatic cancers. Meanwhile the Newcastle group, also backed by CRUK, developed their own PARP inhibitor drug, rucaparib, now sold under the name Rubraca, and approved to treat some ovarian cancers. Top: CRUK chief executive Michelle Mitchell; below: a scientist conducting the process of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify DNA by using a thermocycler Unfortunately, tumours can develop resistance to treatments – even sophisticated, targeted drugs such as PARP inhibitors. In 2008, Ashworth’s group showed that BRCA2-mutated cancer cells, unexpectedly, could “reverse” these mutations, reactivating their defective DNA repair systems and so becoming insensitive to PARP inhibitors. Many other mechanisms of resistance to the drugs have since been discovered. Lord has spent many years working to find ways to prevent resistance to PARP inhibitors, and to treat patients in whom that develops. In June, he published details of a prototype drug that could block the activity of a DNA repair enzyme called POLQ, and so shrink BRCA-mutated tumours in rats. Early research suggests it can target cancers that are resistant to PARP inhibitors. Lord’s group has also shown how a similar approach can be used to tackle tumours with defects in DNA repair genes other than BRCA, including two called ARID1A and E-cadherin. “The original work on PARP inhibitors helped us to see how we can use synthetic lethality to target cancers that don’t have BRCA mutations, by exploiting other vulnerabilities,” he says. Beyond inspiring scientists to find new treatment targets, the olaparib story also highlights the lesser-known roles charities play in driving improvements for patients. “We have a unique part to play because we’re driven by patient benefit rather than profit,” says Michelle Mitchell, chief executive of CRUK. “Based on our expertise, we can back promising but risky science without the need to think about shareholder value.” Charities are well placed to bridge the gap between university researchers making potentially life-saving discoveries and pharmaceutical companies that are reluctant to back innovations that have limited chances of big returns. “Without the initial funding, we would have been unable to do the basic science or to then get over the barriers to setting up a company,” says Jackson. “Without CRUK, we would not have olaparib.” Some cancer charities have become better at making use of commercial opportunities that arise from their funding roles. Obtaining patents makes returns on investments and attracting commercial partners possible. More than 60 companies have been started based on CRUK-funded research. The charity currently has more than 30 drugs in clinical and preclinical development, and has supported 11 drugs to market through commercial partnerships. Between 2013 and 2017, CRUK also licensed more oncology intellectual property (IP) than any organisation in the world other than the MD Anderson Cancer Center at the University of Texas in Houston. This more commercial focus is paying dividends. The charity’s income from intellectual property and royalties, including from olaparib and rucaparib, rose from £62m in 2015 to £100m in 2019. One of CRUK’s key ambitions is to increase the proportion of people surviving their cancer in the UK from around half in 2010 to three-quarters in 2034. Its growing commercial success is making this more likely thanks to a virtuous circle which sees profits from drug sales being ploughed back into funding research to find new treatments. “Supporting entrepreneurship, commercialisation and protecting intellectual property generated through the research we fund are important parts of how we can improve cancer survival and outcomes,” says Mitchell, pointing out that PARP inhibitors are transforming treatment for many patients with cancer. “Thanks to our IP, the story of these drugs gets even better as we get royalties from its sales which we can then reinvest in new research.” To find out more about Cancer Research UK’s work, visit cruk.org, or to donate and fund more life-saving discoveries, go to cruk.org/donateThe National Theatre has cancelled the official opening night for the current run of its major festive musical Hex, which has been “blighted by Covid”, said its director and lyricist, Rufus Norris. Hex, a new version of Sleeping Beauty, began preview performances in the Olivier theatre in December and company illnesses meant that almost every performance in its first week had a different combination of understudies and stand-ins, said Norris in a statement on Thursday. Three weeks of performances were then lost due to illness. The original press night was set for 15 December then postponed to 21 December and then postponed again. “We had hoped to emerge into a clearer situation in January,” continued Norris, who is also the National’s artistic director, “but while we have started performances again, fresh cases are still emerging and the creative team have had to disperse to other projects.” The planned NT Live broadcast has been cancelled. Hex will end, as planned, on 22 January but the National has announced that it will restage the musical in November “to give it the chance to have a full run” and an official opening night. Norris said that “it will take us a long while to understand the full and ongoing impact of Covid, and we will no doubt be in a state of constant adaptation for some time yet”. Last month, the National also cancelled performances of The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time at Troubadour Wembley Park theatre. Over the Christmas period, productions around the UK were beset by last-minute cancellations and postponements caused by Covid-related absences in what is usually theatre’s most profitable period. The new West End musical Moulin Rouge! has also postponed its opening night more than once due to Covid. Andrew Lloyd Webber’s new musical, Cinderella, has suspended performances until next month to “avoid more disruption and to protect the quality of the show we give our audiences” after the impact of the Omicron variant. On Tuesday it was announced that this year’s Vault festival, the London fringe spectacular comprising 600 shows, has been cancelled. It was due to start later this month. In December, a highlights audio recording for Hex, billed as a “mythic, big-hearted musical”, was released. Hex stars Rosalie Craig and has music by Jim Fortune and a book by Tanya Ronder whose plays include Dara and who is married to Norris. It has been an unprecedented time in theatre, added Norris, who said “I certainly have never made a production without an opening night”. In November 2020, the National’s production Death of England: Delroy both opened and closed on the same night as England entered its second national lockdown.Claims by a Spanish government minister that factory farming is damaging the environment and leading to the export of poor-quality meat have provoked a furious backlash after his comments were published in the Guardian. In an interview published on Boxing Day, Alberto Garzón, the minister for consumer affairs, defended traditional grazing “as an environmentally sustainable means of cattle farming”. “That is sustainable; what isn’t at all sustainable is these so-called mega-farms,” he said. “They find a village in a depopulated bit of Spain and put in 4,000, or 5,000 or 10,000 head of cattle. They pollute the soil, they pollute the water and then they export this poor-quality meat from these ill-treated animals.” Garzón is the coordinator of the United Left party, a junior member of the coalition government led by the prime minister, Pedro Sánchez’s, centre-left Socialist Workers party (PSOE). His remarks have provoked outrage from the meat industry, opposition politicians and from senior members of the PSOE, forcing the government to distance itself from his comments. Isabel Rodríguez, the government spokesperson, said Garzón was speaking in a personal capacity. She added that the livestock industry was “an absolute priority” for the government and praised the “extremely high quality” of its produce. Far from contrite, Garzón rejected the claim that he was speaking on his own behalf. “What I said, I said as the minister of consumer affairs. There’s no other way of seeing it,” he said a radio interview with Cadena Ser, adding that his comments were “flawless”. “I’m not saying anything new,” he told the station. “I’m just relaying what scientists say. Everyone knows that the factory farming of meat causes pollution … and emits greenhouse gases. Europe has brought a case against Spain over the excessive level of nitrate pollution.” Garzón also pointed out that while the Spanish Agency for Food Safety and Nutrition recommends people eat between 200g and 500g of meat a week, the average Spaniard consumes more than 1kg. Pedro Barato, the president of the Asaja agricultural association, accused Garzón of irresponsible behaviour and called for his resignation. “The Spanish livestock industry depends on exports to survive,” he said. “You can’t send out this sort of message in the international press.” Álvaro Mateos Amann, the president of the Basque veterinary association in Vizcaya, also demanded Garzón’s resignation, saying that the comments by what he called the “pseudo-minister” were another demonstration of “the poor quality of our political representatives and their lack of respect for the livestock sector”. The centre-right Citizens party said in a statement that “in a single paragraph” Garzón had caused “irremediable” damage to Spain’s livestock industry, while Pablo Casado, the leader of the conservative People’s party, said it was “unacceptable that the government should tell the international press that Spain exports poor-quality meat from ill-treated animals”. A report published in October said that intensive pork farming probably played a major role in one of Spain’s biggest environmental disasters that led to the death of thousands of fish in the Mar Menor, a saltwater lagoon in south-east Spain. Scientists blame decades of nitrate-laden runoffs from the farms for triggering vast blooms of algae that deplete the water of oxygen, causing the fish to suffocate underwater. According to government figures, in 2021 there were 32 million pigs in Spain, in addition to seven million cows and 15 million sheep and goats. Garzón was previously attacked in July for urging Spaniards to reduce their meat consumption. “This doesn’t mean that we can’t have a family barbecue from time to time, just that we do it with a bit more restraint,” he said. “Eating too much meat is bad for our health and for the planet.”The Conservative peer Michelle Mone is being investigated by the Metropolitan police for an allegedly racist message she is accused of sending to a man of Indian heritage. The recipient of the message, Richard Lynton-Jones, complained to the police last summer that during a disagreement following a fatal yacht collision in 2019, Lady Mone told him in a WhatsApp message he was “a waste of a man’s white skin”. Lynton-Jones gave a statement to the police in October, providing screenshots of the messages. He is understood to have told the police in his statement that he believed Mone racially attacked him by using those words in the message, that he found it grossly offensive and felt harassed, alarmed and distressed by it. The alleged contents of WhatsApp messages, in which Mone also allegedly described Lynton-Jones’s partner as a “mental loony” and “nut case bird”, were revealed by the Guardian last month. Mone has repeatedly denied she is racist and her lawyers have questioned the authenticity of the messages. In screenshots of the messages seen by the Guardian, Mone appears to accuse Lynton-Jones and his partner of showing insufficient respect following the yacht crash off Monaco, in which a crew member was killed – an accusation they reject. The WhatsApp screenshots show the Tory peer responding after Lynton-Jones told her to back off, writing: “Your [sic] a low life, a waste of a mans [sic] white skin so don’t give us your lies. Your [sic] a total disgrace.” The Metropolitan police confirmed they were investigating. “In June 2021 police received an allegation of a racially aggravated malicious communication in relation to information posted on a messaging app,” they said in a statement. “Police spoke to the complainant and advised that for the investigation to progress a statement would need to be taken; for this to be admissible in any future court proceedings, this would need to be done in person. ”In October, the complainant gave a statement to police and the investigation continues. A 50-year-old woman has been invited to attend for an interview under caution at a future date.” Mone is understood to have been scheduled to be interviewed under caution on 23 December, but that appointment was reportedly delayed. The police declined to say when the interview was now scheduled to happen. When the Guardian first reported on the allegedly racist message, a representative of Mone initially said: “Baroness Mone is 100% not a racist. Baroness Mone and her husband have built over 15 schools in Africa in the past three years.” Her lawyers later provided another statement in which they said Mone had “no access” to the messages and no “detailed memory of them”. “She is not prepared to comment on the messages unless and until their authenticity has been confirmed but Baroness Mone, in any event, very strongly denies that she is a racist, a sexist or that she has a lack of respect for those persons genuinely suffering with mental health difficulties.” In separate correspondence, her lawyers also said their client believed at the time that the man had “no trace whatsoever of non-white colouring or any features” that would suggest he was not “100% white and British”. In a subsequent post on Instagram, Mone denied the WhatsApp message was racist, saying: “Since when did calling out a man on his actions after a manslaughter and his entitled white privilege constitute racism?” A lawyer for Mone indicated to the Guardian that Mone’s Instagram post did not suggest she now accepted that she sent the message. It has since been reported that Lynton-Jones has started libel proceedings against Mone, accusing her of defamation. Mone is reported to have said to friends she will vigorously defend any action. It is understood that there has been no finding of manslaughter following the yacht crash, and that part of the investigation has been closed.The Football Association is to proceed with a plan to use VAR at only nine of 32 FA Cup third-round fixtures, believing the benefits of using the technology outweigh inconsistency in the way ties could be decided. Only matches played at Premier League grounds will have video refereeing because the FA Cup is not licensed to use VAR across all its fixtures. This means that West Bromwich Albion’s tie against Brighton on Saturday will not use the technology despite it being installed at the Hawthorns and there will not be uniformity in the refereeing. The FA Cup has used VAR since 2018, when it became the first competition in England to implement it as part of a trial. The FA has never applied for a full licence to use the technology, however, which must be agreed with the football lawmaking body Ifab. Last season VAR was used only at ties where Premier League clubs were at home up to the quarter-finals, where all matches were then licensed. The FA has not yet taken a decision on whether to license later rounds this season. The FA is aware of questions over a potential imbalance in sporting standards but is reluctant to increase the running costs of the tournament, with clubs not licensed having to install the necessary minimum of four cameras and costs having to be covered to operate them and hire the necessary officials. “Video assistant referees provide match officials with additional support and should be utilised wherever possible,” the FA said. “However, only Premier League stadiums are currently licensed to use VAR due to the infrastructure, workforce and costs that are required.” The Premier League introduced VAR permanently at the start of the 2019-20 season. The EFL opted against doing the same owing to cost, but five Championship clubs have the technology after seasons in the top flight. Reports have suggested some Championship clubs want the league to adopt “VAR light”, a scaled-down system approved for trials by Ifab.It was between Christmas and new year that Boris Johnson began to worry about the next crisis. In the preceding weeks, Covid had been the big dividing line with his backbenchers as the prime minister wobbled over further restrictions but was chastened by an angry cabinet and a mass rebellion of his MPs over the light-touch plan B measures. But a cost of living crisis has the potential to be the much more serious matter in 2022, and the prime minister told aides he wanted work to begin on what other mitigations for rising energy prices might be necessary. Despite this, Johnson may have thought he had a few weeks’ grace with his backbenchers and friendly newspapers for having decided against new Covid restrictions. That hope was undone in the first press conference of the year when the prime minister stumbled over a question from the Sun over energy bills and the potential to cut VAT – a key Labour demand. When he entered the chamber for prime minister’s questions the following day, Johnson appeared to have come prepared for a victory parade in front of his MPs for allowing a normal Christmas and new year despite surging Covid cases. But Angela Rayner, the Labour deputy leader, took him immediately to task on inflation, tax rises and heating bills, and the prime minister made a string of errors in response, denying his own words on inflation and twice radically overstating the warm homes discount, saying it was a rather implausible £140 a week. Time and again his backbenchers howled about the pressures their constituents were facing on fuel, food bills and tax rises. One of his key cabinet loyalists, Jacob Rees-Mogg, had gone rogue in a cabinet meeting on Wednesday, asking for the prime minister to reconsider his plans for a national insurance rise in April, which will come just as a revised price cap is likely to drastically push up energy bills. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, is not minded to pursue major interventions. And Johnson’s problem is that many of the options open to him will fall short. Of what has been suggested so far, such as an extension of the warm homes discount or even a VAT cut on bills, nothing is likely to make much of a dent in the eye-watering rises consumers are likely to see. The cost of living crisis has the potential to be immensely damaging politically in a number of ways. Many voters who are not especially vulnerable will now care more about a sky-high energy bill than catching Covid. Labour can draw stark parallels with the start of Johnson’s time in No 10. When voters ask themselves whether they feel better or worse off, for many the answer will be the latter. MPs privately say the opposition has a chance to inflict real damage on this issue, rather than on sleaze scandals or rows over Covid restrictions, both of which can sway disgruntled voters midterm but may not ultimately be what matters in the polling booth. Crucially, the squeeze on voters’ pockets gives MPs opportunity to attack the government over their pet grievances, whether that is net zero, deregulation, tax rises or failure to be sufficiently enthusiastic about Brexit. Each one can be seen as a remedy and attract a caucus of troublemakers. A popular and deft prime minister could find ways to contain and mitigate the pressures, with the support of his backbenchers. But with more difficult decisions on the pandemic and embarrassments over sleaze and rule-breaking likely to come, Johnson’s reputation is sufficiently damaged within his own party to make the task even harder.Tracey Emin has said she is launching her own “revolutionary” art school in Margate as part of her broader plan to transform the seaside town into an “artist’s haven”. The school, named TKE Studios – after her full name, Tracey Karima Emin – will be housed at a former bathhouse and mortuary five minutes from her studio. Emin said she wanted to redesign the location into 30 studios for future art students. “People will have to apply, and there’ll be really strict rules,” she said in an interview with the Times. “No subletting, no smoking, no loud music. And if people don’t want to do the rules then they won’t have a studio there. “The other thing, because the rents are going to be so low, I’m not having people having part-time jobs and then never coming in. So, I’m setting it up so they … will have time to work and paint.” Students will be required to regularly put their work on public view, Emin added, “so there’s like this constant intellectual rigour. People can’t just be passive”. The mortuary will be turned into a “mini museum” filled with her own work. Emin will also launch an accompanying artist’s residency programme at a separate location to encourage artists to permanently move to Margate, where she grew up and returned after the death of her mother. “So it’s organically making the place right for the right people,” she said. “I love art. And I love property. And this way I’m combining both my loves and doing a bit of good.” The artist, who underwent invasive treatment for a cancer diagnosis – including having her bladder and womb removed – said she had a new outlook on life and renewed sense of purpose. “You know in life you sort of amble around, and you don’t know what you’re doing, but you know you’re doing something? And then suddenly you see the light. You go: ‘Oh my God, that’s what I’m doing!’ Well, with Margate now, especially after the cancer and everything, it’s all making sense what I’m doing. I am sort of helping. I am making an artist’s haven.” Emin, who shot to fame in the 1990s with her work, Everyone I Have Ever Slept With 1963-1995, said last year people had not understood the “seriousness” of her art and wrote her off as a “narcissistic, deranged, screaming banshee”. Her recent exhibitions include a 2018 neon sign in St Pancras station in London that reads “I want my time with you” and last year her paintings, neons and sculpture were exhibited alongside those of Edvard Munch at the Royal Academy.A computer glitch at the Gatwick control tower left flights unable to land or take off at Britain’s second biggest airport during the morning peak. Three planes were diverted to other London airports as controllers from Air Navigation Services were forced to shut down the malfunctioning IT and guide planes in under a backup system. Passengers on British Airways flights returning from Antigua in the Caribbean and Tampa in the US found themselves landing 45 miles away at Heathrow at the end of their overnight flights. After a delay of more than two hours, the planes refuelled and continued on to the Sussex airport. An easyJet flight from Belfast was diverted to Luton airport, on the other side of London. The three flights were diverted during the “switch down” of the IT system, which started at 7.25am. Other planes were left circling and delayed until the normal systems were restored at 9.10am. A Gatwick spokesperson said: “Earlier IT issues in the air traffic control tower this morning have been resolved and flights are arriving and departing the airport as normal. Some flights may still experience delays however and passengers are advised to check their flight status with the airline.” A spokesperson for easyJet, the biggest airline operator at Gatwick, said it was “experiencing some disruption to our flying programme as a result” of the IT failure. “While this is out of our control we apologise for the inconvenience caused by the diversion and delays and would like to thank passengers for their patience and cooperation,” they added. The disruption was limited. Only about 300 flights in total were expected to land or take off from Gatwick on Thursday, as services return towards normal levels from the depths of the pandemic. In 2019, Gatwick was the busiest single-runway airport in the world.An increasing number of women are losing their monthly periods because they are following a social media trend for restrictive diets and excessive exercise, experts say. Charity heads and nutritionists have raised the alarm about the increase in hypothalamic amenorrhea, a condition where the body enters survival mode because it is under-fuelled, causing menstruation to stop. It is a reversible disorder caused by stress related to weight loss, excessive exercise and trauma. Martha Williams, a clinical advice coordinator at the leading eating disorder charity Beat, said the condition was becoming more widespread, and was often seen in people who were not underweight and did not have a low body-mass index. “There are not exact statistics on this issue but the majority of people we see have lost their periods and some of these women are not seriously underweight. Some are a healthy weight but have restrictive eating,” Williams said. Women often consulted their family doctor when their period stopped, but Williams said many GPs did not have the right training to spot the underlying cause, and prescribed the contraceptive pill to restart menstruation. Williams said the pressure of lockdown was difficult for a lot of people, and the message from the government promoting an hour of exercise a day was not helpful for everyone. “The emphasis on this message was likely quite damaging for someone struggling to regulate their exercise levels.” She added that social media could be a “problem”, because women shared edited photos of their bodies, creating unrealistic expectations of how people should look. Williams said fitness influencers would also tell their followers what they ate in a day, including how many calories, which did not help those with eating disorders. Women have been raising awareness on Instagram about the implications of overexercise and so-called clean eating – a restrictive diet concept where a person avoids refined and processed foods. Chloe Hodgkinson helps girls with disordered eating, amenorrhea and periods, based on her own experiences. When she stopped taking the contraceptive pill her period did not return, and doctors said it was normal for menstruation to be delayed. Although Hodgkinson felt it was related to the fact she was undereating, because her body mass index was not low doctors did not take her seriously. She went to a dietician who told her she had low oestrogen, after which she changed the way she approached exercise and eating, and her periods resumed. “I have clients who have worked with a dietician or nutritionist or doctor and I help them get back into training after losing their cycle and help keep them accountable to their period journey,” she said. Hodgkinson gets more than 20 messages a day, “with girls simply wanting answers because they can’t get them anywhere else. “They can relate to me, they see old me in them now and see that I’ve come out the other side … They need to support to see that life is better this side,” she said. Renee McGregor, an eating disorder dietitian, said in the past 12 months she had had 1,000 hours of contact time with clients and 95% of them had had hypothalamic amenorrhea. “It’s a big problem, bigger than people appreciate, particularly because for so long it has been – not that it should be – accepted that when women do lots of exercise they lose their period.” She said the problem was often misdiagnosed, with women being turned away from GP surgeries and told their period had not resumed because their body was getting used to coming off the pill. “I had someone last week who was told by a gynaecologist that because they do not want children right now it’s not a problem. But not menstruating has a wider impact on physical and mental health,” she said.When the naturalist Edward O Wilson was a boy of seven, the dorsal spine of a fish that he was reeling in near his home in Mobile, Alabama, damaged his right eye. He lost the sight of that eye and subsequently suffered partial hearing loss in his teens. These disabilities led Wilson, a passionate naturalist from an early age, to focus on small organisms, particularly ants, that he could study at close range. Observing their tiny worlds led him to a global vision of the importance of biological diversity in the survival of species including our own. Wilson, who has died aged 92, has been called a modern Charles Darwin for his influence as both a close observer and a unifying theorist. He was also a campaigner whose humane and elegant writings were among the first in recent times to argue that we have a moral duty to value other species, not only for their own sake but also for the sake of future human generations. Fascinated by the apparent selflessness of social insects such as ants and bees, which would sacrifice themselves to protect their colony, in 1975 he published Sociobiology: The New Synthesis. The book sought to provide an evolutionary explanation (based on the work of the Oxford University zoologist William Hamilton) for the existence of apparently altruistic behaviour in a wide range of species. A single chapter addressed altruism in human societies, suggesting that humans evolved to support the reproductive success of their close relatives as a way of ensuring that the altruistic individual’s genes were represented in succeeding generations. Although Wilson argued that human altruism and social structures were also products of culture, his book provoked a resurgence of the “nature v nurture” debate. Soon after its publication, a number of high-profile biologists, psychologists and sociologists from his own university, Harvard, wrote a furious letter to the New York Review of Books, denouncing him for biological determinism and implying that he was providing support for racist and sexist beliefs. Long before the days of the Twitterstorm, opponents whipped up such rage against Wilson that in 1978 protesters dumped a jug of iced water over him as he sat on the platform at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. Not in any way deterred, Wilson followed up with On Human Nature (1979), for which he won his first Pulitzer prize. Today most scientists accept, as Wilson argued, that genetically determined “human nature” includes the capacity to develop extremely flexible patterns of social behaviour under the influence of culture. By the time Sociobiology was published Wilson had already developed ideas that would prove even more influential in ecology and conservation. As a young researcher, he had travelled widely in his quest to document some of the millions of species of ants and other invertebrates. Observing and collecting in New Guinea, the South Pacific and the Florida Keys, he began to think about how different species disperse, compete, survive or become extinct in a confined area such as an island. With the ecologist Robert MacArthur he wrote The Theory of Island Biogeography (1967), showing how a balance developed between immigration of new species and the extinction of previous residents based on birth and death rates and the number of individuals the environment could support. They distinguished between animals that produce many young and invest little in their care (r-strategists) and those that produce fewer young but care for them in early life (K-strategists), depending on the stability of the environment. Today ecologists recognise that there is a continuum between the two life history strategies, but the concept has been highly influential. Wilson’s numerous contributions to his field also include the discovery that insects used complex systems of chemical signals to organise their societies. Just as Darwin developed much of his theory of natural selection from studying finches in the Galapagos archipelago, Wilson’s work had implications far beyond island habitats. As burgeoning human populations encroach on wild spaces, they confine the habitat that remains to smaller and smaller parcels. Wilson’s work showed how this has led to a collapse in biological diversity, with consequences beyond the loss of individual species. In the latter part of his life he became a prominent advocate for the conservation of biodiversity. His book Biophilia (1986) argued that an affinity for other species is fundamental to humanity. In 2016, aged 87, he published Half Earth: Our Planet’s Fight for Life, building on an earlier idea that we should set aside half of the planet’s surface for wildlife. His language was forthright and decidedly un-academic. “We’re extinguishing Earth’s biodiversity as though the species of the natural world are no better than weeds and kitchen vermin,” he wrote. “Have we no shame?” Born in Birmingham, Alabama, he was the only child of Edward Wilson, a former army accountant, and Inez (nee Freeman). His parents divorced when he was seven, briefly placing him as a boarder in the Gulf Coast Military Academy in Gulfport, Mississippi. As he wrote in his autobiography, Naturalist (1994), the strict discipline of the school, and the southern code of behaviour inculcated by his father, left him with a belief that he should “never back down if honour is at stake”; he attributed his later willingness to face up to his academic opponents to this upbringing. He dealt with the unhappiness in his home life by focusing intently on the natural world, deciding at the age of 11 to document every species of ant in his home state. At 13 he made the first report that fire ants, an invasive species, were living near his home in Alabama. While still an undergraduate at the University of Alabama, he published a survey of the fire ant’s progress across the state. He began a PhD at the University of Tennessee before transferring to Harvard, which housed the largest museum collection of ants in the world. He spent the rest of his career there, winning a second Pulitzer prize in 1991 for his monumental volume The Ants (co-authored with a fellow entomologist, Bert Hölldobler). He retired from teaching in 1996 but continued to write and campaign as professor emeritus and honorary curator in entomology. He received numerous honours, including the US national medal of science and the Crafoord prize (often regarded as a Nobel prize for ecologists). The E O Wilson Biodiversity Foundation was set up in his name in 2005 to continue his educational work in conservation. In October 2021 Wilson participated via video link in a discussion with David Attenborough on the Half Earth concept, where he was asked to comment on whether the Covid-19 pandemic would change attitudes to the interconnectedness of species. He replied that in future the pandemic would be regarded as “just a flick on a movie screen”, but, he added “We will never come out from under the loss of species that we have been carelessly allowing to happen just by our ordinary everyday activities. Extinction is for ever.” Wilson married Irene Kelley in 1955 and they settled in Lexington, Massachusetts. She died in August 2021. Wilson is survived by their daughter, Catherine. • Edward Osborne Wilson, biologist, naturalist and author, born 10 June 1929; died 26 December 2021Best gig ever: 3.30 in the morning, sun coming up, watching from the front as you played to an uninterested crowd at Oxford’s Trinity College May ball, 1981. You must have thought you’d sold your soul to the devil. kiwisimmo The fee was good and we needed new amplifiers. I remember lots of “girls” – as they might have called them in an upper-class novel – being sick in the bushes and people tearing around in outfits. They made the mistake of giving us rooms and free champagne. Pete [Thomas], our drummer, was an enthusiastic drinker in those days and took off into the night wearing a gown and a tiara. Does accepting an OBE show you are not the person who wrote Any King’s Shilling? pipini It’s just another bauble in my china cabinet, along with the MTV Video Music award, which no one knows I’ve got, either. Look, my grandfather Pat McManus was in the Royal Irish Regiment and died from illness resulting from wounds he got fighting for king and country. My dad [Ross McManus] went in through the tradesman’s entrance to sing at the Buckingham Palace staff ball in 1962. So, apart from the fact that my mum told me to go and have a laugh, I thought: “I’m going in through the front door.” It doesn’t change my view of the idea of empire as ludicrous and hideous. One of the gentlemen working there was a fan and he’d written this great setlist on Buckingham Palace notepaper. That’s my nicest memento of it. I loved The Death of Magic Thinking [from his new album, The Boy Named If] on your recent US tour. Does it have anything to do with Joan Didion’s book The Year of Magical Thinking? justalackey The song is about the terror of leaving childhood, when the wonderful inventions of your imagination come up against teenage lust and algebra. The Sopranos writer David Chase gave me the title when I met him at a supper 11 years ago. I told him my boys had started school and he said: “School. The death of magic thinking.” I knew exactly what he meant. I believe This Year’s Model is your best LP. Do you agree? aubraccity Every 35 days I’d agree, and on another day I’d recommend something like North, which a lot of people didn’t like, but came from the heart. The music industry prefers the orthodox to new ideas, but I’ve always tried to do something else, even at the risk of losing some of my audience. Oliver’s Army contains a phrase that seemed shocking then, but now is considered unspeakable. If you rewrote the couplet, what would its replacement be? DaveDumanis I believe I was wide awake when I wrote the song about career opportunities, but sadly that two-word slang is a historical fact. It was a derogatory term for Irish Catholics, which I sang to make the point. One dreads to think how the officer class spoke about people of colour. Perhaps I’d express the same idea differently now. I’ve tried changing that verse, but after 44 years I’m done singing it. I’ll sing (What’s So Funny ’Bout) Peace, Love and Understanding instead. Seeing Taylor Swift release new versions of her albums, are there any of your albums you would like to revisit? TeardropsStart We did This Year’s Model as Spanish Model, with Spanish-speaking singers, but if Taylor Swift wants to record all my albums, I’ll not stop her. What percentage of your audiences is female? FifiCorr It depends on whether I open my eyes. I told Iggy Pop that I’d always imagined the [Hollywood venue] Whisky a Go Go would be full of girls in hipsters doing the pony dance, like in films, but by the time I played there it was people wearing bin liners. He said that in the 1960s it was exactly like I’d imagined, but often the reality – in the words of John Cooper Clarke – is some shaven-headed chap with his long-suffering wife saying: “I’m freezing, Charlie, haven’t they finished yet?” while listening to our set. Any news of the long-mooted new Burt Bacharach/Costello music for a possible Broadway show? Paul_Hocker Burt and I were in Capitol studios in the summer with a 30-piece orchestra, cutting two new songs for a collection looking at our nearly 30-year collaboration. We worked on two musical scores simultaneously about 12 years ago, but sadly Painted from Memory and a proposed Austin Powers musical ran into legal complications. At least we got to work together again. He’s 93 and the intensity of his focus is undimmed. He’ll go: “Elvis, in bar six, you’re not singing the right melody.” Which cover versions of your songs have you enjoyed, apart from Robert Wyatt’s Shipbuilding? NewProfile Robert’s is the original and mine is the cover, because it was written for Robert to sing. My favourite cover is Roy Orbison doing The Comedians live at the Cocoanut Grove [in Los Angeles]. I was the rhythm guitarist in the band and when you met this lovely gentleman you’d never imagine he had that power of voice. Oddly enough, my most covered music is The Juliet Letters. There’s an incredible Polish cabaret version, a piano version, string quartets, all sorts. Have you ever met or wanted to work with Neil Young? quilt The first time I played the Bridge School benefit [Young and his late wife Pegi’s event for speech-impaired children], in 1990, I heard this disembodied voice singing harmony during Alison, and Neil walked out with a hand mic. It was great. He played Slane Castle in Ireland when I lived there and my agent, who is also Neil’s, said I should surprise him and sing on Rockin’ in the Free World. I slunk on stage, Booker T from the MGs was singing backing and he pointed to a piano and said: “Take it, Elvis,” like in a dream. Fiona Apple’s performance of I Want You on YouTube is stunning, disturbing and even upsetting. What more can you tell us? Strawwdog Imagine being stood next to Fiona when she did it. It was at some crazy production in Atlantic City. I’d never assume that anyone from a younger generation would know who we are, but she threw herself into it. As the guitarist, I was just trying to match her intensity. By way of thanks, we put a lot into our version of her song I Know. Do you agree that your Saturday headline on the Pyramid stage at Glastonbury in 1987 is the festival’s finest two hours? Bestbeforeoctober88 I could win money in a pub quiz or provoke uncontrollable laughter by suggesting I ever headlined the Pyramid stage at Glastonbury, but it was different then. I’d say ’84 was better. More recently, I was third on the bill to the Rolling Stones and managed to get into the inner sanctum. I was chatting to Keith Richards, Mick Taylor and Ronnie Wood when Charlie Watts, bless him, came up and, without saying hello to me, said: “Hey Woody? Who is this fella, married to Diana Krall? What’s that about?” It was fantastic, because, being a jazzer, he was a huge fan of my wife. How do you feel about the lemonade? wjelly [He laughs.] In the 70s, I was the backing vocalist on an advert my dad did for R White’s Lemonade. Secret Lemonade Drinker saved Christmas when we were broke, and after I had a hit they revived it. I actually preferred Moorhouse’s green cream soda, which was big in Birkenhead. I’ve discovered that Moorhouse’s became R White’s, so it seems I was drinking R White’s long before I knew it. Tramp the Dirt Down and Shipbuilding being obvious exceptions, why have you steered clear of political songwriting? Ummmmm I never sit down and think: “I am now going to write a political song,” but if we’re speaking about things I’ve sensed or seen, then perhaps I can interest you in the following titles from our catalogue of human misery and wickedness and the groovy lessons there: Less Than Zero, Night Rally, Oliver’s Army, Little Palaces, Pills and Soap, Invasion Hit Parade; [This Sad] Burlesque from The Juliet Letters; Bedlam and She’s Pulling Out the Pin from The Delivery Man; The River in Reverse; Red Cotton from the unfinished opera The Secret Songs; Bullets for the New-born King and One Bell Ringing from National Ransom, American Gangster Time; all the songs with the Roots on Wise Up Ghost; Blood &amp; Hot Sauce from the A Face in the Crowd score; We Are All Cowards Now from Hey Clockface; and I guess Nick Lowe’s (What’s So Funny) ’Bout Peace, Love and Understanding. Does that answer the question? What would be your favourite Liverpool FC XI? TheJohnYoung The 1965 FA Cup side, which I can still name. When Roger Hunt died this year, it was really a moment. When people ask who my ultimate hero was, expecting someone from music, the only person I ever thought of in heroic terms was Roger Hunt. I could never play football any good, but Roger looked like a footballer; he never got sent off. He was like a Roy of the Rovers kind of invention and after he stopped playing he went back and worked in his family business. He didn’t haunt the club. Which is the best invention – space travel or gravy? Stuntman Gravy is ghastly. I don’t like it, because I come from another planet. For years, in Little Palaces, I heard: “The sedated homes of England / Who does defend the lies?” instead of: “The sedated homes of England / Are theirs to vandalise.” Any other examples of this? peilefella I like that line and might use it from now on. I once recorded a demo of Bob Dylan’s You’re Gonna Make Me Lonesome When You Go for a George Jones record I was hoping to persuade him to let me produce. I sang it as a country song and in all honesty sang: “Relationships have all been bad / Mine have been like lanes and rambles.” Much later, somebody pointed out that the line was actually: “Verlaine’s and Rimbaud’s”. My guess is that George Jones was not a huge fan of French symbolist poetry. You find yourself on stage at the 2024 Republican National Convention with Donald Trump in the front row. You turn to the band and … what song do you count in? Voodootoyoutoo Baby’s Got a Brand New Hairdo. • The Boy Named If is released on 14 January on EMIAround half-five on the second afternoon, Joe Root turned, again, to Stuart Broad and asked him to come back for his sixth spell of the innings. The sun was a little lower but other than that the only thing that had changed since he finished his last, less than an hour previous, was that Australia had pressed further ahead. The two batsmen Broad had been bowling to then, Usman Khawaja and Mitchell Starc, were still in, and that much better set, Mark Wood had run out of luck, Jimmy Anderson had run out of inspiration, the partnership was up to 40 runs and Australia were closing in on a total of 400. Whatever little flutter of hope England had when the last wicket fell had faded away again, and left everyone who shared in it feeling all the more foolish for thinking it would ever be any other way. Which fits. The decision to leave Broad out of the team for two of the first three Tests was a poor bit of judgment that will come to define this tour, as well as the career of the coach who made it. Like Broad said, given the way England batted in those matches picking him wouldn’t have made so very much difference. But it would have at least shown that the management knew who was in their own best XI. Now he had been selected, Broad didn’t need much persuading to come back for that extra spell. He needed one more wicket for his five-fer, and a place on the SCG honours board alongside his dad Chris, who made a century there in 1988. It had been 18 months since Broad last took five wickets in an innings, against West Indies at Old Trafford in 2020. Of course he missed the last few months of that stretch after he tore his calf during a training session before the second Test against India during the summer just gone. It was a bad injury, which needed surgery, and three months of recuperation. Kevin Pietersen warned Broad that a similar injury had finished his own playing career. Broad is 35, and has a second life lined up in TV, there must have been times when it felt touch and go whether it would end his too. For the first two weeks, he couldn’t even put weight on his foot. After that, there were the long hours treading water in a swimming pool, followed, as he got fitter, by lonely road and gym sessions, then trips to Wimbledon Cricket Club to take tentative steps in the nets, and solitary journeys up to Loughborough to bowl stretches of 10, 12, 14 overs in front of his rehab team. At the front of his mind all the time, the lure of one more tour to Australia, and the prospect of taking the new ball in the first innings at Brisbane, and bowling to David Warner again. The promise of it got him through. Of course it didn’t work out the way he’d dreamed it, it rarely does. Broad has ended up a bit-part player on tour, picked for one Test on a flat track in Adelaide and then another now the series is over already. There was a time when he would have spoken out about exactly how he felt about it, like he did when they dropped him from the Test against West Indies at the Rose Bowl in 2020, but this time he’s tried, some minor grumbling apart, to bite his lip. The men picked ahead of him, Ollie Robinson and Anderson, made a strong case with their wickets, and besides, there were plenty of other good judges making Broad’s point for him in the papers and on TV. It must have left him addressing those same questions all over again, about whether, and why, exactly, he wanted to go on flogging himself for a team who didn’t seem to rate him enough to pick him when they needed him. He said before this Test that he wasn’t going to make a spur-of-the-moment call about retirement. He says he’ll make the decision between now and the spring tour to the West Indies. But first, he had a point to prove. This was the 19th five-fer of Broad’s career. The highlights make it look as good as any of them. He got Warner, of course, in the classic fashion, just the way the two of them must have pictured it, with a delivery from around the wicket that zigged one way and then zagged the other, Steve Smith, too, and Cameron Green, caught behind with similar deliveries, then a vicious bouncer to remove Pat Cummins, and a cutter that had just enough on it to beat Khawaja to finish. That last one was his 125th in Ashes cricket. Among Englishmen, only Ian Botham has more, with 128. But it wasn’t his best bowling, Broad often takes his wickets in fits and sparks, there was none of that this time, just a lot of craft, sweat, and toil. It took him 29 overs – the last time he bowled that many in an innings in which he took five was back in 2009 – and there were moments when Khawaja, Starc and Nathan Lyon were laying into him, when he looked just as vulnerable as any of his teammates. But he persisted, bowling a line and length that, the data showed, he’d often struggled to find on his previous three tours here. He drew more false shots from batsmen than he has done in the past, too. And he made his point. How bittersweet for the team that it came so late.There were things in the first draft of his memoir, says David Pevsner, that his editor thought were “maybe TMI, maybe a bridge too far”. I can’t begin to imagine what was deemed unacceptable, because there is TMI – sample line: “I have always been a copious ejaculator” – on just about every page of Damn Shame, an entertaining, touching and absolutely filthy book. My goodness, the filth! “There is that,” he says with a laugh. Pevsner describes himself, self-deprecatingly, as “a minor player in the entertainment biz”; he’s had small roles in big TV dramas such as Grey’s Anatomy and Modern Family, and bigger roles in small ones. He has been on Broadway, touring productions and off-Broadway hits. He’s not a well-known face, though if you’re a subscriber to his OnlyFans account, where he shares erotic photos and videos of himself, you will be very familiar with his body; Pevsner is, I believe, the only person I’ve interviewed whose erection I have seen. Along the way, to supplement his theatre salary, he has been an escort and a “naked maid”, which had things in common with sex work while also including vacuuming (not a euphemism). He appears, smiling and charming (and dressed), over Zoom from his home in Los Angeles. The online porn has lost Pevsner two acting agents, although it is presumably fairly lucrative in itself. Now 62, he had been posing for nude photographs since his early 30s. It was partly about exploring his own sexuality, he says. “It made me curious to see how far I can take it, how far I could explore what’s really going on inside. I would watch porn and be like: ‘I wish I had the guts to do that.’” His own explicit photos and videos are also partly political. At his age, it’s about broadening the idea of older people and sex. “It is important because we’re so used to the idea that you get to a certain age and go: ‘I’m done, nobody’s going to want me any more.’ I don’t want people to feel that way. I want them to know that it’s never too late. I’m 62, I’m still desirable. I want people to not shut down, and there’s a lot of shutdown when it comes to age.” The overarching theme of Pevsner’s book is overcoming shame and it’s pretty fair to say, from his exploits, he appears to have largely succeeded. “One of the reasons there’s so many stories of [my childhood in the book] is that you get to know me, my insecurities,” he says. “When we get to the more explicit stuff, people may find some of it a little shocking, but they’ll understand why it’s there.” Pevsner grew up in a Jewish family in Skokie, a suburb of Chicago, where his father was a jeweller. He was an awkward, shame-ridden child and teenager, loathing his body and confused by his developing sexuality. “I couldn’t say: ‘I’m gay,’ until college,” he says. He had girlfriends at school in an attempt to stop the homophobic bullying, though it didn’t always work. “It was demoralising.” He pauses: “There were nights I cried myself to sleep, thinking: ‘I am abnormal.’ I wish I could go back and say: ‘You are so normal. You’re normal but crazy, and crazy in a good way.’ I was a sweet, funny, smart kid. But I had that angst running through me, and I couldn’t talk to anybody about it.” As a child, he discovered his parents’ recordings of Broadway musicals and loved singing along to radio jingles in the car. He would put on little plays at school, although this often attracted more bullying, “so I stopped doing it”. It was going to college, Carnegie Mellon University, to do performing arts, where, he says, “I was finally among other weirdo artists like me. It was helpful to find my tribe, because I didn’t have confidence and had a lot of shame.” It was there that he came out. After graduating, Pevsner moved to New York in 1982 and got theatre work fairly steadily, often working away on touring musicals, then coming back to the city to pick up jobs as a waiter. He talks lovingly of New York in the 80s; how exciting it was, but also frightening. The Aids epidemic hit the city hard. Pevsner would run into friends he hadn’t seen for a while, and realise they were ill. He appeared in a Broadway production of Fiddler on the Roof and “we had a couple of losses there. We just lost so much – personally, professionally.” For Pevsner, who had only recently started exploring his sexuality, the risk of contracting HIV “put the fear of God into me about sex, and that closed me up a little bit. But I also felt we were all in it together. There was a brotherhood there. We could all kind of put our arms around each other and say: ‘We’ve got to get through this.’” He was scrupulous about safer sex “so I came out OK – but damaged, as many of us did”. The stigma around HIV, and the political inaction, made him furious – and still does, his voice rising at the memories. “They couldn’t get funding early on because Ronald Reagan and [then New York mayor] Ed Koch couldn’t even say ‘Aids’. It was ‘somebody else’s problem’. That created a lot of anger in us.” He writes that living through the crisis – “used as a way to slut-shame gay men” – was probably a reason he later embraced sex so enthusiastically. By the mid-90s, Pevsner’s theatre work was drying up. He’d had success off-Broadway, but it didn’t pay much. His agent had told him he would never get “straight” roles. So he took a job as a “naked maid”, cleaning houses while nude, a role that could take a sexual turn depending on the person who hired him. After that, escort work was not a huge leap. It wasn’t just about money. Pevsner calls his couple of years working as an escort “the best job I ever had outside of showbiz. I met lots of great people who were happy that I was there. I’m a caretaker guy; there were times when they would be like: ‘My mom just died, and I just needed to feel something.’ So I would go and we would talk. It wasn’t all just about, you know, plugging each other up. I just found it was something I took to.” Did he ever feel exploited? “Absolutely, when it was just: ‘Do your job and leave.’ But I enjoyed that as well – as long as I was the one in control. It just tapped into so much about my libido, my sexual ability, my caretaking. There was a lot of psychology involved with it, a lot of role-playing. It was all the things I was good at!” There are some alarming scenes in his book (one involves toenails) but he insists that escorting wasn’t a bad experience: “I can’t say that that’s how it is for everybody.” Still, he stopped in his 40s, and started a decluttering business. Alongside, Pevsner wrote songs – putting his filthy poetry to music – for the revue show Naked Boys Singing!, and performed two of his own one-man shows. It has not been, of course, to everyone’s taste. Does he mind criticism? “I used to,” he says. He remembers sending a CD of his songs to a friend, a successful Broadway musical director, who was scathing. “He was just like: ‘I hate this. Why do you think this dirty stuff is funny?’ I thought [my songs were] funny, clever and sexy. Some people are offended by it. Some people did not want to hear a song about anal warts, for instance.” He smiles, mischievous. “But to me, it’s one of the funniest songs I’ve ever written. It’s where I learned, after really heavy criticism, you’re not going to please everybody. You’ve got to write with your heart, put it out there. And somebody will respond.” It is what he wants to do with his book. “A lot of it is a fish-out-of-water story,” and many people can relate to that, he says. “The elements of shame, ageism, the fear of sexuality and nudity – there’s a lot to identify with.” Does it all – the filthy songs, the online porn, the eye-popping memoir – make him feel very exposed? “I guess I do,” he says, after a pause. “But I am gobsmacked and thrilled that I had the guts to do it.” Damn Shame: A Memoir of Desire, Defiance, and Show Tunes by David Pevsner is published by Penguin Random House.When Shaparak Khorsandi’s teenage son recently discovered 90s music – the Shamen’s Ebeneezer Good, Pulp and more – he had questions for her. What did Jarvis Cocker mean when he sang “I seem to have left an important part of my brain somewhere, somewhere in a field in Hampshire?” Were they singing about ecstasy? Did she go raving, too? Khorsandi was in her teens and 20s in the 1990s, and being swept along in ladette culture. Used by the lads’ mag FHM as early as 1994, “ladette” came to describe bolshie women who could out-party and out-gross any hardened lad. Sara Cox, Denise van Outen and Zoe Ball were the media favourites: often pictured binge-drinking and out on the town. Ladettes went hand-in-hand with 90s lad culture, where Britpop, banter and sport collided in a blizzard of hedonism. These “new lads”, posited one researcher, were retreating into a more simplistic masculinity in response to the Spice Girls’ concept of Girl Power; and middle-class boys were co-opting the dress and behaviours of working-class men. Writing her latest show, It Was the 90s!, for the Edinburgh fringe last summer, Khorsandi reflected on the decade. “We’ve glossed over ladette culture a bit; it’s been fun to revisit it,” she says. “It was initially meant to be a feminist action. We thought we were taking power back by making ourselves very ill with booze and selling ourselves short when we went out. The men do it, so should we! But what we didn’t have, which my son’s generation has, was the notion of self-care.” It Was the 90s! delves into Khorsandi’s time as a ladette and how attitudes have changed. What do we dismiss under the guise of nostalgia? Was the pressure to go out every night, drink until you were sick, and separate sex from emotions really as good as she thought at the time? Khorsandi explores it all. “The way I deal with bad times is to make them funny and this is the most fun show I’ve done,” she says. “This is an honest conversation between 23-year-old me and 48-year-old me.” Khorsandi started out in comedy in the 90s. “Standup then was the closest thing I had to punk. We just drank until some kind of career happened or you died. There were no other women that I worked with, and it was all about being as hard and as gross as you could.” Esther Manito has also been looking back on 90s ladette culture in her show #NotAllMen, which won the Leicester comedy festival’s best show award in 2021. She comes on stage to Robin Thicke’s Blurred Lines and opens with: “Do we have any violent misogynists in?” Growing up, Manito would spend summer holidays in Beirut. Friends would ask: was it safe? In reality, her happy experiences in Lebanon stood in stark contrast to simply walking home from school in Essex, where she faced catcalls almost daily. The female empowerment she was fed through pop culture back then was incredibly lacking. “We weren’t allowed feminism in the 90s,” Manito jokes in her show. “We had the Spice Girls.” During the pandemic, living with her Lebanese father, British husband and son, Manito began to explore masculinity and how its expectations can damage men. She spoke to old school friends about the way lockdown pushed many couples into stereotypical gender roles. One friend found a list Manito had written as a teenager, detailing the qualities of her dream boyfriend, including: “Must not touch me with the light on.” “That projection of what a woman’s body was through lads’ magazines meant I was really self-conscious,” Manito says. She had grown up in a progressive, feminist household, so the pressure to conform felt doubly bad. “I thought: I’m not this hairless, skinny, big-titted, oiled-up figure, and I don’t want to be.” She recalls a column where Zoo magazine’s agony uncle Danny Dyer suggested a man who’d split with his girlfriend should “cut your ex’s face” so no one else would date her. (He later claimed he was misquoted.) Such flagrant misogyny, she thought, must affect how boys and men interacted with women. “Looking at my husband and others, I think it took them a really long time to be able to have relationships with women that weren’t sexual,” she says. While some of this was “shocking” to look back on, “you find humour in the bizarre”, she says. Both Manito and Khorsandi recall being labelled “shouty” or “fiery” after voicing their opinions. Khorsandi “cultivated a posh accent” because she was made to feel like “I couldn’t be brown and working class”. She shortened her name to Shappi because “I was so ashamed every time anyone said ‘Shaparak’ out loud because there’d be titters of laughter.” This is the first full tour she’s performing as Shaparak. Khorsandi received an ADHD diagnosis earlier this year – another prompt for reflection. Was it partly her undiagnosed ADHD that drew her into ladette behaviour? “Looking back, the booze medicated my ADHD,” she says. “I think not understanding about self-care and neurodivergence played into the 90s binge-drinking culture.” Looking back has made them both appreciate where society is today. “I definitely don’t feel nostalgia for the 90s!” Manito says. “I don’t want to be stuck in my youth,” says Khorsandi. “I’ve watched how things have changed my standup and values have changed. Comedy is part of culture – it all moves forward.” Both women have noticed a refreshing acceptance among their children’s generation. “There’s no othering,” Manito says. “I’ve never heard my boy say: ‘Girls can’t do that’, something I always heard growing up. I think my kids will face fewer hurdles when it comes to creating connections with people.” “The tolerance they have for one another is astounding,” Khorsandi agrees. “It doesn’t occur to my son’s generation to be negative about someone who is transitioning or non-binary. I had to explain to my children that ginger people used to get teased at school. They looked at me like: ‘Are you mad?!’ Things have really changed.” Shaparak Khorsandi’s It Was the 90s! tour resumes 21 January at Otley Courthouse; Esther Manito is at the Beck theatre, Hayes, Friday 7 January, and performs #NotAllMen at the Glee Club, Birmingham, 22 AprilA former student who was told to read classic literature after being convicted of a terrorism offence has told the sentencing judge he “enjoyed Shakespeare more than Jane Austen”. Ben John, who downloaded almost 70,000 white supremacist documents and bomb-making instructions, was given a two-year suspended prison sentence at Leicester crown court in August last year. John was told to read famous works of literature including Pride and Prejudice, Twelfth Night and A Tale of Two Cities as part of a five-year serious crime prevention order. At a review hearing on Thursday, the judge Timothy Spencer QC asked for an update on which books John had read and what he thought of them. “I want you to write down now what literature you have read since we last met,” he said. John said: “I enjoyed Shakespeare more than I did Jane Austen but I still enjoyed Jane Austen by a degree.” “Well I find that encouraging,” the judge replied. Spencer told John he acknowledged “publicity of this case” had affected his rehabilitation. John, 21, from Lincoln was found guilty by a jury of possessing a record of information likely to be useful to a person committing or preparing an act of terrorism. The charge under section 58 of the Terrorism Act, which has a maximum sentence of 15 years’ imprisonment, was brought after the discovery on a computer of a publication containing diagrams and instructions on how to construct explosive devices. Police said John had also amassed 67,788 documents in bulk downloads on to hard drives, containing a wealth of white supremacist and antisemitic material. They said he had become part of the extreme right wing (XRW) online, and was studying criminology with psychology in Leicester when he was arrested. During sentencing, the judge said John had avoided imprisonment by “the skin of his teeth”. The attorney general has asked the court of appeal to review the “unduly lenient” sentence handed to the defendant. The decision by Suella Braverman QC to refer the sentence to the court of appeal came after anti-fascist group Hope Not Hate sent an open letter asking for the it to be reconsidered. Hope Not Hate’s chief executive, Nick Lowles, said: “These sorts of lenient sentences risk encouraging other young people to access and share terrorist and extremist content because they will not fear the repercussions of their actions.” John was told to attend court again in six months’ time when the judge would check his progress. “It is clear that you have tried to sort your life out. I am encouraged about what you have written out for me and I am encouraged by your efforts to seek employment and I wish you well with that,” Spencer said.Boris Johnson has been criticised by his ethics adviser for acting “unwisely” but cleared of being deliberately misleading during an investigation into the funding of his Downing Street flat refurbishment. The prime minister gave a “humble and sincere” apology for failing to disclose crucial messages after facing questions from Christopher Geidt over an undeclared WhatsApp exchange with a Tory peer who funded a makeover of the No 11 residence. Johnson said he “did not recall” the messages with David Brownlow, the man who provided £58,000 to cover some of the cost for the renovations, and blamed “security issues” – thought to relate to when his mobile number was discovered online – for not having access to the phone. Complaining that parts of his No 11 flat looked a “bit of a tip”, Johnson asked Brownlow on 29 November 2020 for “approvals” so his decorator, Lulu Lytle, could “get on with it”. He added: “Ps am on the great exhibition plan Will revert.” In reply, Brownlow said he would “get it sorted ASAP” and reassured Johnson: “Approval is a doddle as it’s only me and I know where the £ will come from.” He also thanked Johnson for “thinking about GE2”. Asked what the great exhibition plan Johnson referred to was, his spokesman said it was an “idea that wasn’t taken forward”. He added that instead, “Festival UK” would be going ahead in 2022 – but could not explain the difference between that event and the great exhibition plan. Lord Geidt, who produced a report last spring which said Johnson told him he knew nothing of the flat payments until “immediately prior” to newspaper reports in February 2021, was deeply critical of having not been provided what he called the “missing exchange”. While he said the new evidence did not alter “the fundamental assessment” that Johnson did not break the ministerial code, Geidt said he doubted if he would still have concluded that Johnson took all steps to make the correct donation and seek advice when he first became aware of the payments. Although Johnson’s phone was “no longer available to search”, Geidt said it “was again accessed” for “another purpose” in June, after the initial inquiry concluded. It also emerged Brownlow had offered the message exchange to the Cabinet Office – but this was declined, in a move Geidt described as “extraordinary”. He concluded: “The greatest possible care should have been taken to assemble all relevant material and this standard has not been met.” In another thinly veiled furious letter to Johnson sent on 23 December, Geidt said: “The episode shook my confidence precisely because potential and real failures of process occurred in more than one part of the apparatus of government.” Johnson wrote to Geidt two days earlier offering a “humble and sincere apology” and saying he wanted to “draw a line under these events” by offering “more dedicated support from officials” for the adviser’s future work. The prime minister resisted committing to beefing up Geidt’s powers to let him open investigations without needing sign-off, as several bodies have recommended. However, a subsequent report compiled by the Electoral Commission unearthed that Johnson messaged the man behind the payments, David Brownlow, in November 2020 asking him to authorise further refurbishments to the flat. The discrepancy prompted a senior Labour MP to allege Johnson “may have lied”, and Geidt sought an explanation from the prime minister in several letters exchanged over the past month. The Conservatives were fined £17,800 in December for not reporting the £52,801 the party received via Lord Brownlow’s company (Huntswood Associates Ltd). Johnson blamed not sharing the WhatsApp message with Geidt on having changed phone numbers, saying he “did not have access to my previous device and did not recall the message exchange”. Geidt, who is the government’s independent adviser on ministerial interests, said he had concluded his initial finding Johnson did not break the ministerial code still stood: “The new disclosure did not in fact result in change to my original assessment of your interests insofar as they related to the ministerial code.” However, Geidt made clear his disdain at not having been given all the evidence originally and is expected to push to be given greater powers in subsequent investigations. He said the episode “shook my confidence precisely because potential and real failures of process occurred in more than one part of the apparatus of government”.Environmental activists who accused police of intimidation and harassment have had a review decision in their favour withdrawn in controversial circumstances. The decision, produced by the office of the police and crime commissioner for Devon and Cornwall, was particularly critical of Project Servator, a national counter-terrorism strategy, saying it was “increasingly being used as an intimidatory and oppressive national policing tactic”. Officials have admitted that the withdrawal of a review that was highly critical of the policing of an incident during environmental protests at last year’s G7 summit in Cornwall “is a rare occurrence”. Rob Higgs, a co-founder of Ocean Rebellion, which works to try to halt the destruction of marine biodiversity and to repair it, lodged a complaint with Devon and Cornwall police’s professional standards department about what he claimed was intimidation and harassment during police raids at a quarry and at a boatyard on 12 May last year, a month before the G7 summit. He said the police actions were particularly concerning in light of government plans to curb the right to peaceful protest in the current policing bill. Officers from Project Servator, a policing operation designed to disrupt criminality of various kinds including terrorism, visited Trevone quarry in Penryn, Cornwall, where Higgs lives and works, and a boatyard where he has a workshop. They were searching for Higgs, who was not at either location on the day they visited. Others who were there have complained that the tone of the police visits was intimidatory and amounted to harassment. Higgs was neither arrested nor charged with any criminal offence after the police visits. He lodged complaints with Devon and Cornwall police that the actions of the Project Servator officers were unlawful because they entered Trevone quarry without a warrant, an action he considers to be harassment and a breach of various parts of the Human Rights Act. His complaint was not upheld by Devon and Cornwall police’s professional standards department, so he approached the office of the police and crime commissioner for Devon and Cornwall and asked for a review of the internal police investigation. On 20 December he received the review, which was highly critical of the police and disagreed with the findings of the internal police complaint investigation that had vindicated the Project Servator officers. The review said the matter had not been dealt with in a “reasonable and proportionate” way in the internal police investigation and made a series of highly critical observations about Project Servator and the issues raised in Higgs’ complaint. Comments in the report include: Project Servator is “apparently increasingly being used as an intimidatory and oppressive national policing tactic”. While police witnesses were interviewed about the incident, those visited by the police were not. “There appears to have been a quiescent acceptance of the police account of their actions by the [police] professional standards department.” Potential misconduct by police officers who visited the quarry and boatyard should also be considered. The matter should have been referred to the Independent Office for Police Conduct “given the politically sensitive and national implications of such disproportionality in a protest situation”. However, two days after Higgs received the report he was contacted by the office of the police and crime commissioner to say there had been an “error” in the review and it was being withdrawn. Officials said this was a “rare occurrence”. Higgs said: “Currently, in this country we still have the right to peaceful protest, which the policing bill would effectively remove. I’m worried about giving the police more power to curtail this. Too often they are already abusing the powers they have. I am suspicious about the police’s motivation in withdrawing this report.” He said he and other climate activists were keen to work with police liaison officers about the nonviolent actions they are staging. A spokesperson for the office of the police and crime commissioner for Devon, Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly said: “A quality assurance process identified that a complaint review carried out by our office did not meet our usual high standards and contained comments about policing which do not represent the views of our office. We therefore took the decision to overrule the review outcome and repeat the process to ensure that all recommendations are correct appropriate standards met. The complaint review has been reassigned to an alternative investigator and we hope to have concluded it by the end of this week.” Shaun Sawyer, the chief constable of Devon and Cornwall police, said: “Devon and Cornwall police note the complaint from Mr Higgs and the initial decision of the office of the police and crime Commissioner to uphold the complaint. “At the time, officers from Devon and Cornwall police were engaging with a number of individuals who had expressed a desire to peacefully protest at the event, the purpose of this being to facilitate that protest as effectively and safely as possible, while allowing the event of international significance to not be put under threat or unduly interrupted. “Project Servator is an overt and engaging national policing tactic to ensure communities are alive to the threat of terrorism and the importance of being prepared and able to report suspicious activity as well as not putting any group in undue danger by protesting in a way which may increase threat as a result.”Millions of people have been given financial breathing space after HM Revenue and Customs effectively extended the tax self-assessment deadline by a month, until 28 February. HMRC is postponing late-payment penalties for self-assessment taxpayers until 1 April because it “recognises the pressure” individuals and businesses are facing because of Covid-19. The move – a repeat of concessions made last year – is good news for the estimated 5.7 million people who have still not filed their 2020-21 tax return. Almost 6.5 million people have already done so. The official deadline for completing a return is 31 January, after which a £100 late-filing penalty would be automatically imposed. HMRC said the deadline to file a return and pay any due tax was still 31 January, but it was waiving late-filing penalties for one month to give more time to taxpayers and accountants who might be struggling. As a result, those who file late will not be hit with a penalty, provided their return is submitted by 28 February. In addition, anyone who cannot pay their self-assessment tax by the deadline will not face a late-payment penalty, provided they pay in full or set up a so-called “time to pay” arrangement – which lets people spread their payments – by 1 April. Normally a 5% late-payment penalty is charged on any unpaid tax that is still outstanding on 3 March. But HMRC said interest would be payable from 1 February, as usual, “so it is still better to pay on time if possible”. Dawn Register, head of tax dispute resolution at the accountant BDO, said: “This is a very welcome move by HMRC … This will be a huge relief to those facing tax bills alongside other household debts in January. “HMRC clearly understands that those severely impacted by Covid-19 should not face receiving a ‘brown envelope’ in February as it would result in unnecessary angst.” Kevin Sefton at tax app Untied said: “The current Covid wave will be affecting not just those who need to file, but accountants and others supporting the 51% of filers who use an adviser, and HMRC themselves.”Warnings of widespread travel disruption and tricky driving conditions have been issued as snow, sleet and rain swept across large parts of the UK on Thursday. The warnings came as a big chill enveloped all four nations. A temperature of -8C was recorded on Thursday morning in the village of Topcliffe, North Yorkshire, making it the coldest night in England of the winter so far, the Met Office said. Richard Miles, a Met Office spokesperson, said wintry snow showers were possible everywhere from mid-Wales upwards, with northern England, Scotland and Northern Ireland bearing the brunt. Blustery conditions would make the temperatures feel colder for many throughout the day and night as air from the Canadian Arctic swept across the UK, he said. Four Met Office yellow warnings for the west of Northern Ireland, northern England and much of Scotland were in place on Thursday, all of them cautioning about snow, sleet, ice and difficult travel conditions which were likely to continue into Friday morning. The alerts included warnings of thundersnow in Scotland, a relatively uncommon phenomenon. “It is just thunder when it’s snowing,” Miles said. “It happens for the same reason that thunder and lightning happens in the summer, it’s to do with the temperature gradient. It is the same mechanisms but it sounds and looks slightly different in snowy conditions.” Miles said there was a small risk of power cuts or mobile phone coverage issues because of the weather conditions. The weather was affecting some ferry services in Scotland, including one of the busiest routes, between Ardrossan, in north Ayrshire, and Brodick, on the Isle of Arran. They were cancelled on Thursday and are expected to resume at 8.20am on Friday. Sailings to the islands of Coll, Tiree, Iona and to Armadale on Skye were also cancelled due to strong winds and swell conditions. Traffic Scotland tweeted safety tips for drivers. The wintry conditions follow an unseasonably mild new year, with record temperatures as high as 16.5C in Bala, Wales, on New Year’s Eve. “We are back to what you would expect in the winter,” Miles said. “It is more like average temperatures.” The yellow warnings are in place until late morning on Friday, with the weekend weather across the UK expected to be unsettled and changeable.The UK government is facing legal action over its decision to keep using a Malaysian company accused of using forced labour as a supplier of personal protective equipment (PPE) to the NHS. Lawyers at the London-based law firm Wilson Solicitors have filed for a judicial review of the government’s decision to name the UK subsidiary of the Malaysian company Supermax as one of the approved suppliers in a new £6bn contract for disposable gloves for NHS workers. Supermax has faced persistent allegations of the use of forced labour involving its migrant workforce at factories in Malaysia since 2019. In October 2021, the US banned imports from Supermax after an investigation found “ample evidence” of forced labour. Canada halted federal imports in November 2021, also due to concerns over labour abuses. In 2019 Supermax workers claimed they had to work 30 days in a row without a day off and had paid high fees in their home countries to get the jobs. The company denied the allegations. After the US ban, the UK government launched its own investigation into the allegations of modern slavery and forced labour concerning Supermax. But in December 2021 Supermax was named as one of the approved suppliers able to pitch for contracts under NHS Supply Chain’s new “framework agreement” for the purchase of surgical gloves. Wilson Solicitors, which is acting for a group of Supermax workers, said it had asked the government to reconsider its decision to continue awarding contracts to the company, arguing that public procurement legislation in the UK allowed for the authorities to discontinue relationships with suppliers on the basis of evidence of labour abuses. It said it found the government’s response “inadequate” and so is proceeding with the judicial review. “The legal requirements are clear that there should be real verification of suppliers before the award stage, but it is not clear that these necessities have been met,” said Nusrat Uddin, a solicitor at Wilson. “It is inadequate for the government to carry out due diligence after the award stage, their approach undermines the UK’s claims that they are world-leading in the fight against modern slavery and highlights the weakness in their own legislation, policies and practices,” she said. The case is due to be lodged at the high court on Friday. Wilson said it was the first time that the UK government had faced legal action under public procurement legislation. Supermax has provided hundreds of millions of gloves via the NHS to hospital doctors and nurses. In 2020, it received a Covid-19 contract worth £316m. The latest order placed with Supermax was in July 2021 for 135m gloves at a cost of £7.9m, according to the Department of Health and Social Care. A government spokesperson from the Department of Health and Social Care, which oversees the NHS, said: “We have made strong commitments to eradicate modern slavery from all contracts in the government supply chain. “We take any allegations of this nature very seriously and do not hesitate to investigate claims made against manufacturers. A proper due-diligence process is carried out for all contracts and our suppliers are required to follow the highest legal and ethical standards. We cannot comment further at this stage.” Malaysia produces nearly two-thirds of the world’s disposable gloves. During the pandemic, UK hospitals were also provided with millions of gloves from Brightway and Top Glove, which have faced accusations of labour abuses from some of their workers. The US banned imports from the latter for more than a year over evidence of the use of forced labour. This ban was lifted in September after Top Glove provided information showing the issue had been resolved. Supermax did not respond to the Guardian’s request for comment but said in a statement that it had implemented a new foreign worker policy in November 2021, which would “speed up the process” of meeting the International Labour Organization’s labour standards. It also said it had raised its minimum wage, was repaying recruitment fees to some former workers, and was working on an equal pay structure to eliminate discriminatory practices. • This article was amended on 7 January 2022 to clarify that the framework agreement comes under the remit of NHS Supply Chain, not the NHS, and to add further information about Top Glove in relation to labour issues.Just under three weeks before the Taliban reached Kabul and took control of Afghanistan, 50 of the most powerful women in the country gathered outdoors in a shady spot to discuss how to deal with the approaching danger. Wearing colourful headscarves, some took notes while others listened intently to Fawzia, 48, one of the most senior female judges in Afghanistan. Holding a microphone, she spoke with urgency about the advancing threat and the need to protect the rights that female lawyers, women’s rights activists and journalists had spent decades fighting for. But they had no idea quite how quickly their precious freedoms were going to be lost. Fawzia and her family escaped from Afghanistan via Tbilisi, Georgia, after the main Operation Pitting airlifts had concluded. They are now being accommodated in a hotel in London under Arap, the UK government’s Afghan relocations and assistance policy. Unlike asylum seekers, the Afghan families are treated more like tourists or business travellers. They are also not constrained by burly security guards standing with folded arms in front of the hotel entrance. Fawzia, her lawyer husband and their four children – aged 18, 16, 11 and nine – say they are very grateful for the sanctuary that has been offered them, and the British government has been very kind. But they do not know what the future holds. Like other Afghans brought to safety, they have been granted six months’ leave to remain in the UK. Details of what will happen after that are not known. Fawzia is energetically networking with other female Afghan judges and human rights defenders in exile, along with prominent female lawyers in the UK such as Helena Kennedy, to try to secure a safe exit for those who have not yet managed to escape. She is becoming increasingly anxious about the female judges still stranded in Afghanistan. She believes that while hundreds have escaped, 93 remain there. “The situation for these women is getting worse all the time,” she says. News that eligibility criteria for the Arap scheme are tightening fills her with dread, and she is urging international governments to do more to rescue women still in hiding in her home country. “We must ensure they can be brought to safety.” Fawzia says she has parents to thank for inspiring her to aim high and fight for what she believes in. Her father was a successful scientist with his own factory and the family lived in a large and comfortable home in Kabul. “When the Taliban was in control of everything the first time in the 1990s I did not leave our home for five years. It was a dark and sad time – women and girls lost all their rights,” she says. “I spent my time studying and growing vegetables like tomatoes and peppers in the garden.” Her parents emphasised the importance of girls getting a good education and a career. “By the time I was eight or nine years old I knew I wanted to be a lawyer,” she says. “My mother’s advice to me for when I was grown up was: stand on your own two feet, don’t stand on your husband’s feet.” After qualifying as a judge, Fawzia worked with her government’s ministry of women’s affairs and introduced groundbreaking protections for women and girls including safe houses for women so they could escape from violent husbands, and protections against forced and child marriages. Although life in Kabul after the Americans and the British drove the Taliban out after 9/11 offered more opportunities to women, things were still very dangerous for women like Fawzia who challenged the status quo. “All the time I was in danger in my work,” she says. “And so were the women I was trying to help. One time a violent man came to the court with a gun to shoot his wife who was trying to get justice for things he had done to her. As he pointed the gun at his wife I hit his hands to direct the gun away from his wife. The bullet missed her and she survived. “Another time I was in the car with one of my children who was just six months old. Some people tried to kidnap my baby. I hid her under the seat to save her. “Everything is lost for women in Afghanistan,” she says. “The situation for them is much worse now than it was soon after the Taliban took over.” She is determined to continue raising her voice for her sisters who are in peril just as she did in Afghanistan. Her focus is on building the international network to support the women left behind. For her family’s future in London she is hopeful and optimistic. “In Kabul we lived in a big house. But now it doesn’t matter if we have a big house or a small house. For the first time since the Taliban took over Afghanistan I felt safe and slept well when we arrived in the UK. Here we can start again.”In the decades after the second world war it was the music of Anton Webern, rather than that of his teacher Arnold Schoenberg, that provided the starting point for the revolution launched by the composers of the European avant garde. Yet despite its influence, Webern’s slender output was rarely performed then, and even more rarely recorded. It did not become more widely accessible until the American conductor Robert Craft directed this series of recordings, made in Los Angeles between 1954 and 1956, using an unidentified orchestra made up, presumably, of Hollywood session musicians, and west coast-based soloists, including the soprano Marni Nixon and pianist Leonard Stein. Craft now is best remembered as Igor Stravinsky’s assistant, author of the books of their conversations and credited with encouraging the composer to adopt serial techniques in his later years. But his Webern recordings proved hugely influential; for those of us growing up in the 1960s and 70s, Craft’s LPs provided almost the only way of getting to know these jewel-like works, until in 1979 Pierre Boulez released the first of what would be his two complete surveys. Craft launched a second series of Webern recordings in 2009 for Naxos, left unfinished at his death, while until this reissue his pioneering efforts from more than half a century earlier had never been transferred to CD. The set includes all the works with opus numbers, as well as Webern’s iridescent orchestration of the Ricercar from Bach’s Musical Offering and just one of the early, pre-opus pieces, the Piano Quintet of 1907 – just under three hours’ music altogether. (The second of Boulez’s surveys, released in 2000 and running to six discs, includes much more of the “prehistoric” music, though by no means all of it.) There’s no doubt that Webern interpretation has moved on since Craft made these discs, not only thanks to Boulez’s work, but through recordings by other conductors (especially Karajan, Sinopoli and Dohnányi) too. The cool, rigorous beauty and impacted lyricism they reveal in this music can only be sensed occasionally in these performances. It’s all too obvious that this music was terra incognita to these musicians; there’s a dogged caution and lack of expression in much of the playing and singing, not helped by the dryness of the recording. But in the orchestral works Craft shows that he at least understands what the essence of Webern’s music is; in the Passacaglia Op 1, the two sets of orchestral pieces, Op 6 and Op 10, and the Variations Op 30, the raw-edged fierceness and cut-glass precision seem authentic. But it’s more an issue of historical than of musical significance; the limitations in the performances of the smaller-scale works make this a set for specialists. Those looking for a Webern survey for their collection should opt for one of the Boulez sets.Hello, and happy Thursday (and 2022), Over the last few days, I’ve been reporting on Republicans’ efforts to exert partisan control over election administration and the counting of votes, a new and deeply alarming anti-democratic trend. One year after the 6 January attack on the US Capitol, a staggering number of Republicans continue to believe the election was stolen. A recent UMass Amherst poll, for example, found that 71% of Republicans, and 33% of Americans overall, do not think the 2020 election was legitimate. Other polls from CNN and Reuters/Ipsos have similar findings. Even though officials have described the 2020 election as the most secure in modern history, it’s easy to see why the belief that the election was fraudulent continues to be so pervasive. Republican politicians across the country have embraced the idea and refused to publicly affirm Biden’s win. In turn they’ve capitalized on the lack of confidence they’ve created, passing laws to impose new restrictions on voting access, saying they’re needed to shore up voter confidence. Jessica Marsden, a lawyer at Protect Democracy who tracks state bills permitting election interference, told me something this week on this point that stuck with me. She noted that in 2020, there was a push from Trump and his allies to get legislatures to convene special sessions to throw out the results of the popular vote in their state and appoint their own set of electors. In the end, key Republicans in places like Arizona, Georgia and Pennsylvania were unwilling to go along with it. Marsden thinks the reason that effort didn’t succeed was not because of legal barriers but because of politics. Republican politicians were wary of blowback from discarding votes. “In both Arizona and Georgia, you had the governors not willing to go along with that game, they would have been doing that quite explicitly to throw out the vote of their own constituents,” she said. “What the disinformation campaign does is try to lower the political cost of throwing out election results by creating a lot of uncertainty about what the true results were.” That lowering of the political cost may be Republicans’ biggest achievement over the last year. The idea that politicians may need to step in and toss out legitimate votes is no longer a fringe idea, but instead one that has moved to the center of our political discourse. Combined with more explicit legislation to exert partisan influence over election administration – 32 bills became law in 17 states last year – Republicans have created a uniquely powerful threat to America’s democracy. “Just as gerrymandering and Republicans trying to make voting harder have been baked into our expectations of democracy, it won’t be long until we just accept that Republicans will try to overturn elections they lost,” Matt Fuller writes in a haunting piece for the Daily Beast. “To not do so, to affirm an election that hands power to a Democrat, will become treachery in the GOP. That’s really where we’re headed – if we’re not already there.” Reader questions Please continue to write to me each week with your questions about elections and voting at sam.levine@theguardian.com or DM me on Twitter at @srl and I’ll try to answer as many as I can. Also worth watching … Chuck Schumer, the Senate majority leader, pledged there will be a vote on changing the filibuster rules by 17 January to pass voting rights legislation. It’s unclear if Democrats will have enough support to change the rules. A group of prominent election law scholars wrote an op-ed laying out how Congress can fix the Electoral Count Act, a confusing 19th-century law that Trump and allies tried to rely on to overturn the 2020 election. The law has remained unchanged since last year. Texas quietly released the results of the first part of a review of the 2020 election on New Year’s Eve. Officials didn’t find much. A Minnesota prosecutor is bringing criminal charges against a man who requested an absentee ballot in 2020 while on probation for a felony, but who never voted. California authorities completed a months-long investigation into a man who was found passed out with 300 absentee ballots last summer, and said there was no evidence he intended to commit election fraud.A French rally driver who was seriously injured in an explosion in Jeddah last week has emerged from a coma, while his team have claimed Saudi Arabian authorities are trying to cover up the cause of the incident. Philippe Boutron sustained serious injuries in the blast outside a hotel near Jeddah’s international airport a week ago. The explosion damaged a support vehicle he was driving for the Sodicars Racing team that was competing in the Dakar rally. Boutron was flown back to France where he was placed in a medically induced coma from which he emerged on Thursday, according to his son. Saudi police earlier announced there was no evidence that the explosion was criminal, but a rally official insisted a “malicious act” had not been ruled out. French anti-terrorism investigators have opened a preliminary inquiry into “multiple attempted killings as part of a terrorist group”. Saudi authorities have not commented on the announcement. A Sodicars press spokesperson told French journalists: “We must tell the truth. It was an attack, and not an accident as the Saudi authorities are trying to maintain. There was a bomb in the side rail of the vehicle, under the pedals.” Richard Gonzalez, the head of Sodicars Racing, who was at the scene shortly after the blast, said: “At first we thought something had hit the car, but there was a significant impact under the car’s chassis. There was a charge under the side of the car that exploded. I was there, I have the photos, I saw everything. It was a deliberate act, there’s no doubt about that. “When we saw the car, we thought something wasn’t quite right, but our priority was to get Philippe out and to hospital. He had suffered serious injuries to his legs. He’s a driver and a client but above all he’s been a friend for 10 years. It’s terrible.” The Dakar rally, usually from Paris to the Senegalese capital, was first held in 1978. It has taken place in Saudi Arabia since 2020 for security reasons. Last Thursday, 48 hours before the first stage of the race was to begin, the Sodicars vehicle was “brought to a sudden halt by a sudden explosion” as it was leaving the hotel, the rally organisers, Amaury Sport Organisation (ASO), said. Five Sodicars rally team members in the vehicle escaped but Boutron, 61, who was driving the car, sustained serious injury to his legs. The marketing executive and president of the French Ligue 2 football team Orléans was due to take part in his ninth Dakar rally. After the blast he underwent several operations in Saudi Arabia before being flown to France for further emergency treatment at the Clamart military hospital near Paris. Boutron’s son Benoît, a journalist with the French radio station RMC Sport, told Radio Monte Carlo: “He is indeed seriously injured on both legs. We will know more in 10 days but we must remain cautious at this stage.” He denied reports that Boutron’s legs may have to be amputated. “With this kind of accident you have to take things step by step. Already he’s come out of the coma. We’re lucky to be able to visit him daily,” Benoît said. ASO has said investigations are continuing and nothing has been ruled out, “including a malicious act”. It said it did not wish to comment further. France’s foreign affairs ministry has advised French nationals to exercise “maximum vigilance” in Saudi Arabia. A spokesperson said it had not been ruled out that the explosion was a “criminal act”, and added: “There’s still a terrorist threat in Saudi Arabia.”The verdict in the trial of the Colston Four has little to do with efforts to tackle racism in Bristol, the city’s mayor has said as he defended himself against criticism for not acting sooner over the statue of the slave trader Edward Colston. Speaking to the Guardian after three men and a woman were cleared of criminal damage in toppling the statue in 2020, Marvin Rees said the fate of the statue was symbolic but he had “no reaction” to the verdict. “More power to them as individuals,” Rees said. “I hope they have good lives and all the rest of it, but what happened to them in court really has very little to do with what we are trying to get done in the city. “My business in Bristol is about holding the city together and tackling racism. Whatever happened to the individuals who pulled the statue down has very little to do with the drive to tackle race and class inequality in the city.” On Wednesday a jury acquitted Jake Skuse, Rhian Graham, Milo Ponsford and Sage Willoughby, who played key roles in bringing down the statue of the 17th-century slave trader at a Black Lives Matter protest and pushing it into the River Avon. Rees and the council had been criticised for not acting more quickly on the Colston statue. The council’s head of culture, Jon Finch, who attended court to give evidence for the prosecution, acknowledged it caused offence but said no official action was under way at the time of the toppling. Rees became the first directly elected black mayor in Europe in 2016. Taking office amid a toxic debate around Brexit, he said he could not afford to waste political capital to prioritise taking down a statue. He said: “What [then] happens to my political capital to actually take action on employment, housing, education? What happens? It evaporates. So you could end up sacrificing real substantial politics for symbolic politics. “I think also what could have happened [is that] you could have scared people and made it very difficult for black people who come after me to get elected. So there’s a context to this that people who talk from privilege would not understand, that really matters and is getting lost in the sensation.” Before the toppling of Colston, the big debate around the slave trader’s legacy in Bristol had been about Colston Hall, the city’s most important arts venue, Rees said. Efforts had been focused there and a name change agreed, only to be delayed by the coronavirus pandemic. “So factually it’s incorrect to say nothing was happening. We may not have prioritised the statue at that particular point in time but that’s a strategic decision of what to focus our energies on,” he said. Rees denied claims that the council supported the prosecution. “We were asked to give a factual account of what happened and we provided it,” he said. “And our head of culture was called as a witness for one side or the other, of course he’s going to turn up. What’s he going to do? Not go?” Ultimately, Rees said, he was happy that the statue of Colston was no longer there. “I’m glad there is no statue of a slaver up in the city,” he said. “My great-great-great-great-grandfather, I found out, was hung by the British for participating in the Morant Bay rebellion; my family may have been owned by Colston, transported by Colston, right? “I’m a descendant of enslaved Africans, I don’t want the statue up in the middle of the city. But that’s a discussion.”Stephen Colbert On Wednesday evening, Stephen Colbert anticipated Thursday’s first anniversary of the 6 January attack of the Capitol, “that horrible day when millions of Americans stared at the TV in shock, and grief, and said, ‘Ah crap, is that Uncle Dave?’” The Late Show host, one of the few not still on vacation or out with Covid, zeroed in on the latest revelation from the House select committee investigating the attempted coup. Earlier this week, the committee requested that Sean Hannity cooperate with the investigation, citing texts between the Fox News host and the White House which suggest advance knowledge of Trump’s planning for 6 January. According to publicly released documents, on 21 December 2020, Hannity texted the White House chief of staff, Mark Meadows: “I do NOT see January 6 happening the way he is being told.” “So Hannity clearly knew what was coming,” Colbert said. “I wouldn’t be surprised if the former president planned this coup with the knowledge of the entire Fox News lineup, including the commercials. “Apparently, Hannity saw some downsides to destroying our system of representative government,” Colbert added, pointing to a text from 5 January, in which Hannity told Meadows he was “very worried about the next 48 hours”. “So he either had advance knowledge of the plot, or he had just eaten three Taco Bell Burrito Supremes,” Colbert joked. “Either way, he knew the next 48 hours were going to bring chaos.” The Biden administration plans to acknowledge the anniversary with solemnity, including a prayer service. Trump, meanwhile, planned remarks doubling down on his election lies during the Capitol prayer service to “counterprogram” the remembrance events. “Yeah, you can’t let remembrance events go on without counter-programming!” Colbert mocked. “Same reason at a funeral, you’ve got to bring out an insult comic for the people who are glad the guy’s dead.” On Monday, Trump cancelled the event, citing “the total bias and dishonesty of the January 6 Unselect Committee of Democrats”, among the other usual targets, and punted his rant to a rally next weekend in Arizona. “It makes sense that he’s moving it from Mar-a-Lago to Arizona, considering their state motto: Arizona, America’s backup Florida,” Colbert joked. Jimmy Fallon On the Tonight Show, Jimmy Fallon checked in on the latest guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), which advised those who had isolated for five days with Covid to take a rapid test if one is accessible. “You can read all about it in this month’s issue of Unhelpful Advice magazine,” Fallon joked. “That’s right, another update from the CDC,” he continued. “Even Dr Fauci is like ‘Oh, I muted those months ago.’ “At this point, the CDC is like that annoying co-worker who emails you every five minutes like ‘just following up on this. Just bumping this up, guys,’” he added. Fallon also lamented the first reports of so-called “flurona”, a combination of the flu and the coronavirus (or just having both at the same time). “Americans are so stressed they started smoking methajuana,” he quipped. And in lighter news, New York’s governor, Kathy Hochul, permanently legalized to-go cocktails in New York City this week. “Then she said the same exact thing five minutes later,” Fallon joked. “New Yorkers are like, ‘Look, governor, if you think you’re just going to win us over – what? We love you.’”At first glance the Northumberland village of Allendale, with its pub and post office and random parking, is like hundreds of sleepy, charming villages across the UK. It’s the Dalek that suggests something out of the ordinary. Behind the Dalek is a four-storey Georgian townhouse. In the cellar of the house is a remarkable and unlikely collection of more than 200 costumes, props and artwork telling classic sci-fi stories of Doctor Who, Blake’s 7, Star Trek, Flash Gordon, Marvel and many more. Together they make up the collection of one of Britain’s most eccentric small museums, one of many to be effectively forced into hibernation because of the pandemic. Most are run on a shoestring. Not all of them will reopen. But Neil Cole, a teacher and creator of the Museum of Classic Sci-Fi, is cheerfully optimistic about the future. “The closure has allowed me to restructure the museum and create more space,” he says. “In a way it has been useful because it has given me time I don’t normally get. “I’ve made the best of it. I don’t have a lot of money but I have got a lot of energy and I do everything myself.” Cole’s determination to create a museum in his house dates back to childhood. “I remember being five and going to Blackpool and there on the front was a Tardis,” he said. “It was the BBC official exhibition.” Inside were the monsters he’d seen on the TV, and it was fabulous. “It was like a blurring of reality and fiction. From that moment on, I just wanted to do something like it. That was the kick-off and it never left.” Like many, Cole’s entry to sci-fi was watching Doctor Who. For him it was Jon Pertwee (just) and Tom Baker. Some of his earliest memories are “sitting down at Saturday teatime, waiting for the Grandstand titles to finish. Then there was Basil Brush, which was cool, but it was Doctor Who I was waiting for.” He learned to read through Marvel comics, he said, and would scour local paper TV listings for any old sci-fi films on in the dead of night. “My dad was very good with that, he’d let me stay up.” It took Cole about five years to convert a rotting, flooded cellar into a space suitable for a museum. Every costume or prop or piece of memorabilia he has collected over the years has its own story. What looks like a drab, nothing-to-it, cheesecloth dress is actually hugely exciting and significant, Cole insisted, because it is a costume from the 1976 Doctor Who story The Brain of Morbius. It was worn by one of the main characters, Ohica, and was the first costume Cole bought. “I had a motorcycle which I was going to university on and I sold it to get that. I ended [up] having to get the bus but it was worth it … to me this was a bit of history, it has a bit of magic.” He has many benefactors and supporters, pointing to a robot mummy’s head from the 1975 Doctor Who serial Pyramids of Mars, which in the highly specialised world of Doctor Who collecting is something of a zinger. It is the only surviving head and was donated to him because he would put it on display and not sell it. “I got it from the son of the milkman who was given it as the BBC were chucking it in a skip in the 1970s.” Each object comes with detailed information which geeky visitors tend to appreciate. A costume from season four of Star Trek: Deep Space Nine for the Rasiinian ambassador Runepp was designed by a fan as a competition prize. “They fabricated his design and the fan ended up on the set in his own costume,” said Cole. “How cool is that?” The museum has become embedded in village life and has survived a run-in with county council planners who, in 2019, objected to Cole’s homemade Dalek standing proudly outside the museum. The dispute came after Cole thought he had won everyone round. He had restored a ramshackle wreck of a building and was creating something different. “I said: ‘Look, I know it sounds mad but you are going to get new tourists. You’ve got your walkers, you’ve got your lead history buffs, you’ve got your cyclists. Now you’ll get your film buffs, your comic readers.’” The story went around the world and the council backed down. The museum recently had a grand reopening whose guests included Sophie Aldred, who played the Doctor’s companion Ace in the 1980s, and is filming a documentary about the museum. The whole weekend was a great occasion, said Cole. “The museum has brought so much into the village. We had [the Daleks’ fictional creator] Davros in the Co-op.”Levels of flu remain low in the UK despite Covid cases rising considerably over Christmas and the new year, official data shows. The Omicron variant of coronavirus has spread rapidly around the UK, leading to a sharp rise in infections and, subsequently, hospitalisations. According to figures from the Office for National Statistics released on Wednesday, one in 15 people in England had Covid in the week ending 31 December, rising to one in 10 in London. However, according to the latest report from the UK Health Security Agency, while Covid case rates rose considerably in England towards the end of 2021 and the start of the new year – particularly in the north-east of England and in white ethnic groups – flu remains at low levels, according to metrics including hospital admissions and GP influenza-like illness consultation rates. Experts previously raised concerns that countries including the UK could face a difficult winter with flu and Covid in circulation. A key issue, they noted, was that measures to tackle Covid led to very low prevalence of flu – a situation that was likely to mean population immunity had dropped. Cases of people being infected with flu and coronavirus at the same time have been reported in a number of countries and has led to the rise of the term “flurona”, although the moniker is misleading as it erroneously implies the two viruses have merged. Prof Beate Kampmann, the director of the vaccine centre at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine, said it was possible for people to carry more than one virus in their noses at any given time. “This is nothing new and it happens regularly with other viruses that give us a runny nose – like rhinovirus and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV),” she said. Kampmann added that with an overlap in symptoms between influenza and Covid, patients who required admission or were sick with a flu-like illness were tested for a whole panel of viruses. “We are now in the traditional winter flu season and Omicron is also still everywhere, hence as we screen with very sensitive tests we will see a lot more of both viruses in the same person,” she said. “Whether this will make people more sick is another question.” The chief executive of the UK Health Security Agency, Dr Jenny Harries, said in October that early evidence suggested people who had a simultaneous infection of flu and Covid were twice as likely to die as those who had only coronavirus. But Kampmann stressed that this was when the Delta variant was prevalent. The latest data suggests the risk of hospital admission for Omicron is approximately a third of that for Delta. Kampmann added that there were effective vaccines against the severe manifestations of seasonal flu and Covid. Indeed, in an attempt to tackle the potential impact of flu and Covid and reduce pressures on the NHS, the UK rolled out its largest flu vaccination programme in its history last year, offering free flu vaccines to more than 35 million people, with many receiving it at the same time as a Covid jab. According to the latest data from the UKHSA, flu vaccine uptake has reached 81.4% in people aged 65 years and over, with uptake of Covid booster vaccines even higher, reaching 91.1% in those aged 75 to 80. Kampmann said the very important public health message was to get vaccinated against flu and Covid. “This is particularly important for pregnant women, as both seasonal flu and Covid-19 vaccines are recommended in pregnancy, given that flu can also make pregnant women quite sick,” she said. “However, carrying both viruses does not necessarily mean more sickness per se.”MEET THE NEW BOSS Promoted to serve as a human shield for Manchester United’s unpopular American owners following the departure of his predecessor David Gill eight years ago, Ed Woodward will officially step down from his post as chief suit of the Premier League’s seventh-placed side at the end of this month. A man who seems to keep announcing his departure from Manchester United without ever actually leaving, it should come as no surprise to learn that he will continue to attend their board meetings until the end of the season but will play no part in the day-to-day running of the club. He will be replaced by Richard Arnold, a man who friend of The Fiver and football finance expert Price of Football has pointed out is cut from almost identical cloth. “Arnold is a rugby fan and Bristol Uni graduate who worked at [PricewaterhouseCoopers] who effectively replaces Ed Woodward, the rugby fan graduate from Bristol Uni who worked at [PricewaterhouseCoopers],” tweeted POF. “Expect big changes.” Hamstrung from the get-go by the departure of Lord Ferg just a few months after he was appointed, Woodward will be forever renowned in United folklore as much for the at-one-time-or-another out-of-work managers he could have appointed but didn’t – Guardiola, Klopp, Pochettino, Tommy T and Conte – as those he shouldn’t have appointed but did. Moyes, Van Gaal, the Special One and Solskjær came and went on his watch, while the latest incumbent has apparently so displeased the dizzying array of moaning, overpaid, under-performing divas Woodward also recruited with his lack of charisma that after just a handful of games they already want him out the door. Soon after his appointment United were plunged into crisis and they remain there now that he’s announced he’s off. And yet by many accounts – almost all of them his own imparted through the medium of off-the-record briefings – he has done a tremendous job. On Mr Ed’s eight-year watch, United have failed to mount anything resembling a serious title challenge, spaffing more than a billion big ones on and at players, an astonishing number of whom failed to make anything resembling an impact. And despite his claims to the contrary, Woodward agitated more than any other big-club suit in English football for the creation of the hideously unpopular €uropean $uper £eague. For all that, it would be remiss of us not to give him credit for the good times: glory in Big Vase, the FA Cup and Coca-Cola Cup, not to mention the kind of crowd-pleasing, big-money commercial partnerships with assorted noodle, tyre, chocolate, wine and electric razor manufacturers that drive social media interaction and engagements more than a bog-standard win in Big Cup. Should his successor succeed where he failed, Woodward’s legacy will eventually be forgotten, but for now he remains still not gone. QUOTE OF THE DAY “No one should suffer discrimination because of their sexual orientation and/or their gender identity and we urge supporters not to use this chant” – Tottenham criticise homophobic chants from their fans during Wednesday’s 2-0 defeat at Chelsea. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Here’s the latest Football Weekly Extra podcast. FIVER LETTERS “Short of letters? Here to help. I was crime reporter of the Brighton Argus when it was in its pomp. One year, around 1985-86, I noticed the new team picture we took of Brighton and Hove Albion, as yet unpublished, had an interesting feature. In the words of Alan Partridge, one of the players’ dogs had slipped out of the kennels. You are a serious newspaper and I know what you are saying now. You want a name. Of course you do. This story means nothing without a name. So here it is. It was Dean Saunders. I pointed this out to my betters at the paper and (incredibly, I thought) they hadn’t noticed and anyway, they didn’t rate it as a story. Later that afternoon the team picture, somehow, found its way into the hands of legendary Brighton-based freelancer John Connor and the following day, a Saturday, the picture filled most of page three of the Daily Mirror. With a circle around said slippage, of course” – Jonathan Buss [Nobo indeed. Caution advised – Fiver Ed]. “As a Kettering Town fan I started a furious complaint that we (as all-time leading FA Cup scorers) should be the Social Media Disgrace Fall-guys for having to default our FA Cup third qualifying round tie against local village team Brackley ‘Town’ last year (and miss a chance to further extend our lead over Spurs at the top of the list for another season) rather than your suggestion of Leyton Orient (yesterday’s Fiver). Having checked that Orient in fact had to default three weeks before the mighty Poppies’ fall from grace, I feel that in the spirit of these times I still have every right to retain a sense of fury despite the (so-called) facts failing to back up my heartfelt belief that we were the first; I mean, haven’t we all had enough of experts anyway? Yours in unmitigated anger, etc” – Simon Richardson. “Great clip of the match between Whitehawk and Three Bridges (yesterday’s last line). I agree that it’ll be tough for the Premier League to top the level of violence and general sh!thousery in that match. But as for the hoiking-the-ball-into-row-z-or-miles-wide action on display, I believe that James Milner and Wilfried Zaha are still active and getting regular match time” – Mike Wilner. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Jonathan Buss. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Pep Guardiola and Sean Dyche have tested positive for Covid-19, meaning they’ll miss the Cup ties against Swindon and Huddersfield, respectively. FA bods will proceed with a plan to use VAR at only nine of 32 third-round Cup fixtures, believing the benefits of powering the planet through confected post-match hot air using the technology outweigh inconsistency in the way ties could be decided. Prepare the backside flares! Uefa is understood to be warming to a bid for the 2028 Euros from the UK and Republic O’Ireland as hopes of bringing in the 2030 World Cup begin to fade. And Inter are waiting to discover if they’ll be awarded a 3-0 win after their Serie A match at Bologna was called off amid farcical circumstances. The hosts were placed into quarantine, but Inter were still forced to turn up and train before the game, as normal, with officials even tasked with inspecting the pitch, despite there being no sign of any Bologna players. “The situation is chaotic,” sighed Inter suit Beppe Marotta. STILL WANT MORE? The Africa Cup of Nations starts on Sunday and Paul Doyle is here to tell you in no uncertain terms who to watch. Has Romelu Lukaku been in the news recently? Jacob Steinberg can’t remember as Spursiness has made him forget. Let the Mill feed all your transfer rumours needs. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! MEANWHILE IN TENNESSEE …European governments are ramping up the pressure on people to get vaccinated against Covid-19 by making life progressively harder for those who have not done so, but few are opting to make jabs compulsory – and one country that plans to is now having doubts. As the Omicron variant sweeps across much of the continent, causing record infection numbers in almost a dozen countries from Finland to Greece, boosting vaccination tallies has become a priority to ease pressure on overburdened health services. Italy, where teachers and health workers must already be vaccinated and all other employees must be jabbed or test negative to enter the workplace, this week made vaccination compulsory for about 28 million people aged over 50. “We want to slow down the curve of contagion and encourage Italians who have not yet been vaccinated to do so,” said the prime minister, Mario Draghi. “These rules aim to keep hospitals functioning well and schools and business activities open.” The new measures oblige people over 50 who do not work to get vaccinated, while from 15 February, those who do have jobs will have to show a vaccine pass to enter the workplace, removing the option of taking a coronavirus test. They follow a government decision late last month that from 10 January, a vaccine pass would be required to use public transport as well as to access hotels, restaurants and gyms – again, excluding those who can only show a negative test. The mandate makes Italy one of only three EU states to compel an entire age group to get jabbed, though several have made vaccines compulsory in high-risk sectors such as healthcare. It divided the cabinet, with the far-right League saying it had “no scientific foundation” since most people in hospital with Covid were over 60. Greece, which has also barred unvaccinated people from indoor spaces including restaurants, cinemas, museums and gyms, said in late November it would make vaccinations mandatory from 16 January for people aged 60 and over, more than half a million of whom had yet to get vaccinated. Those who fail to comply face a recurring monthly fine of €100. The prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, said it was a tough decision but was needed to protect elderly people who had failed to get the jab. “It’s the price to pay for health,” he said. Syriza, the main opposition party, criticised it as being punitive and financially excessive. In Austria, however, where vaccination is due to become mandatory for everyone aged over 14 from 1 February, a political consensus around the plan has started to fray as some argue the nature of the Omicron variant has changed the situation. Gerald Gartlehner, a leading virologist and previously one of the country’s more cautious voices, said this week it was “probably time to reassess” mandatory jabs, since the new, highly transmissible variant would create unprecedented levels of immunity. In an interview just after Christmas, the federal minister for the institution, Karoline Edtstadler, also hinted a population-wide mandate may need to be rethought if data could not prove the effectiveness of available vaccines against Omicron. The Social Democrat governor of Burgenland state, Hans Peter Doskozil, said this week cross-party support for a vaccine mandate was “crumbling away at a federal level”, and several commentators have suggested the government may be quietly preparing the ground for a U-turn. The ruling two-party coalition government, however, insists it continues to favour the draft law, which needs approval only by a simple majority in the health committees of the upper and lower houses of the Austrian parliament. Sceptics say the real difficulty with compulsory vaccinations is likely to start after the law comes into effect: tracing those who decline to be jabbed would require merging two different databases, which comes with further legal and logistical obstacles. “A government that pushes to make vaccinations mandatory but cannot execute such a law makes a mockery of a general mandate”, the health spokesperson of Austria’s liberal NEOS party, Gerald Loacker, said. France’s prime minister, Jean Castex, hinted at the same concern, saying on Thursday that making vaccination compulsory would not be helpful because it was likely ultimately to create more problems than solutions. “We already have some difficulties checking health pass compliance,” Castex told French television. “Those difficulties would become even bigger if we made vaccination compulsory.” Those countries that had moved towards compulsory vaccinations had lower vaccination rates than France, he said. On Thursday, the lower house of parliament passed a bill making it obligatory to have a full course of vaccination to take a plane or long-distance train, eat in a restaurant, drink in a cafe or bar, and visit museums, the cinema and sports venues. A recent test or proof of recovery will no longer be valid. The vote, which sends the draft law to the senate, followed three days of ill-tempered debate sparked by Emmanuel Macron’s warning that he wanted to “piss off” or “put in the shit” unvaccinated people by making their lives increasingly difficult. The president’s coarse language, although widely seen as politically calculated to tap into increasing public frustration with unvaccinated people in a country where more than 90% of over-12s have received at least two doses, caused a furore. Germany’s new government has said it aims to follow Austria down the path of compulsory vaccination but has so far initiated little public debate on the question or made much headway with the necessary legal groundwork. A breakaway group of MPs from the Free Democratic party, one of the three parties in the country’s “traffic light” coalition government, on Thursday submitted a motion to reject mandatory jabs outright.Farmers must “stand their ground” on price inflation and ensure that the rising costs they face are reflected in the prices paid to them by supermarkets for their produce, the UK’s environment, food and rural affairs secretary has demanded. George Eustice told the online Oxford Farming Conference on Thursday that rising input costs should result in higher incomes for farmers, but that increasing farm gate prices need not result in food inflation for consumers. “We do need producers to stand their ground and take quite a tough position with retailers to ensure that the money they are paid reflects the costs of their production,” he told the conference. He said food prices were rising as a result of international pressures, as the price of farm commodities internationally was linked to energy prices, which have risen strongly as economies have recovered from the coronavirus shock. But he said farmers obtaining more for their produce need not affect consumers. “You can have reasonably modest increases in farm gate prices, and significant impact on farm profitability, that does not result in major changes to consumer inflation,” he said. Farming leaders reacted sceptically. Producers wield little power against the UK’s mighty supermarkets, a handful of which control the vast majority of the food retail market. The problem of farmers having their margins cut to the bone by supermarkets, and being threatened with the loss of their contracts for speaking out, has been one of the biggest sources of distress to farmers for more than two decades. Martin Lines, UK chair of the Nature Friendly Farming Network, said: “It’s very difficult for individual farmers to stand their ground against price pressures from retailers who hold all the bargaining power. There is a role for the government to play in giving farmers more power within the supply chain so they are fairly rewarded for food produced to high environmental standards. Government should intervene to ensure contracts between buyers and sellers are fair.” George Dunn, the chief executive of the Tenant Farmers Association, said: “There is significant imbalance within the supply chain with retailers and food service operators able to wield significant power within the supply chain. Down the years, there have been warnings about the sustainability of the ‘cheap food culture’ to which we have become accustomed and it seems now we are seeing the fulfilment of those past prophecies of doom. However, retailers and food service providers have the means to avoid a catastrophe by allowing their prices to increase.” Labour accused the government of letting down farmers. Jim McMahon, the shadow environment secretary, said: “Not only is the government neglecting its duty to support British farmers, leaving them exposed to undercutting through inadequate trade deals, ministers now appear to be washing their hands of that responsibility completely. Our rural businesses deserve better and it’s little wonder many are feeling completely let down by the Conservatives’ failings.” The government’s previous efforts to shift the balance of power, by installing a “groceries code adjudicator”, have had limited impact. Jo Lewis, policy director at the Soil Association, said an overhaul of the UK’s food systems was required: “Eustice is right to say farmers need to get a much fairer share of the value of the food they’re producing, but his suggestion that the solution is them ‘standing tough’ with retailers seems far-fetched. “Farmers will continue to lack power while they are forced to supply commodity crops into a globalised market for ultra-processed foods. They need infrastructure and skills support from government to help them access shorter, fairer supply chains and they need government to get real food back into shopping baskets by tackling the unhealthy takeover of ultra-processed foods with a national reduction target.” She said the government’s response to the national food strategy – which Eustice promised for this spring– would be a key test. Eustice also took a robust line on the potential for price rises caused by a shortage of migrant workers, saying that “employers need not look for cheap labour” from the EU. “There is no reason why the price of daffodils should not rise to £1.10,” he said, a reference to warnings from Cornish growers that they cannot harvest their flowers, at devastating cost to their business. Eustice cheered farmers by announcing 30% higher payments for environmental stewardship schemes, which reward them for taking basic measures to protect the environment, and there was a cautious welcome from many to his proposals for “environmental land management” contracts that will come into force in 2024, with payments to farmers for a broader range of measures, from soil nurturing and tree-planting, and providing habitats for wildlife, to floodplain and watercourse management. However, plans by the government to support rewilding through 10 to 15 large-scale pilot projects of between 500 and 5,000 hectares came under fire. Jyoti Fernandes, policy coordinator at the Landworkers’ Alliance union, representing farmworkers, said: “The danger of this approach is that many of the holdings of this size will be land owned by corporations or landed gentry, which means our public money will continue to flow to the very richest in society, while access to land will become increasingly more difficult for new entrants to farming.”In recent weeks a number of managers have been absent from matches owing to positive Covid tests, with Pep Guardiola and Sean Dyche the latest to leave gaping holes in the dugout. Personally I always missed my manager when they weren’t there but this isn’t the same for every player. By this stage of the season players will know what their manager wants from them on the pitch because they are training every day to hone their craft and perfect tactics. The relentless nature of the schedule means it is pretty difficult to make major changes between games. Only minor tweaks are made to formations and styles but managers are still crucial to the squad environment. Certain players in my experience would take liberties in training if a manager was absent, doing things they knew they would not get away with in the presence of the person in charge, but this did not seep through to matches. On the flip side, I spoke to a former Manchester United player who told me he redoubled his efforts in training if Sir Alex Ferguson was not there because he feared information getting back to the manager that he had been slacking off, fully aware that Ferguson knew everything that happened whether he was present or not. A manager is unlikely to tell a player something they do not know on a match day but their aura is what I missed within a dressing room and on the sidelines. If you look at Jürgen Klopp, for example, he prowls the pitch before the game watching the opposition warm up and his energetic style rouses the crowd and players. Without him prowling the touchline Anfield and the team would be a very different proposition. Within a dressing room the manager will have authority – or, at least, should – and they can utilise it to bring calmness, especially at half-time. Players come in highly emotional after the first 45 minutes whether things are going well or badly and they need that calm to bring them back down and regain focus. I played at Arsenal under Vic Akers, who worked closely with Arsène Wenger, and he had the great reassuring ability to bring players back down to an equilibrium. Managers are often enigmatic characters – they are people you want to play for. I am sure players have signed for Liverpool because of the person Klopp is and the same with Pep Guardiola at Manchester City. Emma Hayes was one of the key reasons I joined Chelsea; I wanted to play for the club, but it is her dream and vision driving it. She knew me from working together at Chicago Red Stars and was clear about what role she recruited me to play. When she was not there, I might not have that connection with the assistant or other staff members. I did not need her at the games but I did miss her when she was not there – for the assurance she offered me. I remember Emma was absent when we won the Women’s Super League at Chelsea in 2018 because of her pregnancy. We had to video call her after the match to celebrate, which is a bit different from in the traditional dressing-room celebrations. Those left in charge on the day need to be strong characters to cope without the person they and the players might turn to when things are not going well. As a player you are only as strong as your physios, doctors, manager, coaches and even set-play specialist, because they get you wins. It is important that the assistant knows what they are doing and is strong enough to cope with the added scrutiny. Some managers can be quite controlling and do not delegate but if they have good staff the manager should entrust them, which ought to help if they are ever absent. Any disruption in routine can cause a problem for teams and put them on the back foot before a ball is kicked, so it is key to minimise the impact on players, and a strong backroom staff can ensure that. Thanks to technology, a manager can be in constant touch with their coaching staff throughout a match they aren’t at, which reduces the effects of their absence. By watching on TV they will have a different perspective from those on the touchline, and that can be very useful. I will notice things on TV which I would not have spotted if I was at the stadium. Match days have changed down the years. When I was starting out the manager would give their pre-match talk in the dressing room and have long chats with players, whereas towards the end of my career this was done at the team hotel. They would go into great detail away from the ground and just save up a few words of encouragement at the stadium before we went out to play, allowing players to focus on the game. Potentially now an absent manager could still do this over a video call, even though it is not the same. Driving, for example, is always best when you have a passenger to help get you to the right destination because going it alone makes life more difficult. You can always turn to them to give directions and a manager does that for players when they need a little guidance and support. People can underestimate what a manager can do on a match day. Without them players risk getting lost.Leaked files appear to suggest the Conservative peer Michelle Mone and her husband, Douglas Barrowman, were secretly involved in a PPE business that was awarded more than £200m in government contracts after she referred it to the Cabinet Office. Barrowman, an Isle of Man-based financier, may have played a central role in the business deal that enabled PPE Medpro to sell millions of masks and surgical gowns to the government at the start of the pandemic, documents suggest. One person closely involved in PPE Medpro claimed Barrowman was “part of the financial consortium that backed” the company and was even involved in initial conversations with the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC). Documents seen by the Guardian suggest he and Lady Mone were kept informed of specific commercial arrangements about PPE Medpro’s supplies. And Mone appears to have sent messages to an individual in PPE Medpro’s supply chain about the contract to supply gowns. The couple’s apparent involvement in the business activities of PPE Medpro, which was fast-tracked through the government’s “VIP lane” after Mone’s referral, will reignite controversy over Tory-linked firms profiting from government contracts during the pandemic. It will also raise questions about repeated attempts by Mone and Barrowman to distance themselves from PPE Medpro. The identities of the people behind PPE Medpro, which was awarded contracts by the government in May and June 2020, has been an enduring mystery ever since and the subject of considerable speculation. Citing confidentiality obligations, PPE Medpro, which was set up weeks before securing the lucrative government contracts, has always refused to identify what it described as the “consortium of successful entrepreneurs that comprise, have financed and backed” the company. It was not until November 2021 – 18 months after PPE Medpro won its first contract – that a Freedom of Information Act request revealed that Mone had referred the company to the Cabinet Office, leading to it being processed through the high-priority VIP lane for politically connected companies. Lawyers for Mone, who ran a lingerie company before David Cameron made her a member of the House of Lords, have always said she “was not connected to PPE Medpro in any capacity”. They also said she had no “association” with PPE Medpro, and “never had any role or function in PPE Medpro, nor in the process by which contracts were awarded” to the company. Once it had become public that she had recommended PPE Medpro to the Cabinet Office, Mone’s lawyers said that after the referral – which they described as a “very simple, solitary and brief step” – she “did not do anything further in respect of PPE Medpro”. Contacted about the Guardian’s new findings, Mone’s lawyers said its reporting was “grounded entirely on supposition and speculation and not based on accuracy” and declined to provide direct responses to a series of detailed questions. “You also appear to misunderstand our client’s responsibilities to you,” they said. “She is under no obligation to say anything to you.” Barrowman’s lawyers have also repeatedly distanced him from the company, saying he “never had any role or function in PPE Medpro” and stating that he was not an investor, director or shareholder of the company. In a statement issued in December 2020, PPE Medpro said: “Mr Barrowman was not personally involved in working for PPEM in relation to PPE contracts.” Major player However, multiple sources and leaked files seen by the Guardian shed new light on PPE Medpro, its supply chain, and the commercial deal that enabled the newly created company to become a major player in the supply of personal protective equipment amid frantic global competition for supplies. The UK-registered PPE Medpro Ltd, which was incorporated on 12 May 2020, was in effect a subsidiary of another company that had been created in the Isle of Man the previous day, using the same name. A director of both the Isle of Man and UK versions of PPE Medpro was Anthony Page. A longtime employee in Barrowman’s Isle of Man-based financial services firm, the Knox Group, Page also runs Barrowman’s family office. During the same week that PPE Medpro was formed, it entered into a crucial business deal with the London-based importing company Loudwater Trade and Finance Ltd, which committed to source gowns and masks from factories in China. The contracts were signed by Page, the authorised signatory for PPE Medpro. However, documents seen by the Guardian appear to show Barrowman was personally involved in setting up PPE Medpro’s deal with Loudwater’s director, Maurice Stimler, as well as related business matters. Documents apparently setting out the terms of the three-year agreement show the companies agreed to divide profits equally with clearly demarcated responsibilities. Loudwater would “manage and secure the supply chain of key PPE items from China” and take responsibility for the import and delivery of the products. PPE Medpro’s role was to use its contacts to win business from the UK government. One document states the Isle of Man company would use its “extensive network to seek to secure rolling forward order contracts with the NHS and other government bodies within the British Isles”. The apparent agreements between the two companies were concluded on 11 May 2020, the leaked materials suggest. It is not known exactly when Mone referred PPE Medpro to the office of Theodore Agnew, a fellow Conservative peer and Cabinet Office minister closely involved in procurement for the NHS. Her referral is understood to have occurred around that time. Lord Agnew then referred PPE Medpro to the VIP lane, a fast-track process set up by DHSC procurement teams for offers to supply PPE from companies referred by ministers, MPs, NHS officials or other people with political connections. Under emergency rules introduced at that time, the government had abandoned the competitive tender procedures usually used for procurement. Analysis would later show that companies that entered the VIP lane were 10 times more likely to secure contracts with the UK government. Less than three weeks after entering into business with Loudwater, PPE Medpro secured an £80.85m government contract to supply 210m face masks. The following month, in June 2020, it won the second government contract worth £122m to supply 25m gowns. It is not known what, if anything, Mone told Agnew’s office about whether she or her husband were involved in PPE Medpro. However, files seen by the Guardian appear to show her involvement in PPE Medpro’s business affairs in June 2020, after the company had been awarded its first contract with the DHSC and during the period it was seeking to secure the second. Documents from that time appear to show both Mone and Barrowman included in correspondence between PPE Medpro’s suppliers about the cost price of gowns. WhatsApp messages believed to have been sent by Mone around the same time appear to show her discussing the required sizes of the gowns, and details regarding the DHSC’s purchase order or “PO” process. In an exchange understood to have taken place days before PPE Medpro was awarded its second contract on 25 June 2020, a person in the supply chain appears to ask “Lady Michelle” for a conversation about the required sizes for the gowns. The reply apparently sent by Mone states: “We are just about to take off in the jet. The sizes are in the order. We are waiting for the official PO, this should come in today.” Moments later, she appears to add: “They tell you not to start until you have this PO.” Asked about the messages, Mone’s lawyers said she could not be expected to comment on “unknown and unattributable WhatsApp messages allegedly sent 19 months ago”. They added: “We have no idea – and neither does our client – of the content of the WhatsApp messages to which you refer, the recipients, the context and perhaps most important the provenance of them.” Profits PPE Medpro’s contracts with the government resulted in profits for a string of other businesses that became involved in its newly established global supply chain. They included Loudwater, additional intermediaries who received substantial payments to offshore companies, and the Hong Kong-based trading company Eric Beare, which was the original source of the Chinese-produced PPE. The Guardian understands that PPE Medpro may have made in excess of £40m gross profits from its DHSC contracts. The company declined to say whether that figure was accurate. Responding to questions on behalf of PPE Medpro, Page accused the Guardian of pursuing an “improper witch-hunt” against the company based on “information that is wrong”. He would not comment on whether the company was seeking further contracts with the UK government’s test-and-trace programme as recently as February 2021, as was suggested in a recent report in the Financial Times. It quoted a leaked civil servant email, dated 10 February 2021, that appeared to suggest Mone was lobbying government officials on behalf of PPE Medpro. In the email, Jacqui Rock, chief commercial officer for the government’s test-and-trace programme, reportedly told colleagues: “We do have an issue here. Baroness Mone is going to Michael Gove and Matt Hancock today as she is incandescent with rage on the way she believes Medpro have been treating [sic] in the matter.” Mone’s lawyers declined to be drawn on why a civil servant may have perceived her to be “incandescent with rage” over the treatment of PPE Medpro as recently as February 2021. The lawyers said the “material quoted” from the leaked email was inaccurate, but provided no further explanation. Lawyers for Barrowman said the Guardian’s reporting amounted to “clutching at straws” and was “largely incorrect”. They added: “Our client’s desire not to reveal private or confidential information should not be taken as an assumption that any of your assertions or conclusions are correct or unchallenged.”A man has lost a seven-year legal battle against a Belfast bakery that refused to make him a cake emblazoned with the message “support gay marriage” as the European court of human rights ruled that his claim was inadmissible, prompting disappointment from gay rights groups. On Thursday the ECHR, by a majority decision, said it would not reconsider the decision of the UK supreme court, which had overturned a £500 damages award imposed on Ashers bakery, which is run by evangelical Christians. Ashers refused to produce the cake, featuring the Sesame Street puppets Bert and Ernie, in 2014 for Gareth Lee, who was a supporter of the campaign to legalise same-sex marriage in Northern Ireland. Same-sex marriage was legalised in Northern Ireland last year. Before the supreme court judgment in 2018, after its first hearing in Northern Ireland, a Belfast county court and a court of appeal had ruled that the company discriminated against Lee, who is gay, on the grounds of sexual orientation. The ECHR said the claim was inadmissible because the applicant had not expressly invoked his rights under the European convention on human rights at any point in the domestic proceedings and had relied solely on domestic law. It said: “The supreme court found on the facts of the case that the applicant was not treated differently on account of his real or perceived sexual orientation, but rather that the refusal to supply the cake was because of the defendants’ religious objection to gay marriage. “What was principally at issue, therefore, was not the effect on the applicant’s private life or his freedom to hold or express his opinions or beliefs, but rather whether Ashers bakery was required to produce a cake expressing the applicant’s political support for gay marriage.” Lee said he was frustrated that the Strasbourg court did not adjudicate on the “core issues” because of what he termed a “technicality”. He said: “None of us should be expected to have to figure out the beliefs of a company’s owners before going into their shop or paying for their services. “This case has put a spotlight on the challenges faced by LGBT+ in Northern Ireland. I will continue to support all law that protects and gives rights to all people equally.” His solicitor, Ciaran Moynagh of Phoenix Law, also expressed disappointment at the decision, calling it a missed opportunity to address the substantive issues raised, and said they would consider whether to launch a fresh domestic challenge. John O’Doherty, the director of the Rainbow Project, Northern Ireland’s foremost organisation for LGBTQ+ people, said: “While today’s decision brings this case to a close, there remains a number of questions around what protections exist for LGBTQIA+ people when accessing goods, facilities and services following the supreme court decision in October 2018.” Stonewall’s CEO, Nancy Kelley, said the ECHR’s decision was “a backwards step for equality. Human rights belong to people, not businesses. No business should discriminate against their customers, and no discriminatory behaviour should be held up by equality law. Our thoughts are with Gareth Lee, who deserved more support from the European courts after seven years of working towards equality.” The Committee on the Administration of Justice (CAJ), a Belfast-based human rights group, was one of several third-party intervenors in the case. Its deputy director, Daniel Holder, said the ECHR’S ruling on inadmissibility left individuals and organisations campaigning on gay rights “vulnerable to a commercial business refusing to provide services like printing posters, leaflets, setting up websites etc, through claiming an exemption to non-discrimination laws on the basis of ‘it’s not you it’s your message’.” The ECHR said balancing the rights of Lee and those of the bakery owners, Daniel and Amy McArthur, was “a matter of great import and sensitivity to both LGBTIQ communities and to faith communities” , particularly in Northern Ireland. Simon Calvert, a spokesperson for the Christian Institute, which backed the McArthurs, called the decision good news for free speech, adding: “It protects gay business owners from being forced to promote views they don’t share, just as much as it protects Christian business owners.” Northern Ireland’s first minister, Paul Givan, said the case “should never have been brought to court in the first place”.Travel firms and airlines have reported surging bookings following the relaxation of Covid testing requirements for travellers returning to the UK. EasyJet said there were almost three times as many flights bought in the UK in the hours following the prime minister’s announcement on Wednesday than in the same period the week before, while holiday firm TUI said there had been “an immediate and strong uptick in bookings”. British Airways Holidays said searches for holidays on its websites increased by nearly 40% compared with the week before. From 4am on Friday, international arrivals or holidaymakers returning to England will not need to produce a negative pre-departure test, nor self-isolate until they receive a further negative PCR test result from the first two days on arrival. The aviation and travel industry had long argued that the prevalence of the Omicron variant meant the measures had little public health benefit but were causing significant damage to their businesses. Alistair Rowland, chairman of travel association Abta and chief executive of long-haul tour operator Blue Bay Travel, said the scrapping of the pre-departure test and ditching post-arrival PCR tests for lateral flow tests was “a relief for the travel industry and great news for holidaymakers”. He said that the news had prompted his firm’s busiest day for website traffic and booking inquiries in more than a year, “which is something we couldn’t have imagined a month ago, when these testing rules came in and consumer confidence plummeted”. EasyJet said flights to Spanish destinations, especially the Canary Islands, were most in demand, led by Tenerife, Alicante, Málaga and Lanzarote, with bookings to Lanzarote up 427% week on week. Tui also said the Canary Islands, along with Mexico, were seeing the biggest increase in summer holiday bookings so far. EasyJet said its customer surveys showed around half of British consumers were planning to take more holiday than usual this year, with a third planning to spend up to £1,000 more after missing trips abroad during the pandemic. Sophie Dekkers, chief commercial officer at easyJet, said: “We know that there is pent up demand with many desperate to get away this year, which we continue to see each time restrictions are removed.” On The Beach chief executive Simon Cooper said the restrictions introduced in response to the Omicron variants had slowed bookings in December but the news had prompted “a fantastic surge” on Wednesday evening. He told the BBC: “We will expect to massively out-trade 12 months ago.” But he said that Covid had left “a level of nervousness”, adding: “People can now book with confidence to travel in the shorter term, with reasonable knowledge that they’re not going to have these tests reimposed … of course with longer lead time bookings, for summer 2022, as yet unknown.”The UK has reported a further 179,756 Covid cases, as the number of people infected with the Omicron variant continues to surge. The latest figures – which reflect infections picked up by testing – bring the UK total for the past seven days to 1,272,131, up 29% on the week before. The true number of infections is estimated to be substantially higher as not all infections are captured by the testing programme. The figure does not include reinfections for most of the countries in the UK, and reflects cases by date reported, rather than by specimen date. Data released on Thursday also reveals that in the UK there are 17,988 Covid patients in hospital, up from 17,295 the day before. A further 231 deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid test were reported in the UK on Thursday.The data comes as the latest weekly Flu and Covid-19 Surveillance report from the UK Health Security Agency revealed that Covid case rates rose considerably in England between 27 December 2021 and 2 January 2022, particularly in the north-east and among white ethnic groups. The report adds that weekly case rates were highest in those aged 20 to 29, at 2,780.7 per 100,000 population, compared with 552.0 per 100,000 population in those under the age of five. Covid hospital admission rates also rose, with the highest rates recorded in London and in those aged 85 and over. The UKHSA adds that levels of flu remain low, and that the uptake of flu jabs among those aged 65 and over is, at 81.4%, at a record level. Dr William Welfare of the UK Health Security Agency, urged everyone to work together to protect loved ones and the healthcare service. “That includes taking a lateral flow test before meeting people, ventilating indoor spaces, wearing a face covering in crowded enclosed spaces, and staying at home if you have symptoms,” he said. “Don’t take chances with this virus - please get your vaccination or booster jab if you haven’t already.”A rare case of bird flu has been detected in a person living in south-west England, health officials have confirmed. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said the unnamed person acquired the infection from close and regular contact with a large number of infected birds, which they kept in and around their home over a prolonged period of time. Bird-to-human transmission of avian flu is very rare and has occurred only a small number of times in the UK previously. The UKHSA said only a small number of contacts were involved, all of whom were professionals working as part of the incident management team. All contacts of the person, including those who visited the premises, had been traced and there was no evidence of onward spread of the infection to anyone else, it said. The infected person is well and self-isolating, and the risk to the wider public from avian flu remains very low. Prof Isabel Oliver, the chief scientific officer at UKHSA, said: “Currently there is no evidence that this strain detected in the UK can spread from person to person, but we know that viruses evolve all the time and we continue to monitor the situation closely. We have followed up all of this individual’s contacts and have not identified any onward spread. “It remains critical that people do not touch sick or dead birds, and that they follow the Defra [Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs] advice about reporting.” There have been a large number of outbreaks of the H5N1 strain of avian flu in birds across the UK, and alerts have been issued to bird owners. The UK’s chief veterinary officer, Christine Middlemiss, said: “We are seeing a growing number of cases in birds on both commercial farms and in back yard flocks across the country. Implementing scrupulous biosecurity measures will help keep your birds safe.” Prof Mike Tildesley, a professor in infectious disease modelling at the University of Warwick, said: “This is clearly going to be big news but the key thing is that human infections with H5N1 are really rare and they almost always occur as a result of direct, long-term contact with poultry. There has never been any evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission of H5N1, so at present I wouldn’t consider this to be a significant public health risk.”The Serbian president has accused Australia of “maltreatment” of tennis star Novak Djokovic, who was denied entry to the country after he flew into Melbourne with a medical exemption from coronavirus vaccination rules. Djokovic was granted a controversial exemption to enter Australia and compete in the Australian Open, but was held up at Melbourne airport by authorities for several hours before his visa was cancelled. The Australian Border Force said he had failed to provide adequate evidence to support his exemption, and the player has now taken his case to court. Serbian president Aleksandar Vučić said the country had offered support to the world No 1. “I told our Novak that the whole of Serbia is with him and that our bodies are doing everything to see that the harassment of the world’s best tennis player is brought to an end immediately,” he said in a statement. Serbian media reported Vučić had summoned Australia’s ambassador in Belgrade and demanded that they immediately release Djokovic to compete. The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, rejected the harassment suggestion on Thursday, saying: “Australia has sovereign borders and clear rules that are non-discriminatory as so many countries do … it has to do with the fair and reasonable application of Australia’s border protection laws … all I can say is that the evidence medical exemption that was provided was found to be insufficient.” In December, Tennis Australia released its Covid vaccination policy for Melbourne’s grand slam which included a process for players seeking medical exemptions to enter Victoria without having to undergo a 14-day quarantine. Djokovic, who is opposed to vaccination, said he had been granted an exemption to compete in the competition although the exact nature of it has not been confirmed. It is understood the reigning Australian Open champion was relying on a previous Covid infection as the basis for his exemption to compete – but that is not recognised by the federal government. The head of Tennis Australia, Craig Tiley, said exemption applications were de-identified and rigorously assessed, and that only a handful of other players and officials had been granted exemptions out of 26 applications. The initial approval sparked public outrage before the tennis star had landed, and the cancellation of his visa only added to the furore. Djokovic’s father, Srdjan, told Russian media he was outraged by the treatment of his son. “Tonight they can throw him in a dungeon, tomorrow they can put him in chains. The truth is he is like water and water paves its own path. Novak is the Spartacus of the new world which won’t tolerate injustice, colonialism and hypocrisy.” In an interview broadcast by Sky News in the UK, Sdjan Djokovic said that his son was being singled out unfairly. “Novak and his team filed the same documents as 25 other tennis players [who received exemptions] and they didn’t have any problems, just Novak. They wanted to humiliate him. They could have said ‘don’t come Novak’ and that would have been OK. But no, they wanted to humiliate him and they’re still keeping him in prison. “He’s not in detention, he’s in prison. They took all of his stuff, even his wallet, they left him with just his phone and no change of clothes, nowhere to wash his face. Our pride is a prisoner of these idiots, shame on them, the whole free world together with Serbia should rise. This isn’t a battle for Serbia and Novak, it’s a battle for billions of people, for freedom of expression, for free speech, freedom of behaviour. Novak didn’t break any laws, just as seven billion people didn’t break any laws, they want to subdue us and for us all to be on our knees.” Speaking to media on Thursday afternoon, tennis great Rafael Nadal suggesting on Djokovic had to accept the consequences of his apparent choice to not be vaccinated. Nadal said he thought it was “normal” for the Australia people to feel frustrated over the case given ongoing lockdowns and people’s inability to return to Australia. “The only clear thing for me is if you are vaccinated you can play in the Australian Open and everywhere,” he said. “The world in my opinion has been suffering enough to not follow the rules.” US player Tennys Sandgren, an Australian Open quarter-finalist in 2018 and 2020, said Australia didn’t deserve to host a grand slam. “Just to be crystal clear here, two separate medical boards approved his exemption. And politicians are stopping it,” said Sandgren, who has also opted not to get vaccinated or play in the tournament. Renae Stubbs, a former Doubles world No 1 and ESPN host, described the situation as “officially a massive shitshow”. “I think ScoMo [Australian prime minister Scott Morrison] made this a moment because the Australian public is so annoyed by Djoker,” she said on Instagram. “I would be ropeable [furious] if I was [Djokovic]. Also the other lesson is, get vaccinated.” Morrison on Thursday confirmed Djokovic’s visa was cancelled, saying “rules are rules” and praising federal Covid policies, a day after saying such exemptions were a matter for state governments. “Our strong border policies have been critical to Australia having one of the lowest death rates in the world from Covid, we are continuing to be vigilant,” he said. Australian tennis legend Rod Laver earlier told the Herald Sun newspaper that Djokovic should reveal the medical exemption he was granted. “Yes, you’re a great player and you’ve performed and won so many tournaments, so, it can’t be physical. So what is the problem?” World No 1 Ashleigh Barty said it had been difficult for Australians, and Victorians in particular, during the pandemic but that she had “no interest in speaking about Novak’s medical history”. She added: “I understand why they may be frustrated with the decision [to grant Djokovic an exemption].” The coach of 17-year-old Indian tennis player Aman Dahiya, who was denied an exemption to play the Australian Open junior championships, also accused Australian and tennis authorities of double standards over Djokovic’s early approval. Dahiya was denied entry because he was unvaccinated, because India has not yet allowed people under the age of 18 to receive a vaccine. His coach, Jignesh Rawal, said they had offered for Dahiya to find a dose and quarantine but were refused, and he said Dahiya was allowed to become “collateral damage” of Australia’s policies but Djokovic – initially – was not. “It shouldn’t be different,” he said. “The circumstances don’t matter. The rule is if you don’t have two vaccine doses you cannot enter,” he said. “Djokovic can have special treatment on the court (like centre court priority) but the entry point has to be the same.” Morrison, who is under fire over his refusal to make rapid tests free or affordable to address major shortages and huge PCR wait times as the country struggles with its worst ever outbreak, had strong words for Djokovic on Wednesday. At a press conference he said Djokovic would be “on the next plane home” if he was unable to provide proof of his medical exemption. On Thursday morning Djokovic was reportedly taken to a quarantine hotel ahead of potential deportation but his lawyers have launched legal to obtain an injunction. In a snap hearing before Judge Anthony Kelly of the federal circuit court of Australia, it was suggested a full hearing could be heard on Monday. The court heard Tennis Australia said it would need to know whether Djokovic could compete by Tuesday for scheduling purposes. The court was also asked whether Djokovic could be moved to a hotel with a tennis court so he could practise.New South Wales hospitals are preparing for Covid-related admissions to triple as cases soar, forcing further cuts or delays in care that could have long-lasting health effects, doctors and medical experts say. Australia posted another record of more than 72,000 Covid cases on Thursday, including almost 35,000 in NSW. But restrictions on access to testing and patchy reporting means the true figure is likely to be far higher than the reported tallies. “Given the proportion of people testing positive, I mean, probably you can double it,” a senior NSW health official said. In NSW, about one-third of tests are returned positive. The official, who was not authorised to comment publicly, said case numbers really took offer after Christmas. Cases in western Sydney, for instance, went from 500 to 5,000 a day. “That’s what an exponential increase looks like – an order of magnitude difference. Where does it stop?” the official said. “The sky’s the limit.” While hospitalisation rates have increased, the system may still be about two weeks from a rise commensurate with the jump in cases, given the time it typically takes infected people to get sufficiently ill for hospital admission. “There isn’t much sign of an uptick yet,” the official said. “But we are worried, very worried.” That concern is shared inside hospitals. One senior doctor said on present trajectories, “in two weeks we’ll be having 400 admissions a day” in NSW, or more than triple the current pace of about 120. “It’s currently very alarming in the medical world,” the doctor said. Staff at Concord hospital in Sydney’s inner-west, for instance, were informed on Thursday the hospital would triple its Covid capacity. Its three Covid wards currently have about 60 Covid patients. “Almost the entire staffing structure will be diverted to Covid with very little left for people, you know, having heart attacks and strokes [or] gastrointestinal bleeds, or whatever else it is that people are normally in hospital with,” the doctor said. Liverpool hospital, with about 180 Covid patients, was gearing up for 600, with other hospitals similarly preparing for a major surge, another senior doctor said. NSW’s health department was approached for comment. The Sydney Morning Herald on Friday reported the Perrottet government was preparing to backflip further by reintroducing additional Covid restrictions. The Coalition could shut nightclubs, ban singing and dancing in pubs, and pause major events and some elective surgery, the news outlet reported. Michael Lydeamore, a Monash University infectious diseases modeller who is part of the Doherty Institute modelling used to advise the national cabinet, told the Guardian the time between people knowing they were Covid-positive and finding they needed hospitalisation was likely getting shorter given the breakdown in testing and tracing. Taking Victoria’s second wave, “which obviously was way, way smaller [than the current Omicron one], I think it took hospitalisations to peak some three or four weeks later than cases” Lydeamore said. “And I don’t see why that would be any different here.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning While political leaders such as prime minister, Scott Morrison, talk of “riding the wave” in reality, “it’s more like a wall of water”, he said. “Hospitals are sort of designed to always be full because they’re expensive to run, so no one will build more than you need to,” Lydeamore said. “But they’re not really designed to be this full.” Elective surgery, which had not recovered from last year’s Delta Covid variant disruptions, will now be wound back severely to free up beds and staff. A proportion of ICU beds, typically set aside to cater for elective surgery that does not go as planned, will now be occupied by swelling numbers of Covid patients. “The entire January and February will be an absolute whitewash” for elective surgery in NSW, another senior Sydney doctor predicted. “This is a real crisis,” the doctor said. “There’s going to be triage medicine” with doctors having to determine which patients have their treatment delayed even if they are in pain from ailments such as hernias or “not-super-urgent cancer”. Current hospitalisations, now at about 1600 in NSW, could rise to 4500-5000, the doctor said. While the NSW government had erred in easing Covid restrictions in mid-December before reintroducing some of them, there was still time to encourage greater mask wearing, social distancing or other steps to at least slow the coming deluge of hospital admissions, the doctor said. Continuing to “let it rip” was not a wise approach. The senior NSW medical official said the whole national and state policy relied on the assumption high Covid vaccination rates would mean there wouldn’t be “a serious rise in hospital admissions due to Covid”. Recent NSW figures estimate 70% of patients in hospital had the Delta variant, and about 60% were unvaccinated. As Omicron is much more contagious than Delta and so would infect many more people, it remains to be seen how an already exhausted health system will cope with the coming spike in hospitalisations. “That’s the gamble that we’re all collectively involved in at the moment,” the offical said. Do you know more about pressure in the healthcare system? Contact peter.hannam@theguardian.com. You can remain anonymous.Norfolk Island is experiencing its first Covid outbreak, with spiralling case numbers forcing more than 10% of the population into isolation and raising concerns about the local health system’s reliance on medical evacuations. Deep in the Pacific Ocean, the external Australian territory about 1,500km off the coast of the mainland had gone the duration of the pandemic without recording any local Covid transmission, until the final days of last year. On 30 December, its first cases of Covid were recorded, weeks after the territory reopened to tourists from Queensland and New South Wales where Covid transmission has soared. Less than a week later, 35 locals have now tested positive for the virus, with more than 200 of the island’s roughly 2,000 residents forced to isolate. In response, authorities have suspended tourism again, initially for two weeks, to allow its health system “to manage the current level of Covid cases in the community without additional cases from visitors arriving on the island”. As most PCR tests have to be sent to labs offshore, the majority of diagnoses are via rapid antigen tests. The prominent variant on the island has yet to be confirmed, though authorities say it appears to be the Omicron strain. More than 95% of the population has received two doses of Covid vaccine. However, a local resident with knowledge of the health system raised concerns about the capacity for local treatment, and a lack of a contingency plan if the outbreak worsens. “People will end up dying probably. It’s a pity that it had to end up this way. They had two years to prepare,” the resident, who did not want to be named given the island’s small population, said. Norfolk’s only hospital has just seven beds – one of which can be used for patients requiring acute care and ventilation – and the small health practice shares a building with the island’s only aged care facility. There is just one permanent doctor on the island. “The hospital was built in the 1940s, and it looks and runs like it was built in the 1940s,” the resident said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The median age of residents at the 2016 census was 49, compared to the national average of 38. The resident said many suffer from existing health conditions. More than 32.6% of the population is older than 60. “It’s a very vulnerable population … and once they’ve got an infection in the hospital, they won’t have any hospital for non-Covid patients. It’s also a problem because it’s next to aged care, and once it gets in there it’s like a death sentence,” said the resident with knowledge of the health system. “Medevacs” to the mainland are frequent for broken limbs and other common injuries, and happen “at the drop of a hat” when conditions worsen, the resident said. Evacuations range from approximately $35,000 to $80,000 per medevac, a department of infrastructure spokeswoman said. Since Norfolk Island lost the right to self-governance when the Australian government abolished its parliament in 2015, health and education services had been supported by New South Wales. However, from 1 January this transitioned to Queensland, meaning that medical evacuations will now take residents to be treated in that state. Eric Hutchinson, the administrator of the island appointed by the Australian government and a former Liberal MP, said the medical evacuation process takes about five hours. But he suggested the island would not rely on evacuations as the Omicron variant of Covid stretches hospitals on the mainland. “We do realise that at the moment, a number of hospitals [on the mainland] have their own challenges. We’re trying to avoid medical evacuation,” Hutchinson said. For now, Queensland Health is providing remote care to Covid patients isolating in their home on the island, in what is termed a “virtual hospital”. None are in the hospital, which Hutchinson said was because authorities were trying to avoid admitting patients due to the proximity of beds to the aged care facility. “That obviously presents a risk.” Hutchinson acknowledged the island’s vulnerability to the virus, but insisted that preparations over the past 18 months had put it in a better position to respond. “It’s quite evident that what is happening on mainland Australia is justifiably concerning for the people of Norfolk, as we are an isolated community with limited medical resources and an older population.” He also acknowledged that while there were plans for a new hospital in coming years, the island’s current facility meant the community was “still dealing with old infrastructure” when they access healthcare. However, Hutchinson stressed that “at this point in time we’re alert, not alarmed”. It is also understood that some in the community – specifically descendants of Bounty Mutineers and their Tahitian brides who settled on Norfolk from Pitcairn Island – are reluctant to leave the island for medical evacuation because they want to be buried there. Hutchinson acknowledged this connection many residents have, but suggested this was no different to other parts of regional and remote Australia. “If in the unfortunate event somebody has to be taken off the island for treatment, their bodies would be repatriated,” he said. Guardian Australia contacted Metro North Health, the section of Queensland Health that provides assistance to Norfolk Island with questions about contingency plans for the island if the outbreak deteriorates. A spokeswoman said it is continuing to monitor high risk patients remotely and provide advice for local public health measures. “Metro North Health will continue to support Norfolk Island as required, with medical evacuations to the mainland set to continue if needed.”Health officials warned almost a year ago that widespread community transmission could see testing sites overwhelmed and “alternative testing methods”, including rapid antigen testing, could help alleviate pressure. Amid growing criticism of the government’s handling of the testing regime in the face of the surging Omicron variant, archived advice shows that health officials were warning federal and state governments of a scenario in which testing sites could not cope as far back as February last year. A “testing framework strategy” prepared by the Communicable Disease Network of Australia (CDNA) and the Public Health Laboratory Network (PHLN) in February 2021 modelled three epidemiological scenarios relating to the transmission of the virus, including one of high community transmission. In this epidemiological scenario, community transmission is “placing burden on response capacity” and resulting in “testing demand exceeding laboratory and public health capacity.” The paper states that the “analytical performance and possible uses” of rapid antigen tests is being “evaluated as a matter of urgency”, but the group’s position is that those tests are useful in limited settings, such as when there is a strong chance of a positive result. “For example in an outbreak setting or where community transmission is established.” “In this epidemiological scenario, in addition to use for public health investigation purposes, this technology (rapid antigen tests) may prove useful as a screening test for individuals in high risk settings … where the pre-test probability is high,” the advice states. “It offers rapid results in relevant settings, while reducing pressure on RT-PCR capacity.” The CDNA is a subcommittee of the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee, and was established to provide national public health coordination for the prevention and control of communicable diseases. The PHLN is a collaborative group of laboratories that provide public health microbiology services. The joint advice, which was prepared in consultation with the Doherty Institute, suggests that given the rapid development of new testing technology, Australia has “the opportunity to explore testing strategies that may be complementary to, although not a replacement for, the gold standard diagnostic test (the RT-PCR).” “Using alternative tests or testing methods may help conserve the capacity of the public and private laboratory systems,” a section of the advice marked “committee in confidence” says. The emergence of the February 2021 advice comes as the prime minister, Scott Morrison, continues to defend the government’s handling of the Omicron wave, that has seen testing clinics overwhelmed amid a national shortage of rapid antigen tests. The prime minister, who has flagged that shortages will continue for a couple of weeks, said the federal government had secured adequate supplies of rapid antigen tests to fulfil its responsibilities, and states were responsible for securing their own supplies. He rejected suggestions the federal government was unprepared for the current outbreak. “There are plenty of armchair critics and people who say what could have been, but those who actually are doing it every day and the health officials who have responsibility for it every day, those who are regulating vaccines, which have very profound implications for people’s health … I don’t accept the suggestion that they haven’t been doing the job,” Morrison said. “I think they’ve been doing their job extremely well and under extraordinary pressure in a very uncertain environment. “There’s no guidebook to Covid. We all know that. And so I what I think is important is the country just focuses on the task ahead.” The CDNC and PHLN paper also discussed potential barriers to Australia’s testing regime, suggesting that Australia only has the capability and capacity to meet “the current testing demands”. “However, laboratories’ maximum daily throughput cannot increase without: procuring new platforms; training new skilled medical laboratory scientists (and) identifying additional laboratory space.” It also highlights the concerns about workforce constraints that are now being experienced, saying it “can easily come under significant pressure in times of increased testing.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Several laboratories across Australia are currently operating 24 hours a day, seven days per week. This requires laboratory staff to work 12–14 hour shifts at a time. Workforce contingency planning in the event of increased testing demand should include planning for these workforces.” Despite the discussion of scenarios where testing demand increases, the paper suggests that the “continuity of supply into the Australian market of tests and reagents for the primary Covid-19 tests in use is assured.” “The Australian government has also invested in securing a strategic reserve of pathology supplies should international supply lines be compromised.” A separate paper on rapid antigen tests that was first published in October 2020 and has been twice updated, outlines many of the limitations of the tests compared to PCR testing, and says the tests should only be used in limited circumstances. “However, significant changes in epidemiology may trigger a move to wider deployment of these devices to augment the current laboratory-based systems,” the August 2021 paper says. The paper also suggests that a protocol for reporting test numbers be established if rapid antigen tests are used, with each jurisdiction then reporting case numbers to the federal government. Despite the early advice that such a reporting mechanism may be needed when rapid antigen tests are in use, states and territories are now scrambling to come up with a reporting system for use by the end of the month. On Thursday, the Victorian government announced a new system obliging anyone who returns a positive rapid test to register the result. Morrison said that case numbers, which topped 64,000 on Thursday were becoming less important. “What matters is how many people are in hospital, ICU and on ventilators and that’s the real measure of what the impact is,” Morrison said. “The real issue is that people are connected to care.”General practitioners say they are being given a “laughable” supply of vaccine for the rollout to children, warning they will struggle to inoculate them ahead of the return to school in February. Parents across Sydney and Melbourne are also complaining of either having long-held bookings cancelled or being prevented from making appointments for their children due to system glitches. The rollout of the Pfizer vaccine to 2.3m children aged 5-11 begins on Monday, leaving families with a tight window to secure bookings before the school year starts in late January or early February. This week, vaccine taskforce head Lt Gen John Frewen said Australia had enough supply to administer first doses for every child “either within January or in the early weeks of February”. But GPs, who make up one of the main distribution channels, say they are facing similar problems to those experienced in the botched early stages of the adult rollout early last year. Dose allocations are too low to allow for rapid, widespread vaccination, and there has been confusion among GPs on whether shipments will arrive prior to Monday’s start date. In Melbourne, Dr Shea Wilcox says his clinic has been promised just 100 doses a week for children. The clinic says it could administer 1,000 doses per week. They have been overwhelmed with parents desperately seeking appointments ahead of the school year. “People are just phoning us saying ‘the prime minister is saying that there are doses, we want those’. We’re saying ‘we have no doses’,” he said. “One hundred doses per week is laughable. What’s that, about 30 families with three children each?” GPs placed orders for vaccine doses in mid-December but are being told shipments will only begin arriving late this week, just days out from the rollout’s commencement. That leaves little room for error. Any delay to shipments would force Wilcox and others to cancel bookings made for Monday. “We don’t have any vaccines in the fridge for children, parents are getting increasingly anxious with the case numbers going up, and the government is saying there are vaccines,” he said. Dr Maria Boulton, a GP and clinic owner in Brisbane, has also been allocated just 100 doses per week, which won’t begin arriving until 14 January, two to three weeks before most schools generally return for the year. Her clinic has 1,500 child patients aged 5-11. On the current dose allocation, it would take more than three months for her to vaccinate them all. The same supply and distribution issues were experienced by GP clinics during the early stages of the adult vaccination program last year. Still scarred by that experience, Boulton’s clinic hasn’t been taking appointments until she has the doses in her hands. Asked whether the government had learnt the lessons of that experience, Boulton said: “No. Once again, communication with GPs has been very poor by the health officials, and we tend to find things out through the media.” Boulton said rising Covid case numbers meant she would be operating with a reduced workforce, as staff were either infected or isolating. Dr Mukesh Haikerwal, who practises in Melbourne’s west, told Guardian Australia his clinic currently had 200 doses to vaccinate 1,400 eligible children. At the same time, he was dealing with the loss of 19 staff members and added pressure due to the clinic’s provision of Covid testing. “We also have business as usual to try and manage. Still there are many and massive problems,” he said via text. The Victorian spokesperson for the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners, Dr Anita Munoz, said the lack of doses being delivered to GPs was a significant issue. “It is frustrating for GPs,” she told Guardian Australia. “We would definitely like to see more doses with each delivery.” She said the sector was under enormous pressure at the moment, due to the adult booster program, high Covid-19 case numbers, workforce strains, and business as usual, all on top of the the children’s vaccination program. Asked if GPs would be able to vaccinate children before the return of school, she said: “I have concerns about getting all the kids vaccinated before then. I’m not sure it’s going to happen.” A spokesperson for the health minister Greg Hunt said 2m doses of Pfizer for children had been tested by the Therapeutic Goods Administration and were being distributed to primary care and state clinics. “Operation COVID Shield advises all orders are on track to be delivered as scheduled and advised to providers,” the spokesperson said. “The government has secured sufficient supply of the 5-11 year doses to offer all children a first dose by the end of January. Week by week allocations depends on ordering rates by individual vaccine providers.” The various booking systems for children’s vaccinations are also experiencing problems. Prof Alexandra Martiniuk, an epidemiologist at the University of Sydney, booked her children in for their vaccinations at the earliest opportunity last year. Both were to receive their first doses at the Mona Vale vaccination hub in Sydney in the first week of the rollout. Two days ago, she was told all appointments at the Mona Vale vaccination hub were being cancelled, and that she would have to find open bookings elsewhere for her children. That effectively put her at the back of the queue, despite her having a family member vulnerable to Covid-19. She asked NSW Health whether there was any triaging of vaccinations to prioritise more at-risk families. She was told there is no such strategy. “We are in a chaotic state, we all know that, with Omicron, on so many fronts, and this is one more front,” she told Guardian Australia. “But the thing is we knew child vaccinations were coming – we’ve known it for months.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Initially, she could only secure an appointment in March at the earliest. After spending hours on hold to the Covid hotline, she managed to bring forward the bookings to late January. NSW Health said a “technical error” caused both the Mona Vale and Royal North Shore vaccination hubs to be listed as sites for children’s vaccinations. The error has been fixed and parents were being asked to book in at Hornsby Hospital, which is taking children’s vaccination appointments. “NSW Health apologises sincerely for any inconvenience and encourages parents to please book their children in for a vaccination as soon as possible,” a spokesperson said. “There is ample supply of the Pfizer COVID-19 vaccine (Comirnaty) at Hornsby Hospital for the younger 5 – 11 years old cohort of children.”Arriving home to a heatwave, I open the front door to see the house has swollen in the heat. It’s an old miner’s cottage built on dirt, no proper foundations. It seems to breathe and change form depending on the weather. Remember that scene in Willy Wonka where Violet Beauregarde eats the forbidden gum and turns purple then expands like a blueberry? My house is Violet Beauregarde. The skirting boards have popped off and detached from the wall, a deep crack has appeared in the ceiling, and the ceiling and the wall appears to have separated. Will the house cleave in two if the heatwave continues? And if so, what does that mean? What should I do? There’s been a run of 37C days. I take cold showers at night and sleep with a wet cloth on my head. The air has weight and thickness. Breathing feels like taking something in that’s heavier than air. I buy some fans and am dismayed to learn upon opening the box that I have to assemble them myself. Making a fan seems a task too complex and important for a layperson. I worry that my friends in the spare room will be killed in the night, decapitated by a fan blade flying through the air as it becomes detached and airborne. * * * We are in a liminal zone – the days between Christmas and New Year’s. Who even knows what day it is? Time seems to stretch, a week crawls and purposelessness pervades. It has always been like this – but Omicron gives this baggy week a sinister edge. The detritus on the kitchen table reflects this new place where we have found ourselves: the plastic swabs and small bottles of solution, results windows and concertina instructions of the rapid antigen tests. I take Rats, my friends take Rats, we send each other photos or screenshots of our negative Rats or inform each other over group Whatsapp of a positive Rat – until a point, just after New Year’s, where there are no Rats, but everyone seems to know someone who is sick, or are sick themselves (the scratchy throat, the dry cough … ) or are isolating or waiting in some queue, somewhere, for a PCR, until after hours and hours of not moving or the centre closes, they go away. But on New Year’s Eve we are all negative – and there are some grounds for hope. 2022 will be better. This year is almost over. We don’t have it. We are not in lockdown. We can go out. * * * On the last day of the year we walk along a ridge, over the tufts of dry grass where last year I saw a brown snake cross our path – and we cool off by jumping in an old quarry converted into a reservoir. It’s like a Frederick McCubbin painting. The last hours of the year we sit under a tree, share a bottle of wine and say what we want from the new year. The wants are modest. This is Year 3, after all, and no one is dreaming big. Two days later, a cabbie comes to take me to the train station. The house is still swelling. Maybe when I return I’ll have two houses. As the cab pulls up, I’m outside with a glass of water, and instead of throwing the water out – which I intend to do – the glass slips from my hand and smashes dramatically on the porch. It looks like the operatic gesture of a mad person, like I’ve just gone outside and wantonly hurled a glass. It is one of those heavy crystal tumblers; the shards will be stepped on for years. The cabbie helps me clean it up and tells me that houses like mine are diabolical: “Only good for keeping the animals out.” Each year city people fall in love with them “because they’re cute”. They do a summer there and realise “it’s like sleeping in a hot tent”, he says. “They flip them pretty quick after that.” Not me. I love my sweat lodge. “The house is swelling up,” I tell him. “It’s coming apart at the seams. The other day the ceiling split from the walls.” On the way to the station he tells me about his house, which has double glazing and a split-system cooling. We say goodbye then he returns to the station because, inexplicably, he finds my credit card on the road. He comes back a third time – just before I get on the train – because I’ve left my phone in the backseat. “The heat makes me crazy and forgetful,” I say. * * * Down at the beach I reunite with friends who have been away from Australia for more than two years and had to delay coming back because they got Covid. They have been living in the UK and are pasty and jet lagged. The wind is nasty and hot, a southerly that is dragging the seaweed up from the shore and dumping it in huge piles on the sand. When we get to the beach, one of my friends drops to his knees in the sand and says: “The beach, the beach.” I am not sure if he is being ironic or real, but I leave him to it. Even though the conditions are bad (sand whipping around in circles, jellyfish particles washed up on the sand, a recent bull shark sighting), he runs into the sea and comes back grinning with joy. * * * I take a three-and-a-half-hour train journey down the west coast. The coast is cold and windy and the heat and my swollen house seem like another country. I visit friends in isolation and bring them morning coffees. Other friends visit me and send me screenshots of negative Rat tests. Other friends cancel visits because of positive Rat tests. But the wheels are falling off faster in 2022 – which is itself an extension of the Christmas/New Year’s liminal zone. In this popular tourist town, restaurants and cafes are shut, unable to get staff or because workers are isolating. No one can buy tests anymore. So many people are sick now. Even last week’s modest resolutions and hopes for the new year seemed outlandishly ambitious and out of reach. We are only four days in … but still. Down the coast I’m looking after a dog that eats plastic ornaments off the Christmas tree. He just jumps up and gobbles them whole. It is the least strange thing about this summer. Brigid Delaney is a columnist for Guardian AustraliaDirector Matthew Walker’s irresistibly fun and jaunty documentary follows an artist you’ve most likely never heard of, but after a viewing will probably never forget: Wanita Bahtiyar, Australia’s self-professed “queen of honky tonk”, country music singer and longtime sex worker. The film begins with her walking down an outback road in a beautiful royal blue dress, declaring via voiceover that “it’s insane, all of this is insane” – an accurate description of the contemporary human condition. Flighty, squirrely and eccentric, Wanita is someone most would call “a free spirit” – though she is certainly no pushover or shrinking violet; early in the film, Wanita reflects on how her mother once told her Hank Williams died from singing, which led her to think “that’s how I’m going to go”. There is an inference that Wanita has frittered some of her life away, getting “sidetracked” in Tamworth, New South Wales for 25 years, missing or squandering opportunities, partly as a result of her fickle and bullish personality. But now the subject is a “woman on a mission”, in her own words, who “always goes her own way” as her husband Baba puts it. This mission – to fly to America and record a full country album – gives the rudderless Wanita a purpose and the film a straightforward “on the road” narrative arc. We follow Wanita and her friends and fellow musos, her manager Gleny, and Archer, who she claims to have found under a bridge, as they travel to Nashville, making some stops along the way – performing to strangers on the street and in the airport, and recording a track in a New Orleans studio. Wanita has a terrific voice, no doubt about it, and – more importantly for the documentary – a colourful turn of phrase. She is charming in a rough and rowdy way, with a straight-to-the-bone candidness and self-effacing style. “I’d like to not look like a fuckwit,” she says at one point, of her big plan. On another occasion she enters a room and declares: “Take your hands off your genitals, the queen is in your presence.” In other words, Wanita is “good talent” as they say in documentary land, whose charm is very entertainingly reflected in the tone and texture of the film. Like a rollicking piece of music, I’m Wanita has a zesty rhythm and tempo; even when there’s no singing or tunes, one feels inclined to strum their knees and tap their toes to it. It joins a growing list of recent Australian docos presented in aesthetics inspired by the artists they explore, such as The Witch of King’s Cross (one of the best homegrown films of 2021), Ecco Homo and Whiteley. This is an easier task to achieve in productions about visual artists, whose work can be presented on screen, rather than those about musicians, beyond peppering the soundtrack with their music. Director Walker does that but also brings visual playfulness, avoiding the boring talking heads format and picking out certain words and turns of phrase from Wanita’s unpredictable tongue and displaying them in large capital letters, including “SOFT COCKERISM”, “I’M AN INFINITE NUMBER CONFIDENT” and “FUCK! YA KNOW?” I’m Wanita comes together very smoothly and appealingly, with some meaty themes under the hood: this is a film about how life dreams do not (or do not have to) disappear as youth fades. And – without wanting to sound cheesy, because the film certainly isn’t – I’m Wanita is about embracing life as a journey, rather than a destination. It’s also a vivid portrait of a very artistic way of living: about the pain, exhilaration, fun, and terror, and the highs and lows of living life outside the prescribed boxes and definitions. Walker doesn’t make the mistake of suggesting this is the “right” or the “wrong” way to live, and in fact draws attention to some of the selfish aspects of art as a way of life – articulated primarily by the subject’s estranged daughter, who clearly has complex feelings towards her mother. Perhaps the core message is that we are all walking in our own way, to our own beat, through the wilderness – or, as the case may be, down an outback tree-lined road, reflecting on the insanity of existence. I’m Wanita is in Australian cinemas nowIn Cape York’s Indigenous communities, locals are anxious for rain. Covid cases have spread to remote parts of northern Australia for the first time – just days before the expected onset of the wet season that will cut road access to large swaths of the Cape for months. Soon, the only way into the Aboriginal community of Lockhart River will be by air. The flood waters could represent a circuit-breaker to help restrict arrivals and keep Covid infections at bay. Or, in a worst-case scenario where the virus arrives before the rain, they could hem in vulnerable people living in overcrowded homes and unable to isolate; people living with chronic health conditions that can heighten the severity of Covid. “We’re burying people too young as it is,” the Lockhart River mayor, Wayne Butcher, told Guardian Australia. “The last four women we buried in our community were under the age of 45. The last thing we need is Covid.” Butcher said he received about 100 phone calls earlier this week when health authorities announced a case had been detected in Lockhart River. Outbreaks have already taken hold in Cherbourg – where there are more than 100 cases, including two people in intensive care – and on Palm Island. Cases have also been detected in other parts of Cape York and in the Torres Strait. The Lockhart River case is, fortunately, isolated about 8km from the town. “Everyone is in panic mode at the moment,” said Butcher. “People are very worried. The festive season is probably the worst time, because the majority of our people go down to Cairns, they’re shopping for Christmas, visiting family and coming back.” The onset of the wet season now feels like a race against time. “We won’t be able to control Covid here because of the culture of sharing. We’ve got two-bedroom houses with 15 people living in it. “We saw that out in Wilcannia, Bourke and western NSW, they were able to drive 100 caravan homes out there to put people out in the paddocks. In the wet season we won’t be able to drive a four-wheel-drive into Cape York. “If we keep Covid out, we’ve got a natural gate for three months. But now we’ve already got cases in the Torres Strait and we’ve got cases in Cape York. It’s only going to grow by the minute. It’s a wait and see game now.” Higher rates of infection Queensland recorded more than 10,000 confirmed Covid cases across the state on Thursday. The explosion of case numbers has been tempered with news that there are still relatively few people in hospital, in intensive care, or requiring a ventilator. Jason Agostino, the senior medical adviser to the National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation, said Indigenous people and those living in remote communities were at heightened risk. “It’s safe to assume that we’re going to see higher rates of infection and more people with severe disease in remote communities because of higher rates of chronic conditions that lead to more severe Covid, like diabetes and heart disease,” Agostino said. “[In previous outbreaks] Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people had been infected at twice the rate. There have been higher hospitalisations and ICU admissions in every single age group and we expect that to continue through Omicron. “The challenge in Queensland is how stretched the health system is already. With really large Aboriginal and Torres Strait Island communities in Queensland being affected at the same time, their ability to respond [will be impaired].” The Queensland Aboriginal and Islander Health Council had expressed “profound disappointment” that border decisions had been made without consultation with First Nations people, particularly given the vaccination take-up had been slow in some places. As the outbreak spreads, health workers are going door-to-door on Palm Island attempting to lift that rate. Butcher, who is the co-chair of the Indigenous Leaders Forum, said remote communities had wanted the Queensland border re-opening delayed until the New Year. “We were very concerned, the Indigenous shires, simply because some of the communities weren’t double-vaxxed enough,” Butcher said. “We were asking the Queensland government to hold off until after the New Year to give us more time. “But I guess we’re a minority in this state.”I am a man in my early 40s, a college graduate with three young kids and generally speaking have no money worries. Having worked in finance since I left university, I recently changed career by moving into a more generalist role with the civil service. I left finance because I wasn’t willing to commit to the long hours my employer demanded. I have more time with the family and am even studying again, so all should be fine now. Except it isn’t. I find I am beset by poisonous comparisons. I constantly compare myself to my friends, my relations, siblings and people I have previously worked and studied with. An old and dear friend has recently gained a prestigious promotion and instead of being happy for him I am quite jealous. I cannot even read a biography without comparing my position to the subjects. It’s frankly very foolish and petty of me. Intellectually I know I have nothing to be ashamed of. But in my gut I don’t feel this. I find myself wondering what is wrong with me, that I’m not at the same position in life as some of my peers. How can I stop wasting my time on stupid comparisons? Eleanor says: Sometimes when we step away from a particular set of values, it takes a while to stop measuring ourselves by them. We know we don’t agree with those values; we know why we chose to walk away; but still we default to them in how we criticise ourselves and what we desire or covet. It happens in all kinds of exits: we decide we want to leave a relationship, a culture or a job, but months later find we’re still seeing ourselves through its eyes. I wonder whether that might be what’s going on for you. You’ve made a big life change by moving away from a career that gave you financial stability and a clear identity, and though you know why you chose to walk away, that doesn’t guarantee it has quite walked away from you. Expectations about what’s worth wanting set up deep root systems inside our minds; we don’t get to weed them out overnight. It may be that this envy, this feeling of losing-by-comparison, is a reflexive scolding from the part of you still habituated to those norms. After all, envy isn’t just wanting what other people have; it’s feeling that there’s something shameful about the fact we don’t already have it – as though that lack reveals some deeper truth about us that we’d rather not face. Happily, there are some ways we can shrink the space between leaving a set of values and no longer measuring ourselves by them. One is to try to covet what you have now, instead of what the self-critical voice tells you to want. You say you feel preoccupied by others’ promotions and prestige. But how would those people see you? Many of the people in the positions you envy – who spend their days in glass corner offices and their nights in long meetings – can’t bear seeing pictures of their contemporaries on holidays with the kids or running around with the dog, because for them, those are the things worth envying. Many people wish they had the time with their families that you do now – or even just the ability to say out loud how much they’d value it. So consciously set aside some time to look at your life like an envious outsider peeping in – look, this man has the autonomy to make decisions; the bravery to leave a well-paying job; the self-possession to pursue new skills; no money worries! Ask what else people would say of you while thinking “I wish I were more like that”. Actively taking time to value what we have can retrain the part of us that criticises what we lack. And remember that you can build your own opportunities to feel proud and purposeful. Careers hand us a sort of “snakes and ladders” version of what to want next and how to get to it, but you can make your own. In the meantime, try not to be unkind to yourself by calling this “petty” or “foolish”. Envy can cling to all kinds of things, from jobs to spouses to hair or humour. The one thing all forms of envy have in common is they trace what we feel embarrassed about. In time, as your values catch up to your decisions, you won’t measure yourself like that any more. *** Ask us a question Do you have a conflict, crossroads or dilemma you need help with? Eleanor Gordon-Smith will help you think through life’s questions and puzzles, big and small. Questions can be anonymous. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service hereSuperannuation is the fancy word for your retirement fund. In Australia, your employer is mandated to pay 10% of your salary into your super account. Your account is held by a super fund that invests your money on your behalf. That way, your money is making more money instead of sitting there, losing its value to inflation. But when we first start working, most of us don’t know what super is. So we go with an employer’s recommendation. Then we move jobs, open a new account, and end up with multiple accounts. Super funds charge you various fees for their services. When you have multiple super accounts, you are paying fees on each one. But if you put all the money into one super account, consolidate your super – voilà! You will save thousands of dollars in fees, find that one account is easier to manage (no more losing track of your super!) and compound your investment returns by pooling all your money together. Before you consolidate your super, there are two things you should consider doing. First, compare super funds and choose the one that’s right for you – this may not be one that you already have. Second, you may want to seek advice on fees this may incur or insurance cover you may lose. Speak to your fund or a financial adviser about it. But, ultimately, the consolidating is quick and easy. Here’s how to do it in three steps Log in to your myGov account (or create one). Link your Australian Taxation Office account to myGov (click on “Link a service” and follow the instructions). Select “Super” from the top menu. You can then find any “lost” super and consolidate all your accounts into one. This will take you less than five minutes, but in future you will be glad you took the time. Mariam Mohammed is co-founder of MoneyGirlFresh out of a long-term relationship, the kind that had left me feeling flat and sexless, I was on a quest to get my groove back. Heavily influenced by Sex and the City reruns, the plan was less eat, pray, love and more download and swipe. I met him on a dating app. He was hot in an obvious kind of way: tall, tanned and muscular. He looked like he should be on Home and Away – or maybe an erotic spoof version. His body was covered in tattoos, thick cursive lettering; phrases written in different languages. When I showed a photo of him to a mate, she laughed and quipped, “He definitely doesn’t drink soy milk.” Still, on our first date he was calm, laughed at my jokes and made me feel attractive. For our second date, we agreed to meet at my new local beach in Maroubra. Best known for Bra Boys, bumbags and non-ironic mullets. When I first moved to the area, I’d spotted someone clutching a surfboard in one hand and a cigarette in the other. It was a sharp contrast from the men within my old home’s dating app radius, who had mostly traded rollies for vanilla-flavoured vapes. Despite the fact he kept calling our rendezvous a “date”, my date wasn’t wearing a shirt. Only in Maroubra I suppose. He greeted me with “sup”, and we began plodding along the beach. After I got over the confrontation of his bare chest, I asked what one of his tattoos meant in English. “Hopefully, ‘We only live one life,’ but who knows, eh?” A refreshingly honest answer. The sand was squishy, the waves were big and loud and the teens that usually loitered around the area smashing energy drinks seemed to have gone home for the day. I couldn’t wait to kiss him. We’d kissed before, but in the shy way new people kiss each other. Polite, almost. This night felt charged. It was in the way he touched my arm, the way he concentrated on me as I spoke – I had all his attention. We were both waiting for something to happen. We sat down together towards the back of the beach, far away from the ocean and near the hiking trails. He threw his hoodie down as a makeshift blanket and I snuggled under his arm. He held me surprisingly tightly but it felt nice. Then he told me he was glad he met me. I kissed him after he said that, with the kind of fierceness one does when they haven’t really kissed in a while. A light had turned on inside of me. One that had been off for months, maybe even years. We hunkered down in the sand together. I wanted to touch him everywhere – so I did. I could feel the sand scratching my feet and knees. As things got heavier, he kept checking in with me. “Do you want to stop, babe?” Every time I’d shake my head. Even in the dark, I could almost see his smile. Afterwards, we lay in the sand and caught our breath. The air suddenly felt colder. I could also feel sand everywhere but even that felt nice – cool and freeing. “Do you drink soy milk?” I asked. “Fuck no,” he replied, and we both burst out laughing.If there has been rain and it’s after dark, Daryl Dickson listens for a shower of drops bumped loose from the leaves above. When it’s dry, it could be the faint sound of the caps of bloodwood blossoms landing on her roof that sends her off to grab a torch and catch a glimpse of one of her elusive marsupial neighbours. “I don’t think there’s anything more magnificent than seeing a big mahogany glider go over the top of you. I just think they’re beautiful,” she says. When artist Dickson moved to Meunga Creek near Cardwell in far north Queensland almost 30 years ago, she had no clue she was sharing her home with a unique mammal. Her block, it turns out, is not the “rubbish scrub” the real estate agent told her about. Rather, it is prime and precious habitat for the mahogany glider, which is living a precarious existence on Earth in a thin but fragmented strip of coastal woodland just 120km long. Australia has seven possum-like gliding marsupials, but the mahogany is the most threatened. The earliest known specimen was collected in 1886 near Cardwell by a collector at Queensland Museum, but had lain in a drawer without ever being identified as a unique species. In 1986 when the museum was moving, staff wondered if this much larger specimen might be a different species. After returning to the location again, staff eventually found the glider four years later. The name mahogany comes from its colour and the swamp mahogany tree – one of the important species in its habitat. The gliders, which grow up to 28cm long and have tails up to 41cm in length, live in tree hollows and like open wet woodlands and tea tree swamps, but about 80% of their habitat has been lost. What’s left is badly fragmented by agriculture and human settlement. Now, the glider habitat is fractured into almost 1,000 individual pieces. The last estimate suggested there were no more than 2,000 individuals left. But that count was before 2011’s Cyclone Yasi – one of the state’s most powerful recorded cyclones that smashed the glider’s tiny bolthole. “Since cyclone Yasi, we’re not really sure how many there are,” says Andrew Dennis, who is coordinating a five-year project to save the glider at Terrain NRM, an environmental management organisation. “They’re actually quite hard to trap. They feed mostly on nectar and tree sap and it’s quite hard to get them attracted to a bait.” So far, the bait that works the best for the mahogany gliders has turned out to be raspberry cordial. “We have to spray quite a bit of it around the camera and the cages,” says Dennis. An island hideaway? The Guardian can reveal there is hope a community of the gliders could have been hiding out for a few thousand years, unnoticed by any humans, on Hinchinbrook Island – a wilderness national park less than 10km off the coast. Modelling of the glider’s habitat suggests the island is “high quality mahogany glider habitat”, says Dennis. A team put up 20 camera traps on the island for six weeks and brought them in just before Christmas. There were no mahogany gliders spotted, but in the final hours before the cameras were removed one caught an image of a sugar glider – a smaller close cousin of the mahogany. “Finding that sugar glider is tantalising,” says Dennis. “They’re often in the same forests together with mahogany gliders.” Researcher Eryn Chang is two years into a PhD at James Cook University. She led the work to model the gliders’ habitat and is working to understand their genetic health. So far, she has taken tiny tissue samples from the ears of 22 gliders to analyse. “They’re very difficult to catch,” she says. “But they’re extremely cute for sure. Anyone who handles them loves them.” Using a flap of membrane attached to their wrists and ankles, mahogany gliders can propel themselves up to 60 metres from one tree to another. All agree it’s a wondrous sight. “It’s magnificent to see them glide. It’s like... Wow,” says Chang. Her genetics work will give clues about the viability of the different groups of gliders spread in small pockets around the area. “We can then know if a population is suffering from in-breeding or if they’ve been recently connected to other groups,” she says. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning If any mahogany gliders are hiding out on Hinchinbrook, then Chang wonders how being cut off from other populations will have affected their genetic diversity. How much might the gliders have changed over thousands of years of isolation? Could they really have survived there? She hopes they’re questions she’ll get to investigate. Even if mahogany gliders are not found on the island, Dennis says Hinchinbrook could be an option in the future as a refuge to relocate some mahogany gliders to live without many of the threats they face on the mainland. Help for the vulnerable A large group of stakeholders from local, state and federal government agencies, conservation groups, Indigenous Girringun rangers and plantation managers have completed a draft national recovery plan for the mahogany glider. The plan is currently with federal environment minister Sussan Ley for final approval. Terrain NRM is working with Indigenous rangers to carry out controlled cool burns. Historically, Indigenous groups managed the glider habitat with fire that kept rainforest vegetation out and retained the woodland trees that gliders prefer. As clearing and development along the coast has made the gaps between trees wider, the gliders have struggled to make the distance, often getting caught on barbed wire. There’s also work with landholders and volunteers to plant trees to create corridors and to replace the barbed wires at the top of fences with plain wire. The gliders are awkward and vulnerable on the ground. Poles resembling wire-free telegraph poles have gone up in 10 locations to help them bridge gaps over roads and fields. Cameras have caught the gliders using them. “There’s this sound of a glider landing on a tree trunk – like a whack and then a scratch. You’ll then hear a little scamper up the trunk,” says Dennis. Dickson and husband Geoff have nursed about 25 wounded mahogany gliders over the years, mostly with injuries caused by their flying membrane being snagged on fences. Most years one or two mahoganies arrive for care with Dickson. But after Yasi hit, there was a seven-year gap until the next one arrived. Three gliders have been dropped at her small sanctuary for care in the past three years. The first gliders arrived at Dickson’s home in 2000 in the form of two tiny 19 gram “jellybeans” pulled from the pouch of a dead mother found at a nearby caravan park. Only one survived. “They were see-through,” she says. “You could see their hearts beating. From then there was no chance we would ever lose our love for this species.”For a second time, Boris Johnson has been cleared of breaching the ministerial code over concerns about how he funded renovations to his Downing Street flat – though he faced opprobrium from his ethics adviser. The saga has lasted two years and spawned several investigations, most of which have now concluded. This is what we know so far. What was Johnson accused of doing? In February 2021, media reports surfaced that a Tory donor was funding renovations to the No 11 Downing Street flat Johnson shares with his wife, Carrie, and their children. Although prime ministers get £30,000 of public money a year to spruce up their official residence, the cost of the renovation reportedly exceeded that, rising as high as £200,000. The Daily Mail said some additional payments were made through the Conservative party and had not been properly declared, so the idea of a trust was floated – like those that help pay for the upkeep of the prime minister’s countryside retreat, Chequers. In March, Downing Street insisted Johnson had met all the costs personally. It later turned out others had originally footed the bill but he then came up with the money himself and the original payees were refunded. Then in April, a leaked email came to light from a Tory peer, David Brownlow, to the co-chair of the Conservatives Ben Elliot, dated October 2020. Brownlow confirmed he was making a £15,000 donation, and another worth £58,000 “to cover the payments the party has already made on behalf of the soon to be formed Downing Street trust”. Facing huge pressure, Johnson appointed a new ethics adviser, Christopher Geidt, to look into a potential breach of the ministerial code. What did the first investigation find? Lord Geidt’s inquiry said that to ensure credibility he had “tested the assertions” that “at no point” until the media reports first emerged did Johnson know either “the fact or the method” of money being paid to cover the refurbishment. Although the work had started almost a year previously, Geidt said he had spoken directly to Johnson, and the prime minister said “he knew nothing about such payments until immediately prior to media reports in February 2021”. Geidt said Johnson had acted “unwisely”, but cleared him of breaching the ministerial code. What about the second investigation? While Geidt’s inquiry was under way, the Electoral Commission began its own in April, saying there were “reasonable grounds” to suspect an offence might have occurred. The watchdog published its findings in December 2021, saying the Conservatives had not reported Brownlow’s £58,000 donation and fining the party just over £17,000. In its report, the commission confirmed that as early as 21 January 2020 – just a month after Johnson’s landslide election win – the supplier of the refurbishment provided a detailed proposal to No 10 about the work. A curious piece of evidence also emerged from the commission’s findings: that Johnson messaged Brownlow on WhatsApp in November 2020 “asking him to authorise further, at that stage unspecified, refurbishment works on the residence”, and that Brownlow agreed and explained about the concept of the trust. This appeared to suggest a discrepancy with Johnson’s original insistence to Geidt he “knew nothing” about the payments. What happened then? Unhappy he had not been given a key piece of evidence, Geidt spent December exchanging letters with Johnson to find out why, and whether it should alter the findings of his initial report. Geidt eventually concluded, in letters released on Thursday, that he still believed Johnson had not broken the ministerial code. If he had, it could have set off a seriously damaging chain of events for the government. Usually, those who break the ministerial code are forced to resign – though Johnson has previously spared a cabinet colleague this fate. The publication of the WhatsApp messages between Johnson and Brownlow, revealing the prime minister raised the issue of support for a “Great Exhibition 2” while requesting No 11 funds, means further questions are being asked, however. What could happen next? There could yet be another investigation, launched by the parliamentary standards commissioner, Kathryn Stone. She was awaiting the Electoral Commission report, and will also probably have wanted to see Geidt’s take before deciding whether to launch an inquiry of her own. This could still be damaging to Johnson, given Stone has powers to recommend that sanctions be imposed on any MP found guilty of breaking the code of conduct, including for them to make an apology or be suspended from the Commons.The newly knighted Sir Tony Blair is one of several well-paid western advisers who have burnished the image of Kazakhstan’s former ruler Nursultan Nazarbayev and his autocratic regime, now the target of angry protesters. Narzabayev invited Blair to give him strategic advice after Kazakh security forces shot dead 14 people during the country’s December 2011 anti-government uprising. The protesters in the western oil town of Zhanaozen were demanding higher wages. Although the unrest then was on a lesser scale than this week’s rebellion, the government’s heavy-handed response dealt a serious blow to its international reputation. Blair offered advice on a speech Nazarbayev made in Cambridge, where the Kazakh leader was to make his case to a western audience of academics and dignitaries. In a letter to Narzabayev, Blair advised the president to “meet head-on the Zhanaozen issue” while stressing the “enormous progress” Kazakhstan had made since its independence from the Soviet Union. Blair urged the dictator to stress he “understood” what his critics were saying. The former Labour prime minister suggested Nazarbayev say reforms would “take time” and should be done “with care and with stability uppermost”. The Kazakh government is said to have paid Blair’s consultancy $13m for its services. Narzabayev incorporated the ideas in the speech. Blair signed off by writing: “With very best wishes. I look forward to seeing you in London! Yours ever, Tony Blair.” The Kazakh regime has spent – sometimes covertly – large sums in recent years to improve its standing in the west and to rebut persistent allegations of corruption and lavish spending by Narzabayev and his family. His daughter and grandson own £80m of property in London. In 2020 the National Crime Agency lost an attempt in the high court to force them to explain where the money came from. Blair’s former consultancy firm, Tony Blair Associates, signed a deal to advise Kazakhstan’s government in 2011, months after Nazarbeyev was controversially re-elected with 96% of the vote and weeks before the massacre. The former Conservative cabinet minister Jonathan Aitken wrote two flattering books about Nazarbayev. Aitken travelled around the country on a plane belonging to Sir Richard Evans, the former head of BAE Systems who sits on the board of Samruk, a Kazakh state holding company. The Guardian described Aitken’s 2009 Narzarbayev and the Making of Kazakhstan as “quite probably the hagiography of the year”. He denied receiving money from the regime for the work, which skirted over repression and Kazakhstan’s poor human rights record. But the Pandora Papers, a trove of leaked data exposing tax haven secrecy reported on by the Guardian and others, suggested Aitken was paid £166,000. According to the papers, World PR, a firm that represents several Kazakh ministries, sent the cash to the former MP’s Oxford bank account via the British Virgin Islands. It allegedly also paid for his hotel and book tour in the US. Meanwhile, London-based bankers have earned large fees from assisting with the flotation on the London Stock Exchange of Kazakh mining conglomerates. They include the Eurasian Natural Resources Corporation (ENRC) and Kazakhmys, which mines the country’s copper. The late businessman and Tory party chairman Sir Paul Judge was an ENRC director. The company also hired and subsequently ousted Sir Richard Sykes, the former head of GlaxoSmithKline and chancellor of Brunel University. A spokesperson for Blair said he was not an adviser to Narzarbayev but did “give thoughts” on the president’s speech and said he should deal with human rights issues during his UK trip. The Kazakhstan project was in line with international community goals and was “focused on the government’s change and reform programme,” they added. The project fee did not go to Blair personally and mostly funded an in-country team, they said, with the “business side” of his consultancy work ending in 2016.Boris Johnson has criticised anti-Covid vaccine activists for spreading “nonsense” on social media, while stressing that he does not support moves to overtly pressure people into getting vaccinated. “I want to say to the anti-vax campaigners, the people who are putting this mumbo jumbo on social media: they are completely wrong,” Johnson told broadcasters on a visit to a vaccination centre in Moulton Park, Northampton. “You haven’t heard me say that before, because I think it’s important we have a voluntary approach in this country and we’re going to keep a voluntary approach.” While some other European countries were trying “coercion”, the prime minister said, this would not happen in England. But he added: “What a tragedy that we’ve got all this pressure on the NHS, all the difficulties that our doctors and nurses are experiencing, and we’ve got people out there spouting complete nonsense about vaccination. “They are totally wrong, and I think it’s time that I, the government, call them out on what they’re doing. It’s absolutely wrong, it’s totally counterproductive, and the stuff they’re putting out on social media is complete mumbo jumbo.” In an interview published on Wednesday, the French president, Emmanuel Macron, explained that it was his overt plan to make life difficult for unvaccinated citizens. Macron said he wanted to put them “in the shit” – using the verb emmerder, a vulgar slang term derived from merde (shit) – by “limiting as much as possible their access to activities in social life”. Macron said: “We have to tell [the unvaccinated] … you will no longer be able to go to a restaurant, you will no longer be able to go for a coffee, you will no longer be able to go to the theatre, you will no longer be able to go to the cinema. We will continue to do this, to the end. This is the strategy.” Johnson’s approach for England – health policy is devolved between UK nations – is different, although he has introduced Covid passports, requiring proof of double-jabbed status or a recent negative test, for access to nightclubs and larger venues such as sports grounds. Even this was notably unpopular with Tory MPs, 101 of whom rebelled in a Commons vote in December, leaving him reliant on Labour support for the measure to pass. While the rollout of booster vaccinations, seen as key to protecting people against the Omicron variant, started rapidly, progress now appears to have stalled slightly, with almost 9 million eligible adults not yet having had one.Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, the convicted Boston Marathon bomber, spent $2,000 on expenses such as gifts, books and support for his siblings instead of making payments he owes to his scores of victims, prosecutors charged in a court filing on Wednesday. The document listed a number of large deposits to Tsarnaev’s inmate trust account that he failed to report to the court, allegedly violating the Mandatory Victim Restitution Act. Following Tsarnaev’s conviction in the 2013 terrorist attack that killed three people and injured hundreds more near the Boston Marathon finish line, part of his penalties included a $3,000 special assessment and $101,126,627 in criminal restitution. Yet so far, he has only paid $2,202.03, instead sending money to third parties such as his family. After sentencing, deposits to Tsarnaev’s account only became more frequent, prosecutors wrote. Among the larger payments was a $1,400 relief benefit that Tsarnaev got on 22 June. Between May 2016 and last June, he also received $11,230 from the Office of Federal Defenders of New York. Meanwhile, he has also attracted an outpouring of financial support from individuals. One person in Indianapolis sent him monthly payments for six years, for a total of $2,555. Another from Bloomfield, New Jersey, contributed $1,450 between 2015 and 2017. Another from Frederick, Maryland, deposited $950 over roughly five years, and a broader swath of 32 others have sent a collective $3,486.60. In response to the prosecutors’ motion, a US district judge has already authorized the Bureau of Prisons to turn over the funds from Tsarnaev’s account to cover part of his criminal monetary penalties. Near the end of December, Tsarnaev had roughly $3,885.06 in his account. The Boston bombing was the scene one of the most harrowing terrorist attacks in recent American history. After Tsarnaev and his brother Tamerlan Tsarnaev planted pressure-cooker bombs at the marathon, the world watched as a violent manhunt ensued. During a gun battle with police, Tamerlan sustained mortal injuries – some of which were inflicted by Dzhokhar, who ran over his brother in a Mercedes SUV. Dzhokhar Tsarnaev was later found covered in blood and taken into custody. He was sentenced to death in 2015. An appeals court ruled to overturn the execution in 2020, and the supreme court is now considering whether to reimpose it. Tsarnaev is currently incarcerated in Colorado’s so-called supermax prison.Hospitals outside London could end up treating even more Covid patients than at the peak of the pandemic last January, a senior NHS leader has said. Soaring infection rates in the north of England mean that one NHS trust expects to have 30% more Covid cases next week than it had at the last peak, the chief executive of NHS Providers said. Chris Hopson fears that hospitals outside the capital will not be as able to cope with the new wave of admissions as those in London. He said this was because they had deeper staffing problems, higher levels of sickness absence, older populations and in some cases worse social care provision. NHS Providers represents all the 213 NHS trusts of different sorts in England. Drawing a contrast between the ability of trusts in London and the rest of England to withstand the intense pressures of Omicron, Hopson said in a series of tweets that in the bulk of the country, “overall Covid cases v previous peaks could be much higher”. He added: “London currently [circa] 50% of Jan 2021 peak Covid hospital load. One northern trust already at 70% of Jan 2021 peak and predicting [circa] 130% next week.” Some trusts outside London have as many as 19% of their staff absent because of Covid, much higher than the 10% off sick or isolating that other NHS organisations have been reporting, he added. It came as the UK reported a further 179,756 Covid cases on Thursday, with the number of people infected with the Omicron variant continuing to surge. The latest figures – which reflect infections picked up by testing – bring the UK total for the past seven days to 1,272,131, up 29% on the week before. The true number of infections is estimated to be substantially higher as not all infections are captured by the testing programme. The figure does not include reinfections for most of the countries in the UK, and reflects cases by date reported, rather than by specimen date. Data released on Thursday also reveals that in England there are 17,988 Covid patients in hospital, up from 15,659 the day before. A further 231 deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid test were reported in the UK on Thursday. The data comes as the latest weekly flu and Covid-19 surveillance report from the UK Health Security Agency revealed that Covid case rates rose considerably in England between 27 December 2021 and 2 January 2022, particularly in the north-east and among white ethnic groups. Hopson said he had spoken to chief executives of more than a dozen trusts outside London over the previous 24 hours. “They all, unanimously, challenged the assumption that the rest of the country will automatically follow London on the shape and scale of, and ability to ‘cope’ with, pressure,” he said. “CEOs outside London gave a number of reasons why their local system may be less able to cope with pressures than London has done. Demographics, patterns of infection, hospitalisation and sickness absence will be different. “So we are likely to see a very varied pattern emerging over next days and weeks, with some trusts finding it easier to ‘cope’ than others. With London trusts at ‘more able to cope’ end? Hence why some trusts now declaring critical incidents – around two dozen now.” Listing other issues that hamper non-London trusts, he said: “Several saying they’ve started with higher bed occupancy (both Covid and non-Covid) than many London trusts. Multiple workforce issues. Ability to access agency and bank shifts more difficult outside London. Especially outside urban areas. “Many trusts, for example some offering full set of services across multiple sites, already had workforce gaps pre-Covid so [are] less resilient when absences strike. Geography and distance to travel make staff redeployment across sites more difficult.” Older populations, the difficulty of redeploying staff to sites where they do not usually work and fewer agency staff living locally affected trusts serving rural areas, he added. All of the 24 trusts that have declared an “internal critical incident” in recent days have been outside London. Several operate more than one hospital across a wide area with a small population, such as the Morecambe Bay and United Lincolnshire trusts. Others serve coastal and rural areas, such as those in Blackpool, Plymouth and Dorset. The entire NHS in Norfolk has gone on alert. Hopson said the NHS across England was “stretched like never before”. He urged politicians and NHS leaders to “openly and clearly acknowledge scale of current pressures and impact on patients and staff”. Despite their best efforts to maintain normal care, some trusts are having to again postpone non-urgent operations because of the pressure they are under. That, combined with long waits for ambulances to arrive and to access A&amp;E care, was leading to a “clear, regrettable impact on quality of care for patients”, Hopson added.While X-Men scribe Simon Kinberg’s junky action thriller chooses not to reveal the meaning behind its truly forgettable title until the end (one of his many bizarre decisions as writer-director), I’m going to start by explaining that The 355 is a reference to Agent 355, one of America’s first female spies, deployed during the late 18th century, real identity forever unknown. Perhaps the reason we find this out so very late is that a mere whiff of this story ends up being far more dramatically enticing than the film it’s inspired, the first big release of the year doubling up as its first big disappointment. Back in 2017, while in the middle of shooting another ill-advised disaster – the loathed X-Men spin-off Dark Phoenix – Jessica Chastain approached Kinberg about creating a female-led action thriller in the vein of James Bond and Mission: Impossible. By the following summer, the film was presented to buyers at Cannes by Chastain and co-stars, an appealingly commercial package that was unsurprisingly snapped up fast. Almost four years later, after a delayed release as a result of Covid, whatever might have worked on paper fizzles out on screen, a gussied-up pile of schlock that wastes a cast who deserve so much better. Rather than being worthy of the collective might of Chastain, Lupita Nyong’o, Penélope Cruz, Diane Kruger and Bingbing Fan, it feels like the kind of bottom shelf dross that Bruce Willis and Jesse Metcalfe would sleepwalk through to pay the bills, piles of cash handed over via grubby manilla envelopes. The derivative, stitched-together plot focuses on an all-powerful piece of tech that can hack into pretty much anything, crashing planes, tanking power grids and creating chaos for whomever its owner wants. Mace (Chastain) is an agent tasked with bringing it in along with her colleague and best friend Nick (Sebastian Stan). But the plan goes awry and Chastain is left as a lone wolf, forced into partnering with agents from around the world to figure out what happened and who is to blame. It’s every bit as generic as that sounds, with a hapless, first-draft script from Kinberg and playwright Theresa Rebeck that fails to introduce any surprise, suspense or humour, coasting along on its stretched star cast and good intentions. The genre still remains heavily male-skewed of course but simply replacing male action heroes with women and then standing back waiting for applause isn’t quite enough. There’s been a very slow inch toward a tad more equality of late, with recent female-led streaming efforts like The Old Guard, Kate and Gunpowder Milkshake easily putting The 355 in the shade, and so beyond the logline “what if Bond but with women”, there’s not much else brought to the table. The film also can’t decide if it’s skewering the genre or conforming to it. In one scene, Chastain’s character ridicules the lack of reality in a 007 movie – “James Bond never has to deal with real life” – but just a scene later, just after travelling around the world in an unexplained army plane, the on-the-lam women arrive at a gala with new outfits, new wigs and new tech, reality nowhere to be seen. Films such as The 355 live and die by the quality of their action set pieces and while there’s a propulsive pace to the proceedings, there’s never quite enough genuine excitement. The fight scenes, of which there are many, are shoddily captured despite game performers and so the action has a numbing effect, confusingly choreographed and ultimately rather boring. Chastain, who recently gave one of her finest performances in The Eyes of Tammy Faye, is a bit flat and muted here without any eccentricities to play with and so doesn’t really convince as the charismatic, take-no-prisoners lead inspiring a ragtag bunch of agents to follow her. There’s not much of interest for Nyong’o, Fan and particularly Cruz to chew on and so it’s Kruger who steals it, stepping in for the originally cast Marion Cotillard, doing a lot with very little. No one expects intricate character development with a barebones film such as this but there’s barely an attempt to even differentiate the characters outside of their nationalities, a film about strong women that reduces them to nobodies. Like the films it aspires to be like, The 355 ends with the promise of more but even without an Omicron-hit box office and a cursed January release, it’s unlikely that audiences would be clamouring for a sequel. There will be worse films to come this year but not many will be quite as hard to remember by the end of it. The 355 is out in US and UK cinemas on 7 JanuarySerge Mombo, a leading football official in Gabon, has been accused of sexually abusing young players and demanding sex as a condition of them securing places in national teams. Mombo was re-elected as president of La Ligue de l’Estuaire, Gabon’s senior football league, in June 2021. He is also set to serve as the kit man for Gabon’s senior men’s team at the African Cup of Nations in Cameroon, which begins on Sunday. Mombo, a former policeman, denied the abuse claims, made by alleged victims and witnesses to the Guardian. He also denied claims he provided a Gabonese football coach, Patrick Assoumou Eyi, known as “Capello”, with boys to sexually abuse. Eyi, like Mombo a senior figure in the Gabonese football federation Fegafoot, is facing charges of raping minors and sexual assault after claims by alleged victims were reported by the Guardian. Two other coaches in Gabon are also facing charges. Mombo said his accusers were “lying to try to dirty my image.” One alleged victim said he was abused by Mombo and Capello in 2014 at the Heliconia hotel in Libreville, the capital of Gabon, during a training camp. “He was there, choosing some boys. We didn’t really understand why he was so powerful. Some players had to call him coach but he was a kit man. It was very weird. He did his dirty game with Capello.” The alleged victim said Mombo would give the first three pieces of watermelon to three boys they would then invite to a room to be abused. “The same night, Mombo came to my room and told me to go to Capello’s bedroom. He didn’t say more and didn’t give me the choice. It was almost 10 at night. Capello waited for me without a T-shirt. He told me that I was talented but in order to support the pressure, I would need ‘la présence d’esprit’ [presence of mind].” He added: “Capello and Mombo worked together on this. Mombo came with us on the away trips, in the same plane. He came to see us, told he could help us. I remember after a game at home that he told me: ‘If you want to play, you’ll need to give me what I want. I can make your career, even with the senior national team.’ “I came from a poor family, I was thinking about it. I’m shameful but it was my only way to help my family, you know, so I accepted his first offer. I was selected the next time but I felt so bad. Physically, emotionally, they ruined me. When I refused to go further I wasn’t selected any more with the national team.” Another former player who claimed he was abused by both Eyi and Mombo when he represented Gabon’s Under-17s in 2017 said the official attempted to proposition him with promises of a place in the starting lineup. “In the national team, Serge Mombo was a predator,” he said. “He offered us sexual propositions in exchange for a place in the team in the future. They picked us, they gave us some advantages: money, gifts and also the privilege to play for our country. “When you start to like it, to dream, they asked for sex. Basically, he told me: ‘If you want to stay with us, you’ll need to give me something.’ I asked what and he answered: ‘Your arse.’ He even offered me money if I wanted … I am a victim of both.” Both of these alleged victims have said Mombo was also working as a kit man for all of Gabon’s national youth teams. This is denied by Mombo. Mombo denied the claims of sexual abuse and said that he had “never worked with this Capello in a national team. I met him as a DTP [provincial technical director] when I was elected to the league”. “Never and never,” he added. “ Of course they are lying to try to dirty my image.” The former Gabon international Brice Makaya served as assistant to Eyi with the Under-17s in 2014 and told the Guardian that Mombo regularly travelled with the squad and the Fegafoot president, Pierre-Alain Mounguengui, to tournaments. “Mombo was the all-powerful kit man of the Gabonese football federation’s kit men. He managed the kits for managers of all age-groups of the national selections. In the under-17s when we had trips he was travelling with Mounguengui and acting as the law, and sometimes he was the decision maker.” Makaya has claimed that on a trip to Ethiopia, he informed Mounguengui of his suspicions that Eyi had been abusing players but was told “you don’t have proof”. “When he told me to calm down and there’s nothing he’ll do, I understood that it’s a system,” he said. Mounguengui did not respond to requests from comment from the Guardian. Another alleged witness has claimed they heard Mombo asking a young boy to perform a sex act on him if he wanted to be selected for the national team. “Mombo was on the phone and I was 10 metres away,” he said. The alleged witness has also claimed that Mombo confiscated the passports of players from Gabon’s Under-20 women’s team after they reported accusations of rape, abuse and sexual harassment. “He threatened them if they wanted to talk about sexual abuse,’ he added. Mombo did not respond directly to a question about whether he had confiscated players’ passports. But he added: “I promise you that if I have information on the various predators that have killed the lives and careers of some, I will communicate it to you; together we must save our football. Especially young people. I am also doing investigations at my level. If I have news, I will share it with you some time.”Greggs has confirmed Roger Whiteside is to step down as chief executive in May, after nine years leading a turnaround at the bakery chain, as it revealed strong sales of mince pies and vegan festive bakes helped lift sales in the run-up to Christmas. Whiteside said he was handing over the business “in a strong place” to Roisin Currie, the group’s retail and property director, after a “fantastic journey”, despite challenges including inflation and staff shortages. He said prices on Greggs products had risen by 5p-10p because of increases in the cost of ingredients, energy and labour which were affecting its suppliers as well as itself. “We won’t pass that all on in price [rises] but we have to pass on some,” Whiteside said. He said prices had already been put up for the first half of 2022 and it was not yet clear if there would be a further increase in the second half of the year as Greggs was still negotiating with suppliers for that period. Whiteside said about 70 out of more more than 2,000 Greggs shops had been affected by staff shortages as a result of employees being infected with Covid-19, or having to isolate. He said the number of outlets affected was rising every week. “We have seen a sharp rise in absences,” said Whiteside, adding that he expected the situation to worsen. “It’s a matter of concern but we managed before in the ‘pingdemic’ and our teams are doing a great job [again].” Despite the inflationary and staffing woes, the company – known for its sausage rolls, steak bakes and vegan snacks – said in a trading update that it expected to beat its pretax profit forecast for 2021 when it reports official full-year results in March. Greggs said sales rose 0.8% in the three months to 1 January, compared with the same period two years before, contributing to a 5.3% increase in sales for the whole of last year to £1.2bn. Annual sales were down 3.3% excluding new store openings. Whiteside, a veteran of Ocado and Marks &amp; Spencer who was poached from Punch Taverns to run Greggs in 2013, will continue to work with the company to “support the transition process” until his notice period expires on 5 January next year. Shares in Greggs have risen from £4.70 when Whiteside started as chief executive in February 2013 to more than £31.00 on Thursday. Currie, who joined Greggs in 2010, is responsible for the chain’s 2,200 stores across the UK and rapidly expanding home delivery partnership with Just Eat. “Roisin has played a central role in the success of Greggs as it has developed as a multichannel food-on-the-go business and I am delighted that she will lead the next phase of our growth as chief executive,” said Ian Durant, Greggs’ chair. “She has deep experience of our culture and our strategic plan, and will lead with energy and character.” Currie will become chief executive designate and an executive director from 1 February and take over from Whiteside at the company’s annual general meeting in May. Greggs said it sold 6.7m mince pies in the run-up to Christmas, as fourth quarter like-for-like sales beat 2019 levels by 0.8%, despite “continued disruption to staffing and supply chains”. Whiteside, 63, praised the efforts of the company’s 25,000 staff, who would be receiving their annual pay awards five months early. “Greggs has made great progress in 2021 despite tough trading conditions,” Whiteside said. “We enter 2022 with a strong financial position that will support our ambitions to accelerate the rate of growth in our shop estate whilst developing new digital channels and extending the trading day.” The company opened 131 new shops last year and closed 28, and has expanded its home delivery service with Just Eat to 1,000 outlets. Greggs plans to open 150 stores this year and intends to pay shareholders a special dividend of £30m-£40m, depending on trading conditions. The company said inflationary pressure increased towards the end of last year and was “likely to remain elevated in 2022”. “While conditions in the first few months of 2022 are likely to remain challenging, we are confident that we are well placed to make progress on the many attractive opportunities that lie ahead,” Whiteside said.Time to wrap up - here are today’s main stories: Goodnight. GW Danni Hewson, AJ Bell financial analyst, sums up the day in the markets: “Will this be the tale on repeat for early 2022? Banking and Energy shares heading up and rate sensitive growth stocks heading down? Investors shouldn’t have been surprised by the increasingly hawkish tone being employed by the US Federal Reserve and yet just the anticipation of seeing its most recent comments in black and white prompted a tech stock sell off yesterday which has just kept on rolling. It certainly feels like the piper is calling to be paid, inflation numbers for the next few months look pretty nailed on if Germany’s latest update is anything to go by. “And that squeeze on households isn’t a good look for any government, particularly those looking to raise taxes to pay for some of the battering Covid inflicted. Pressure might be mounting on the UK Chancellor to U-turn on his plans to boost the NHS but at the moment it seems Rishi Sunak is not for turning. But how can consumers be expected to keep spending the country out of the pandemic if their cash reserves are dwindling? And how will this government’s popularity cope with people’s mounting discomfort as energy bills climb higher and higher. Homeworking on a day when temperatures are plunging takes on a new hue, and there will be many donning extra layers in order to keep icy fingers from thermostats. “What’s also been noticeable today is the lack of enthusiasm from investors for past performance. Next might have racked up the sales and raised its earnings guidance for a rather spectacular fifth time in ten months but the big story fast becoming a familiar one. Prices are set to rise to deal with the double threat of higher wages and increased shipping costs. How will the decision to pass on costs impact consumer sales? That’s the big question many businesses will have to wrestle with over the next 6-12 months. If this Christmas was about making up for lost ground, Spring might look more like clawing back lost savings. “Businesses that provide vital services and those must haves are looking mighty fine to many investors right now. Walgreens’ stocks enjoyed a nice bump in early trading before falling back slightly as the company raised its profit forecast. Sales jumped to a twenty year high as those coming to get their Covid jabs stayed to peruse the aisles and found a lot more to tempt them than in previous years. But overall US investors are feeling jumpy, looking for that sliver of silver amongst the dark clouds as last year’s tech rally retreats.” After a choppy day, European stock markets have closed firmly lower tonight. In London, the FTSE 100 has dropped by 66.5 points, or 0.9%, to 7450 points, easing away from Wednesday’s 22-month peak. Industrial software group Aveva (-5.8%) led the fallers, followed by veterinary pharmaceuticals group Dechra (-4.8%), IT analytics firm RELX (-4.8%) and gambling group Flutter (-4.5%). Among smaller firms, Greggs tumbled 8% despite predicting it would beat expectations this year. The bakery chain said it had raised prices between 5p and 10p on items across its range of sausage rolls and cakes. Footwear maker Dr Martens got a shooing, with shares dropping over 10% after major investor, private equity firm Permira, sold 6.5% of the company at a discount last night. Banks had a solid day, though, while commercial property firms also rallied on hopes that the pandemic could be easing despite the damage to the economy last month. The pan-European Stoxx 600 fell by 1.3%, while France’s CAC lost 1.75%. The slump in tech stocks has hurt a popular fund which focuses on growth companies. US investment manager Cathie Wood’s flagship Ark fund had a stellar 2020 as innovative technology companies boomed in the pandemic. But it weakened in 2021 as the boom in disruptive, but currently unprofitable, tech firms faded, and has suffered fresh losses this year as some of its investments continued to slide. The Financial Times has the details: Ark Invest’s flagship fund has dropped 9 per cent so far this year, following a sharp fall in 2021, as a strong shift by investors out of the unprofitable technology stocks that powered its extraordinary rise dealt it a fresh blow. Investors have pulled more than $300m this year on a net basis from fund manager Cathie Wood’s Ark Innovation exchange traded fund, known by its ticker ARKK, as its bets on riskier tech companies have soured, according to Bloomberg data. The $14.4bn vehicle, which combines an ETF structure with an ability to pick stocks, has now tumbled about 45 per cent from its February peak. Ark did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Travel firms and airlines have reported surging bookings following the relaxation of Covid testing requirements for travellers returning to the UK. EasyJet said there were almost three times as many flights bought in the UK in the hours following the prime minister’s announcement on Wednesday than in the same period the week before, while holiday firm TUI said there had been “an immediate and strong uptick in bookings”. British Airways Holidays said searches for holidays on its websites increased by nearly 40% compared with the week before. From 4am on Friday, international arrivals or holidaymakers returning to England will not need to produce a negative pre-departure test, nor self-isolate until they receive a further negative PCR test result from the first two days on arrival. The global economic recovery slowed slightly at the end of 2021, as a weaker increase in services activity offset faster growth at factories. The JP Morgan Global Composite Output Index, which includes surveys of purchasing managers across the world, dipped to 54.3 in December. That shows the slowest growth in three months. Almost all of the nations covered registered economic growth during December. Signs of slowdown were widespread, however, although China did see an acceleration in groth. The US grew most rapidly, followed by Ireland and then India. But Germany lagged behind -- it was the only countr surveyed to register a contraction, ending a 17-month sequence of growth. Omicron has hit growth in America’s service sector too. The US services PMI produced by the Instutute of Supply Management fell to 62% in December, down from the alltime high of 69.1% in November. Services firms reported that new order growth and business activtiy both slowed last month, as the Covid-19 variant weighed on the economy. But still, the Services PMI had now exceeded 60% for the 10th consecutive month, which shows solid growth. Companies also reported that they were suffering from shortages of materials and labor, supply chain delays, and higher prices. Here’s some examples: “Supply chain challenges to procure supplies for our restaurants remains our greatest obstacle at present, along with staffing needs. We are considering another price increase after just one in 2021, in August.” [Accommodation &amp; Food Services] “Supply chain issues continue, but our business is adapting.” [Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing &amp; Hunting] “The escalation in costs for materials, fuel, labor, lodging and the like continues to negatively impact margins in an unsustainable direction.” [Construction] “Higher than normal employee attrition within our own company and at our suppliers, which is causing disruptions and delays.” [Finance &amp; Insurance] A computer glitch at the Gatwick control tower left flights unable to land or take off at Britain’s second biggest airport during the morning peak. Three planes were diverted to other London airports as controllers from Air Navigation Services were forced to shut down the malfunctioning IT and guide planes in under a backup system. Passengers on British Airways flights returning from Antigua in the Caribbean and Tampa in the US found themselves landing 45 miles away at Heathrow at the end of their overnight flights. After a delay of more than two hours, the planes refuelled and continued on to the Sussex airport. An easyJet flight from Belfast was diverted to Luton airport, on the other side of London. The three flights were diverted during the “switch down” of the IT system, which started at 7.25am. Other planes were left circling and delayed until the normal systems were restored at 9.10am. Millions of people have been given financial breathing space after HM Revenue and Customs effectively extended the tax self-assessment deadline by a month, until 28 February. HMRC is postponing late-payment penalties for self-assessment taxpayers until 1 April because it “recognises the pressure” individuals and businesses are facing because of Covid-19. The move – a repeat of concessions made last year – is good news for the estimated 5.7 million people who have still not filed their 2020-21 tax return. Almost 6.5 million people have already done so..... After that cautious start, Wall Street has now turned lower as anxiety over looming US interest rate rises grips investors. The S&amp;P 500 is now down 0.3%, while the Nasdaq Composite has slipped by another 0.6%. European stocks are weakening too, with the UK’s FTSE 100 now down 80 points or around 1% at 7437. Last night’s hawkish minutes of December’s Federal Reserve meeting continue to hit markets, as investors ponder how soon, and how fast, the Fed might tighten monetary policy. Melissa Davies, chief economist at Redburn, says that the US central bank is considering when it might unwind its massive bond-buying programme (a process called quantitative tightening, or QT). What we learned from last night’s Minutes is that the Fed is more than ready to proceed with QT once the first rate hike has taken place, and that they are prepared to go quickly with balance sheet reduction. Rate hikes may be de-emphasised relative to QT to avoid putting too much flattening pressure on the curve. The existence of the ON RRP in particular means the Fed has a large amount of headroom to carry out swift balance sheet reduction without causing a meaningful tightening of financial conditions. This can take place while the inflation outlook becomes clearer. US factory orders rose 1.6% last month, extending an almost-unbeaten run of gains since the first lockdowns in 2020. New orders for manufactured goods in November rose by $8.4bn to $531.8bn, the U.S. Census Bureau reports. This followed a 1.2% October increase, and is the 18th rise in the last 19 months (they fell slightly last April). Shipments also rose, while unfilled orders jumped for the 10th month in a row, showing that high demand and shortages of materials and workers may still be holding back production. In New York, shares have opened cautiously after yesterday’s hawkish Federal Reserve minutes spooked markets. The S&amp;P 500 index of US companies has gained 12 points or 0.25% to 4,712, with energy stocks and financial firms rallying. Industrial stocks are higher, as are some technology companies. The tech-focused Nasdaq has gained 66 points or 0.44% to 15,166 points, after tumbling 3.3% yesterday after Fed officials signalled interest rates could rise sooner or faster than expected. The Dow Jones industrial average of 30 large US companies is flat. America’s trade deficit has widened, due to a surge in goods imports and a fall in exports of goods. The US trade gap jumped by 19.2% to $80.2bn, wider than expected, Reuters has the details: Goods imports soared 5.1% to an all-time high $254.9bn, likely as congestion at ports eased. Overall imports increased 4.6% to $304.4bn. The broad rise in imports was led by industrial supplies and materials. Consumer goods also increased strongly as did imports of motor vehicles, parts and engines. Goods exports fell 1.8% to $155.9bn. They were pulled down by decreases in capital goods as well as industrial supplies and materials. But exports of services rose, lifted by travel and transport. Overall, exports increased 0.2% to $224.2bn in November. Here’s Dan Boardman-Weston, CIO at BRI Wealth Management, on the rise in US jobless claims: “Jobless claims came in at 207,000, 10,000 above consensus for the first week of January. Whilst this is a slight negative, it’s worth noting that they remain at historically low levels and continue to show significant strength in the US labour market. This is likely to add further impetus for the Fed to raise rates faster or sooner than the market had been expecting. Unless the rapid spread of Omicron starts to put the economy under significant pressure - which markets don’t expect will happen - then the stage looks set for continued economic growth and for monetary policy to become tighter over the coming months.” Robert Frick, corporate economist at Navy Federal Credit Union, says the labor market isn’t being badly disrupted by Omicron: “Weekly unemployment claims only ticked up for the latest week, showing the surge in Omicron cases hasn’t increased layoffs. Given the surge is expected to drop significantly in the next month, and employers are clinging to the workers they have in the face of a record number of employees quitting, Omicron may not affect layoffs at all.” The number of Americans filing new claims for unemployment benefit has risen, but remains near to pre-pandemic lows. There were 207,000 new ‘initial claims’ in the final week of December (up to 1st January), up from 200,000 in the previous seven days, on a seasonally adjusted basis. Stripping out seasonal adjustments, the actual number of initial claims jumped by 57,599 to 315,469 last week, as some firms cut their workforces after the pre-Christmas rush. Here’s some early reaction: The jump in Germany’s consumer prices index to 5.3% in December, the highest level since June 1992, is “another inflation shocker” says Carsten Brzeski of ING: He warns that inflation pressures will broaden, before easing later this year: Higher gas prices have been passed on to most German households with the start of the new year. Based on personal anecdotal evidence, all kinds of administrative prices and even TV broadcasting prices have gone up. Add to this additional price-markups in the hospitality, culture and leisure sectors once the current round of restrictions is over and it is hard to see inflation coming down significantly any time soon. It will take until late summer to see inflation slowing down to any significant degree, when lockdown-related price markups are over and negative energy price base effects kick in. The year 2021 brought Germany the worst inflation surge since the early 1990s. Today’s inflation numbers should, in our view, mark the peak of the inflation surge. However, inflation is unlikely to come down in a straight line from here. Instead, inflationary pressures will first broaden further across sectors and goods before abating towards the end of the year. Brzeski also points out that the all-time high of German inflation since reunification dates back to the summer of 1992, at 6.2%. For the entire year 2021, inflation came in at 3.1%, the highest since 1993. Inflation in Germany has jumped to its highest rate in almost 30 years, as price pressures build in Europe’s largest economy. Consumer prices jumped by 5.3% per year in December, statistics body Destatis reports, as the cost of energy (+18.3%), goods (+7.8%), food (+6%) and services (+3.1%) rose. That’s an increase on the 5.2% inflation rate reported in November, and the highest since 1992. Prices rose by 0.5% in December alone. Destatis said several factors had pushed up Germany’s inflation rate, including the end of last year’s temporary VAT tax cut, the rise in the oil price, and price increases across supply chains due to the pandemic. On an EU-harmonised basis, Germany’s annual inflation rate was 5.7% last month -- or almost triple the European Central Bank’s 2% target. The boss of one of the UK’s fastest-growing energy suppliers has said Britain must find £20bn to rein in soaring household bills that have compounded fears about a cost-of-living crisis in 2022. Greg Jackson, the chief executive of Octopus Energy, said his company did not know yet how much bills would rise in the run-up to 7 February, the deadline when the regulator Ofgem sets a new cap on what suppliers can charge customers. The record wholesale gas prices across Europe has led to forecasts that average annual bills in the UK could leap from £1,277 to more than £2,000 when the cap comes into effect in April. Jackson said talks between energy suppliers and the government would have to find a way to avoid global gas prices being passed directly on to consumers. “We’ve got to recognise that as a result of the pandemic, every sector is asking the Treasury for help and there’s not an infinite supply of money,” he said. “The reality is that the UK buys most of its energy on a global market and we’ve had to pay about £20bn more than usual this year. So, in some way or another, the UK is going to have to pay that money.” World food prices surged by 28% during 2021 to their highest level in a decade. The UN’s food agency reported today that the cost of all major food groups surged last year, as strong demand, supply chain problems, rising fertiliser costs and poor weather such as droughts and heatwaves all pushed up prices. The Food and Agriculture Organization’s (FAO) food price index, which monitors the most globally traded food commodities, averaged 125.7 points in 2021, the highest since 131.9 recorded in 2011. Cereal prices jumped 27.2% year-on-year, with maize up 44% and wheat 31.3% pricier. Vegetable oil surged 65.8% to an all-time annual high, dairy rose 16.9%, meat prices increased 12.7% and sugar rose 37.5%. FAO senior economist Abdolreza Abbassian warned that market conditions are unlikely to stabilise this year. “While normally high prices are expected to give way to increased production, the high cost of inputs, ongoing global pandemic and ever more uncertain climatic conditions leave little room for optimism about a return to more stable market conditions even in 2022.” The cost of cereals, vegetable oil, and sugar did dip in December, but dairy prices rose. The UK government is looking for a new competition watchdog chief. Andrea Coscelli, chief executive of the Competitions &amp; Markets Authority, says he will step down from the role at the end of his current term in July 2022. Coscelli has run the CMA since 2016, having joined as an executive director when it was created in 2013, and says now is the right time to confirm he won’t seek another term. The announcement came after Sky News reported this morning that Coscelli would step down later this year. In its role protecting consumers and promoting competition, the CMA has blocked the merger of supermarkets Asda and Sainsbury’s, ordered JD Sports to sell trainer retailing rival Footasylum, and instructed Facebook owner Meta to sell gif website Giphy. The CMA is also lacking a permanent chairman. Interim chair Jonathan Scott was reappoined in October, after former chair Andrew Tyrie quit saying the limits of his role prevented him leading a more aggressive campaign for change. Update: Labour MP Darren Jones, who chairs parliament’s Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy Committee, tweets: New pandemic restrictions, supply shortages and Brexit trade frictions all slowed UK service sector growth last month, says Duncan Brock, Group Director at the Chartered Institute of Procurement &amp; Supply: “Uncertainty and volatility in the services sector returned at the end of last year with a sudden drop in demand and overall activity growth was the lowest since February 2021. This not unexpected turn of events was the direct result of increased pandemic restrictions as the number of festive activities were reduced by covid-concerned consumers. Ongoing Brexit customs delays and supply shortages also added to depressed activity in the sector. Exports orders were also affected by reduced international travel with sales falling for the first time since June 2021. Martin Beck, chief economic advisor to the EY ITEM Club, says services firms bore the economic brunt of the rise of COVID-19 infections, the growing numbers of people isolating and increased consumer hesitancy: This has prompted a significant fall in the services PMI to 53.6 in December from 58.5 in November. This was the lowest since February, although a little above December’s flash reading of 53.2. Consumer-facing services firms, particularly in travel and hospitality, were particularly vocal in citing the adverse effects of the worsening COVID-19 situation. Simon Lister of financial comparison website InvestingReviews.co.uk warns that firms also face rising prices, higher taxes, and supply chain disruption: “The Omicron variant savaged the UK economy during December. Sadly the worst may yet be to come. The sheer number of hurdles facing UK businesses as they enter 2022 is frightening. It’s less a 110-metre than a 1010-metre hurdles race. With skyrocketing energy prices and inflation, supply chain crises, rising interest rates and tax increases to come, the disconnect between stock markets and economic reality has been more extreme than ever in recent weeks. The Fed indicating that US interest rates could rise relatively soon has given markets a reality check and the months ahead could prove exceptionally turbulent as the grim economic fallout from the pandemic starts to bite.” The oil price has risen back to its pre-Omicron levels, reflecting hopes that the Covid-19 variant will not badly hurt economic growth. Brent crude hit $82 per barrel this morning for the first time since 25th November. That was the day when six countries were placed under England’s red list travel restrictions due to concerns over the B.1.1.529 variant. Elsewhere in the markets, government bond prices are dropping as investors anticipate that central bankers will tighten policy this year to cool inflation. That pushes up the yield, or interest rate, on government debt - as investors seek a higher return for holding sovereign bonds. That could dampen risk appetite, because the drop in bond yields has been one factor pushing up riskier assets such as shares. Bloomberg’s Lisa Abramowicz explains: Back in the City, the FTSE 100 index is recovering some of its earlier losses. British Airways parent company IAG is now among the top risers, up 2.6% to its highest since mid-November. The travel sector should benefit from the scrapping of pre-departure tests for people travelling to England from tomorrow, amid hopes that the Omicron variant. Airline stocks surged earlier this week, amid confidence that the economic threat of the Omicron coronavirus variant was fading. Bank stocks are also rising, as traders anticipate that they will benefit from rising interst rates (record low borrowing costs have squeezed their profit margins). Standard Chartered (+3%), Lloyds Banking Group (+2.3%), HSBC (+2%) and NatWest (+1.8%) are in demand. The FTSE 100 is now down 35 points at 7482, down 0.5%, recovering around half its early fall. Motorists paid £5m more a day for fuel than they should have last month after petrol station owners refused to pass on a drop in wholesale prices to consumers, the RAC has claimed. The motoring organisation branded December a “rotten month” despite the price of unleaded petrol falling by 2p per litre, after estimating that petrol retailers should have reduced the cost by 12p. The RAC said that instead of pocketing the traditional long-term margin of 6p a litre, retailers took an average of 16p a litre on petrol and 12.5p on diesel. Across December, the RAC estimates that drivers collectively lost out on £156m, or £5m a day, from the wholesale price cuts not being passed on by retailers. More here. Eurozone factories continued to hike their prices in November, a sign that inflationary pressures are still building. Prices at factory gates across the euro area rose by 1.8% month-on-month, statistics body Eurostat reports, and were 23.7% higher than a year ago. Economists had forecast a 1.2% monthly rise. Although steep, that’s a slowdown on the 5.4% jump in producer prices in October. The energy crunch was the primary factor, with energy prices surging by 66% over the last year. But costs rose elsewhere too -- prices in total industry excluding energy increased by 9.8%. Intermediate goods (used in final products) jumped by 18.3%, followed by a 4.7% rise in durable consumer goods, 4.4% for capital goods and by 3.8% for non-durable consumer goods. Customer-facing firms were hit by a rush of cancellations after the Omicron variant hit the UK, a new survey from the Office for National Statistics shows. Around 45% of accomodation and food services firms reported a jump in cancelled bookings over the last month. Many Christmas parties and other meet-ups were scrapped due to pandemic fears, or because attentees had caught Covid or were isolating. Half of firms in the ‘other service activities industry’, which includes hairdressers and other beauty treatments, reported a rise in cancellations. Consumers also kept away from the shops. In the week to 2 January 2022, overall retail footfall in the UK was 75% of the level seen in the equivalent week of 2019. Firms are also short of staff, with 15% of businesses reporting a shortage of workers. A third of accommodation and food services firms said they were understaffed, with two-thirds saying employees were working increased hours because of these worker shortages. Plus, one in five working adults said they were working from home exclusively, up from 14% before. The survey took place from 15 December to 3 January. M&amp;C Saatchi, the advertising group that has worked with clients including the Conservative Party, O2 and Sky, has received a takeover approach from an investment company run by its deputy chairwoman. London-listed shell investment firm AdvancedAdvT, set up and run by M&amp;C Saatchi’s deputy chair and major shareholder Vin Murria, has made a “preliminary approach” with the intention to make a formal bid for M&amp;C Saatchi “in the near term”. AdvancedAdvT, which raised £130m last year to seek acquisition opportunities, acquired a 9.8% stake in M&amp;C Saatchi on Wednesday saying the agency represented a “good investment opportunity”. Murria holds a 13% stake in AdvancedAdvT and is the company’s executive chairman. The company said in a statement on Thursday. “The Board of M&amp;C Saatchi notes the recent press speculation and confirms that it has received a preliminary approach from AdvancedAdvT Limited, a vehicle connected with Vin Murria, a director of the company, which may or may not result in an offer for the company. “No proposal has been received but the board has been told to expect one in the near term.” Murria, who sold her company Advanced Computer Software for £725m in 2015, holds a 12.5% stake in M&amp;C Saatchi. She became deputy chairman last year after the agency’s three founders were forced out following an accounting scandal. Investment company Marwyn, which has previously owned Peppa Pig parent Entertainment One and the owner of WeBuyAnyCar.com, holds a 15.4% stake in the ad agency. M&amp;C Saatchi’s share price hit a three-year high following the news of the potential takeover. The emergence of the Omicron variant of coronavirus hit British businesses’ expectations for sales, jobs and investment last month, a Bank of England survey showed today. The BoE’s Decision Makers’ Panel report showed companies expected output price inflation to hit 4.5% in the three months to December 2022, up from 4.2% in the November survey, Reuters reports. Growth across the UK services sector has slumped to a 10-month low, as the emergence of the Omicron variant slowed the UK recovery. December was the worst month for the UK’s service economy since February 2021, in the last lockdown, according to data firm IHS Markit. Services firms suffered a steep fall in spending on face-to-face consumer services, escalating business uncertainty and disruptions due to staff absences as Covid-19 continued to hit the economy. This pulled the UK services PMI down to 53.6 in December, from 58.5 in November. That shows the weakest growth since the rebound from lockdown measures began last spring, as consumer caution and the tightening of restrictions under the government’s “plan B” slowed activity. On a more positive note, job creation remained relatively strong, cost pressures eased from November’s peak and output growth expectations improved slightly. But it’s clear that the UK economy took a knock last month, as Omicron hit hospitality firms and many office staff worked from home. Tim Moore, economics director at IHS Markit, says: “December data revealed a severe loss of momentum for the UK economy as many customer-facing businesses experienced a drop in demand due to escalating COVID-19 cases. Total new orders in the service sector increased at the weakest pace for 10 months. Mass cancellations of bookings in response to the Omicron variant led to a slump in consumer spending on travel, leisure and entertainment. Survey respondents also noted that renewed pandemic restrictions had slowed the recovery in business services. Firms are still confident about the longer-term business outlook, with 55% of the those surveyed expecting a rise in output during 2022 as a whole, while only 10% expect a decline. But costs are still rising, which will hit consumers in the pocket this year: “The inflation outlook appeared to improve as input prices increased at the slowest pace for three months. Survey respondents again commented on considerable pressure from energy, fuel and staff costs. Output charge inflation eased only slightly from November’s record high, however, as many businesses cited the need to pass on escalating costs to clients over the course of 2022.” The chief executive of British food-to-go retailer Greggs said surging cases of Omicron were putting pressure on its store staff, but it was manageable from a business perspective. “It’s disruptive and it creates problems for our people,” Roger Whiteside said in an interview on Thursday, Reuters reports. “It is the impact on the people I’m mostly concerned with, rather than the impact on the business per se, because it’s still a manageable number from that perspective.” Britain’s car industry has recorded its second worse year for sales since 1992, as the pandemic and chip shortages hit the sector. Industry body the SMMT has reported that new car registrations grew by just 1% last year, with 1.65m new cars entering the UK market. That’s 28.7% less than in 2019. The year ended on low note too -- new registrations in December fell by 18.2% compared with the previous year. Sales were held back by the global semiconductor shortages, which meant fewer models were available (which also drove up second hand car prices last year). Mike Hawes, SMMT chief executive, said: “It’s been another desperately disappointing year for the car industry as Covid continues to cast a pall over any recovery. Manufacturers continue to battle myriad challenges, with tougher trading arrangements, accelerating technology shifts and, above all, the global semiconductor shortage which is decimating supply. But there was one bright spot in the gloom -- demand for electric vehicles jumped, with more battery electric vehicles registered in 2021 than over the previous five years combined. As my colleague Jasper Jolly writes: Reflecting growing appetite for greener vehicles, sales rose from 108,000 in 2020, when battery-powered cars accounted for just 6.6% of new cars bought in Britain. In December 2021 alone, electric cars made up 26% of sales, a record for a single month when physical dealerships were allowed to open during the Covid pandemic. Next rang up £70m more sales than expected over Christmas as a surge in online orders of party dresses and occasionwear made up for lower trade in stores, my colleague Sarah Butler writes. The fashion and homewares chain is the first retailer to report its Christmas trading results, potentially giving an indication of how the high street fared in the biggest sales period of the year. The group said it now expected to make £822m in annual profits, £22m more than previously hoped for and almost 10% ahead of pre-pandemic levels, in its fifth increase in guidance in less than a year. In the eight weeks to Christmas Day, Next said its sales rose 20% on 2019 – before the pandemic – despite suffering “materially lower” levels of stocks than it had hoped for while its delivery service had struggled because of labour shortages in its warehouses and distribution networks. The company said in a statement. “The fact that our sales remained so robust in these circumstances is, we believe, testament to the strength of underlying consumer demand in the period,” The group’s strong performance was underpinned by an 85% surge in full-price online sales compared with 2019 at its Label business which sells brands such as Ted Baker, Nike and Mint Velvet. Online sales of Next goods in the UK and overseas were also up by more than 30% in the three months to 25 December while sales in its UK and Irish stores fell 5.4%. However, Next warned of a “tougher environment” for the year ahead despite assuming no further disruption from the Covid pandemic. The company said it was unclear how much it had benefited from shoppers spending their savings built up during lockdowns and whether a return to spending on holidays and other social activities would hit sales of non-essential goods such as clothing. You can read more here: Growth at eurozone construction firms slowed last month, as builders continued to suffer from shortages of materials. Data firm Markit’s eurozone construction PMI, which tracks activity in the sector, dropped to 52.9 in December from 53.3 in November, showing a slowdown. Firms reported a rise in new orders, as projects on hold due to the pandemic resumed. But cost burdens continued to rise, and confidence about the outlook weakened. Usamah Bhatti, economist at IHS Markit, explained: “The upturn in the eurozone construction sector extended into its third month at the end of 2021, as businesses reported a solid, albeit softer rise in activity. Positively, growth in new business quickened to the steepest in nearly three years, as new projects came to tender amid sustained government support for the sector. That said, firms continued to report widespread shortages of raw materials across the bloc and beyond, which placed continued strain on supply chains and cost burdens. Discount retailer B&amp;M has also lifted its profits guidance, after a strong Christmas. B&amp;M says it benefitted from importing products from abroad early, which paid off when retail spending jumped in October and November as consumers brought forward their Christmas spending. Simon Arora, B&amp;M’s chief executive, said, “The Group has delivered a very strong Golden Quarter, with our two-year like-for-like performance demonstrating strong retention of new customers. Our decision to take receipt of imported Christmas stock early in the season meant we were able to provide customers with great products at great prices. B&amp;M now expects earnings this financial year to hit £605m to £625m, ahead of the current analysts’ consensus estimate of £578m. Although B&amp;M’s like-for-like sales in the three months to Christmas Day fell 6.2% year-on-year, they were still 14% higher than two years ago, before the pandemic. Other European markets have also opened lower, with Germany’s DAX dropping 1% and France’s CAC losing 1.1%. In the City, the FTSE 100 has fallen by nearly 1% as investors react to the prospect of earlier US interest rate rises. The blue-chip index has dropped by 67 points to 7450 points, after last night’s US Federal Reserve meeting minutes showed the central bank may raise interest rates sooner than expected. Consumer credit report firm Experian (-3.5%), software developer Aveva (-3%), analytics firm Relx (-3%), and tech-focused investment trust Scottish Mortgage (-2.9%) are the top fallers, pulling the FTSE 100 away from the 22-month high touched on Wednesday. Most stocks are lower, although banks (which benefit from higher interest rates) are bucking the selloff. Lloyds Banking Group has gained 0.6%. Mining stocks are also a little higher. Greggs has also appointed a new chief executive, to replace long-serving CEO Roger Whiteside. Roisin Currie, Greggs’ retail and property director, will succeed Whiteside in May. In her current role Currie runs Greggs’ retail operations, developing its shop estate and its home delivery partnership with Just Eat. Whiteside has led Greggs since 2013, expanding its store estate, adding new ranges, and growing the share price from below £5 in 2013 to over £33 last night. Ian Durant, Greggs chairman, says: “Roisin has played a central role in the success of Greggs as it has developed as a multi-channel food-on-the-go business and I am delighted that she will lead the next phase of our growth as Chief Executive. She has deep experience of our culture and our strategic plan, and will lead with energy and character. Roger Whiteside has been an outstanding Chief Executive and I wish him well for the future. Roisin and I look forward to working with Roger to ensure a smooth transition. “ British clothing retailer Next has lifted its full-year profit outlook again after beating its sales guidance in the crucial Christmas trading period. Next’s full price sales in the eight weeks to Christmas Day jumped 20% compared with two years ago (before the pandemic), which is £70m ahead of its previous guidance. Next has now lifted its full year profit before tax guidance by £22m to £822m -- which would be 9.8% higher than two years ago. It now expects full price sales growth of 12.8% versus 2019/20, £70m ahead of previous guidance. A “ strong revival” in NEXT branded adult formal and occasionwear boosted sales, it says, and helped it ride out the UK’s supply chain problems. In the run up to Christmas our stock levels were materially lower than planned. We also experienced some degradation in delivery service levels as a result of labour shortfalls in warehousing and distribution networks. The fact that our sales remained so robust in these circumstances is, we believe, testament to the strength of underlying consumer demand in the period. Bakery chain Greggs has predicted its full year trading will be “slightly ahead” of previous expectations, despite the impact of omicron on high street stores. Greggs, which sells sausage rolls, sandwiches and cakes from over 2,000 stores, has reported a 0.8% rise in like-for-like sales for its fourth quarter compared to two years ago. Like-for-like sales in the last quarter of 2021 were 0.8% higher than two years ago, despite the move back to home working at the end of last year. Greggs says it saw: a strong performance in October being followed by more challenging conditions as consumers responded to precautionary messages relating to the new coronavirus variant. Christmas food was popular -- with Greggs selling 6.7m shop-baked mince pies over the festive season. Our range continues to evolve in line with changing consumer tastes and dietary choices so the launch of our new Vegan Festive Bake was a natural next step. Like many food retailers, Greggs also faced staff and ingredient shortages, which drove up costs (it warned in October). Today it says: The fourth quarter results were achieved against a backdrop of continued disruption to staffing and supply chains. Our teams across the business have done a magnificent job coping under difficult circumstances and in recognition of this we brought forward the planned 2022 pay awards for our operational teams by five months. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Stock markets are taking a tumble today after America’s central bank revealed it could raise interest rates sooner or faster than expected, to tame US inflation. The minutes of the Federal Reserve’s December meeting, released last night, shows that Fed officials were concerned about America’s “elevated levels of inflation”, and considering normalising monetary policy faster to combat rising prices. In a hawkish turn, the Fed minutes say: Participants generally noted that, given their individual outlooks for the economy, the labor market, and inflation, it may become warranted to increase the federal funds rate sooner or at a faster pace than participants had earlier anticipated. Officials pointed to America’s “increasingly tight labor market”, and the jump in prices which they attributed to supply and demand imbalances and the reopening of the economy. US inflation hit 6.8% in December, its highest since 1982. Some policymakers also argued the Fed could stat to cut the size of its balance sheet “relatively soon” after beginning to raise the federal funds rate. It’s currently on track to end its pandemic stimulus bond-buying programme in March. The minutes spooked Wall Street, sending the tech-focused Nasdaq Composite down by over 3% in its biggest one-day drop since February. A strong US jobs report (US companies added 807,000 employees in December) also fuelled expectations that the Fed could normalise policy faster. Ipek Ozkardeskaya, senior analyst at Swissquote, explains: Yesterday has been a deep red day for the US equities, as the FOMC minutes hinted at earlier and a faster rate normalization path, and the reduction of the Fed’s balance sheet soon after the first rate hike. The extra hawkish element hammered the sentiment sending the US yields higher and the equities lower. The better-than-expected ADP data certainly gave an extra support to the Fed hawks. The ADP data revealed that the US economy added more 800K new private jobs in December, twice the 400K expected by analysts, and as strong as the figures we used to see at the heart of the post-pandemic recovery last year. But helas, the strong data added to the hawkish Fed expectations, as it reinforced the Fed’s view that the US economy is close to a full employment and it’s time to move on. We are now stepping into a period where good data is bad as it fuels the Fed hawks, and bad data is bad, as well, because it can’t fuel the Fed doves. Asia-Pacific markets have followed Wall Street’s lead, with Japan’s Nikkei sliding 2.9%. Britain’s FTSE 100 index is down over 1% in the futures market, while European stock futures have dropped nearly 2%. There’s a flurry of economic data ahead, which will show how the UK service sector, car dealers and eurozone builders fared last month as the omicron wave hit. We also get the latest US jobless claims report. The agenda 8.30am GMT: Eurozone construction PMI report for December 9am GMT: UK car sales for December 9.30am GMT: UK service sector PMI report for December 9.30am GMT: ONS publishes weekly economic activity and business insights report 1pm GMT: German inflation rate for December 1.30pm GMT: US weekly jobless claims 1.30pm GMT: US trade report 3pm GMT: US factory ordersBoris Johnson has been criticised by his ethics adviser for acting “unwisely”, but cleared of being deliberately misleading during an investigation into the funding of his Downing Street flat refurbishment. Downing Street has ruled out delaying a tax rise this April despite increasing concern among Tory MPs and cabinet ministers over the toll on voters of the cost of living. Britain is not a country where “destroying public property can ever be acceptable”, a cabinet minister has said, as Conservative MPs vented their frustration at four people being cleared of tearing down a statue of the slave trader Edward Colston. Farmers in England will be given taxpayers’ cash to rewild their land under plans for large-scale nature recovery projects announced by the government. Johnson has criticised anti-vaccine activists for spreading “nonsense” on social media, while stressing that he does not support moves to overtly pressure people into having Covid vaccines. A further 179,756 Covid cases have been recorded in the UK. And, as PA Media reports, a further 231 people have died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid. Today’s dashboard also shows a total of 17,988 people were in hospital in the UK with Covid as of 5 January. This is up 50% week-on-week and is the highest number since 18 February. During the second wave of coronavirus, the number peaked at 39,254 on 18 January 2021. That’s all from me for today. But our Covid coverage continues on our global live blog. It’s here. At the lobby briefing No 10 also sought to explain what Boris Johnson meant when he described the Downing Street flat as a “tip”. The spokesman said: I think the PM’s words reflect the fact that works were incomplete, refurbishment and renovation works were incomplete, at that point, which meant the further expenditure was necessary to complete them. As my colleague Jessica Elgot reports, at the afternoon lobby briefing No 10 said the Great Exhibiton plan favoured by Lord Brownlow (see 3.48pm) was not taken forward. The Geidt/Johnson correspondence is not as damning as it might have been. Lord Geidt, the independent adviser on ministerial standards, does not conclude that he was intentionally misled by the PM over the refurbishment of the Downing Street flat (see here for the background) and he does not conclude Johnson broke the ministerial code. But there is plenty in the correspondence that is embarrassing for the PM, and it is not hard to see how a less generous adviser might have come to different conclusions. Here are the main points. Geidt says his original report into the Downing Street flat refurbishment would not have been as positive if he had seen the missing WhatsApp exchanges. He says he doubted he would have been able to include the line about the PM taking steps to declare the interest “at the point when [he] became aware” of Brownlow’s donation. But Geidt says he has not changed his view that there was no conflict of interest. But Geidt is clearly very unhappy about the fact that information was withheld from him. There was an “evident failure to meet the very highest standards of disclosure”, he says. And at various points he talks about matters being “plainly unsatisfactory”, “very unfortunate”, “inherently unwise”, this being an issue of “grave concern”, “insufficient care” being taken, a “signal deficiency” being exposed and how “the episode shook my confidence”. Johnson claims he did not remember the WhatsApp exchange with Lord Brownlow that triggered the claim Geidt had been misled. Given that most of us would remember a conversation relating to someone paying a five-figure refurbishment bill on our behalf, many will consider this claim surprising (although Johnson has a bigger in-tray than most of us). The exchanges do not prove that Johnson knew Brownlow was settling the bill himself. But Brownlow’s declaration “I know where the £ will come from” does suggest, at the very least, that the PM should have been able to guess. (See 3.27pm.) Geidt says that, had he known about these exchanges at the time, he would have had further questions to ask. But, although he has been in contact with the PM, by letter and in person (the letters refer to at least one conversation), he does not seem to have pushed Johnson for an explanation now as to what he understood by that phrase. It is almost as if he feels the matter is best left unresolved. Johnson clearly has high accommodation standards. In his WhatsApp message to Brownlow, he describes the Downing Street appartment as “a bit of a tip”. It was extensively refurbished while the Camerons were living there, and Theresa May never complained about it. And he is capable of issuing an apology. (See 3.11pm.) Many people thought he wasn’t. Geidt is going to emerge from this with a slightly beefed-up role. In some respects the affair has damaged his reputation (when the Electoral Commission report came out, it made him look naive), but the letters released today focus a lot on how his role might be enhanced. Partly this may be Johnson seeking to “buy him off”, and partly it may be Geidt using what leverage he has to increase his clout. But Johnson has promised him more administrative support, as well as giving him an “it won’t happen again” transparency assurance. More significantly, Johnson says he will ensure that Geidt, as the independent adviser on ministers’ interests (his formal title), has enhanced powers to get information. Johnson says he will produce a specific plan in January, possibly involving “clearer legal instrument”, ie, a legal right to access information. Tim Durrant from the Institute for Government thinktank has a good Twitter thread on what the Geidt/Johnson letters reveal. It starts here. Paul Givan, Northern Ireland’s first minister, has confirmed that no further restrictions have been agreed amid the latest Covid-19 surge, PA Media reports. Givan also said that there are no plans to close schools. However, ministers are examining contingency plans in light of staff shortages across all sectors ahead of the expected peak in the next 10 days. The WhatsApp exchanges between Boris Johnson and Lord Brownlow, the Tory donor who initially financed the Downing Street flat refurbishment, suggest that in return for Brownlow’s help, Johnson promised to consider a proposal from Brownlow for a new Great Exhibition. (See 3.27pm.) As my colleague Jessica Elgot say, that suggests a potential quid pro quo. Brexit talks over Northern Ireland are set to resume tonight with renewed hope that an interim deal can be found over the protocol dispute within the next four to six weeks. The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, will meet her Irish counterpart, Simon Coveney, for dinner tonight in London ahead of a meeting with European Commission vice-president Maroš Šefčovič next week. Truss will host Šefčovič at Chevening House, the foreign secretary’s grace and favour home, next week with meetings scheduled for two days. The UK hopes that she will be able to persuade the EU to make further compromises over the checks on goods crossing the Irish Sea and end the dispute that has dragged on for over a year over the Brexit arrangements in Northern Ireland. My colleague Jessica Elgot has posted the new exchanges between Boris Johnson and Lord Brownlow, the Tory donor who initially funded the Downing Street flat refurbishment, that are revealed in the correspondence out today. And here is a comment from the Institute for Government’s Catherine Haddon. Humza Yousaf, Scotland’s health secretary, has paid tribute to health workers and the general public after the country recorded its millionth positive Covid case today, and another 18 Covid-positive people died. The latest daily Covid statistics suggests the sharp surge in cases may be peaking, with 11,360 cases reported for the last 24 hours, but Scotland’s total number of confirmed infections reached 1,010,660. That total does not include cases which were not detected or reported. Joined by Sir Gregor Smith, Scotland’s newly-knighted chief medical officer, Yousaf said: The past two years have undoubtedly been some of the toughest this country has faced in peacetime and as we hit the one millionth confirmed Covid-19 case in Scotland, it is important to acknowledge the huge toll the pandemic has had on us all. We have all been affected by the Covid crisis in some way or another and my thoughts remain with everyone who has lost a loved one. The immense pressure the virus has also put on our NHS [should not be] be understated and I’d like to thank every single person across our health and social care sectors who have worked so hard to look after us. Boris Johnson is famous for his reluctance to apologise, but in his letter to Lord Geidt (pdf) released this afternoon he delivers a “humble and sincere” apology - about as strong an apology as possible. Labour claims the Geidt correspondence (see 3pm) shows that Boris Johnson did break the ministerial code. In a statement Angela Rayner, the deputy leader, said: Boris Johnson has little regard for the rules or the truth. The ministerial code requires ministers to act with transparency and honesty. It is simply impossible to read these exchanges and conclude that the prime minister has not breached these aspects of the code. Once again, by attempting to hide the truth, Boris Johnson undermines his own office. The prime minister’s pathetic excuses will fool no one, and this is just the latest in a long line of sorry episodes. This matters because it matters who has influence on our government in a democracy. The British public can’t WhatsApp a wealthy donor to open their wallets on request, and the least they deserve is transparency about who’s bankrolling their prime minister. The Cabinet Office has now published correspondence between Lord Geidt, the PM’s independent adviser on ministerial standards, and Boris Johnson over the claims that Johnson misled him during his original investigation into the Downing Street flat refurbishment. They are here. Here is my colleague Aubrey Allegretti’s story. And here are some highlights from what has been revealed. The latest Covid data for Scotland suggests the Omicron-fuelled surge in cases may be nearing or past its peak, after daily figures showed the lowest number of new infections for a week and hospitalisation rates only grew slightly in the last 24 hours. The potentially reassuring slow-down in cases was qualified by the news that 18 fatalities involving Covid-positive people had been reported over the last 24 hours, taking the total by that measure to 9,890. Data released at 2pm showed 11,360 new infections were reported over the last 24 hours, 23% of those tested, following a five-day peak where between 14,000 and 20,000 new cases were detected each day and positivity rates hit 36%. It is thought the peak figure of 20,217 on Monday 3 January was driven by late registration of positive results over the New Year holiday weekend. Those new cases took the total number of Scots infected by Covid-19 since the start of the pandemic over the 1 million mark, to 1,010,660. Hospitalisation rates for people with Covid also slowed markedly: after patient numbers doubled in under a week from 528 on Boxing Day to 1,033 on 3 January, daily patient figures have since crept up by a far slower rate, reaching 1,267 in the latest data. Intensive care hospitalisations also remain comparatively low but rising slightly, up from 53 on Wednesday to 57 in the latest data. Critical questions have been raised by opposition MSPs over the lack of detailed data on the proportion of hospital patients admitted because they were ill with Covid rather than for another medical reason. English data suggested about a third were hospitalised for another reason. Scotland’s figures are expected to be released by Public Health Scotland. There is still no data in Scotland on the numbers hospitalised or in intensive care with Omicron, or who have died infected by the Omicron variant. It is unclear when that will be published, if at all. In his pooled TV interview Boris Johnson also criticised (again) the removal of toppling of the Edward Colston statue in Bristol on the grounds that it was like editing your own Wikipedia entry. Asked about the acquittal of the Colston four, he replied: I don’t want to comment on that particular judgment - it’s a matter for the court. But what I would say is that my feeling is that we have a complex historical legacy all around us, and it reflects our history in all its diversity, for good or ill. What you can’t do is go around seeking retrospectively to change our history or to bowdlerise it or edit it in retrospect. It’s like some person trying to edit their Wikipedia entry - it’s wrong. And I think if people democratically want to remove a statue or whatever, that’s fine. But I think that, in general, we should preserve our cultural, artistic, historical legacy - that’s my view. (I presume many people do edit their own Wikipedia entries, although I’ve always taken the Johnson view and not touched my own, very modest, one. But I’d be grateful if someone else would, because it wrongly says I’m the author of a 2007 book on media law. That was another Andrew Sparrow. The rest of it’s fine.) In his TV clip Boris Johnson was also asked if he really expected the public to believe that he did not disclose key evidence to Lord Geidt, the standards adviser investigating his flat refurbishment, because he had a new phone. (See 11.35am.) All Johnson said in response was: I followed the ministerial guidance at all times, and yes. When it was put to him that it was unlikely that he would have forgotten the incriminating exchanges on his old phone, even if he had acquired a new one, Johnson just repeated his claim that he had followed the ministerial guidance at all times. Boris Johnson has condemned anti-vaxxers for spreading “complete nonsense” and “mumbo jumbo” about vaccines. In a pooled broadcast interview during a visit to a vaccination centre, he stressed the importance of vaccination, saying 30 to 40% of patients going to hospital with Covid had not been vaccinated. He went on: I want to say to the anti-vax campaigners, the people who are putting this mumbo jumbo on social media: they are completely wrong. You haven’t heard me say that before, because I think it’s important we have a voluntary approach in this country and we’re going to keep a voluntary approach ... What a tragedy that we’ve got all this pressure on the NHS, all the difficulties that our doctors and nurses are experiencing and we’ve got people out there spouting complete nonsense about vaccination. They are totally wrong, and I think it’s time that I, the government, call them out on what they’re doing. It’s absolutely wrong, it’s totally counterproductive, and the stuff they’re putting out on social media is complete mumbo jumbo. In his TV clip this morning Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, talked about the need for the government to “invest” in the NHS and in social care. (See 1.11pm.) The wording sounded unremarkable, but earlier in the Commons Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, told MPs that he was very wary of this sort of language. He was responding to a question about local government spending, and Warrington council in particular, but it is hard to listen to his words without thinking he had someone else in mind too. I have a great quibble about using this word ‘investment’ for government expenditure, because actually government is spending taxpayers’ money. It shouldn’t be talking about investing; it should recognise that it is using other people’s money and therefore has a great fiduciary duty to spend it wisely. Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, has recorded a TV clip on a visit to a vaccination centre this morning and he pushed back a bit more firmly than No 10 against the Jacob Rees-Mogg faction in the party hoping to reverse the national insurance increase. No 10 said there were “no plans” for a U-turn. (See 12.31pm.) Asked about Rees-Mogg’s intervention in cabinet yesterday (see 10.50am), Sunak started by saying he had “enormous respect” for all his colleagues (which, when said by politicians, is almost always untrue, and just a polite precursor to an attack). Sunak went on to imply that Rees-Mogg was irresponsible. He said: We’re facing an unprecedented level of backlogs in the NHS. And we as a government don’t think it’s acceptable. We don’t want families to be waiting years and years to get the treatment they need. We want investment in more doctors, more nurses, more operations. We’re also doing the thing that governments before us have not done and that is to finally fix social care. And, look, it’s it’s always easy to duck difficult decisions, but I don’t think that’s the responsible thing to do. I think people’s priorities are for us to invest in the NHS, to invest in social care. We need to make sure that those investments are funded sustainably. That’s what we’re doing. Sunak was also asked about the cost of living crisis. He highlighted the various measures already in place that would help people - the rise in the national living wage, the cut to the universal credit taper rate, and energy bill measures - but he also said he was “always listening”. Here are the main points from the Downing Street lobby briefing. The prime minister’s spokesman failed to deny reports that Boris Johnson has apologised to Lord Geidt, his standards adviser, for not fully disclosing information relevant to Geidt’s original inquiry into the Downing Street flat refurbishment. (See 12.05pm.) The full exchanges between Geidt and the PM are due to be published this afternoon. The spokesman said there were no plans to shelve the national insurance increase due to take effect in April. Asked to rule it out, the spokesman said: There are no plans to do that, no ... The cabinet collectively agree with that approach and recognise the priority of the public in ensuring our NHS has the funding it needs to tackle the backlog, which has been exacerbated by Covid. “No plans” is not a firm denial, and sometimes it can be a hint that a U-turn is on the way. But there was nothing in what the spokesman said at the briefing that made that sound particularly likely. The spokesman also refused to discuss the reports that at cabinet yesterday Jacob Rees-Mogg, the Commons leaders, argued for such a U-turn. Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, reportedly argued back forcefully, saying the money for health and social care was needed. The spokesman restated the government’s determination to toughen penalties for people who damage memorials. Asked about the acquittal of the “Colston four”, the spokesman said: Rightly we would never comment on individual jury decisions, which we respect. But we expect the police to take all crimes seriously, including vandalism or public damage to property. We’ve been clear it’s always legitimate to examine and challenge Britain’s history but we should retain and explain our heritage so more people can understand our nation’s past to its fullest. Vandalism of any sort remains a crime, we expect police to take all crimes seriously. You’ll know that we are changing the law to ensure those found guilty of desecrating or damaging a memorial face a punishment that better reflects the high sentimental and emotional impact these actions can have. The spokesman would not say when the government might change the definition of fully vaccinated so that people have to have had a booster jab to qualify. Such a change would affect twice-vaccinated people without a booster travelling abroad or using Covid passes to enter large venues. Boris Johnson indicated earlier this week that at some point in the future people will need to have had a booster to count as fully vaccinated. Scotland’s busiest health board has urged injured people to avoid emergency departments across the greater Glasgow area unless they have a life-threatening injury. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde said it was facing “unprecedented and unsustainable demand on emergency services” at its four accident and emergency units, which were working well above normal capacity. The Herald reported the A&amp;E department at the Queen Elizabeth University hospital in Glasgow, Scotland’s largest hospital, was closed for up to eight hours earlier this week because it hit full capacity. Ambulances waited for hours to hand over patients, and were then diverted to another hospital. Ambulances in Ayrshire were also diverted from University hospital Crosshouse after its emergency department was overwhelmed to University hospital Ayr for a short period of time on Wednesday “in the interests of patient safety”. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde said patients should first call the NHS 24 medical helpline on 111 to get advice on which service to use. The board said many patients could go to its three minor injuries units, including those with broken limbs, or easily be treated by a GP or local pharmacy in less serious cases. Dr Scott Davidson, the board’s deputy medical director for acute services, said: Our A&amp;Es remain open and continue to assess, treat and admit emergency patients, however they are extremely busy and staff are facing huge challenges to ensure we’re able to treat patients safely and as quickly as possible. [As] a result of current demand at A&amp;E, people are facing long wait times and our staff are under severe pressure. [Unless] very urgent or life-threatening, please do not attend our A&amp;Es unless you are referred. The Downing Street lobby briefing has just finished. Boris Johnson is visiting a mass vaccination centre in Northampton, where he is doing a TV interview. It will run around lunchtime. The PM’s spokesman would not discuss the latest reports about the latest inquiry by Lord Geidt into the refurbishment of the Downing Street flat, and whether the PM misled him during the first inquiry, but the full findings are due to be published later this afternoon. But the spokesman did not deny the Sun report saying Johnson has apologised tob Geidt. (See 11.35am.) I will post more from the lobby shortly. A family court judge has drawn the marriage of Michael Gove, the levelling up secretary, and Sarah Vine, a journalist, to a close, PA Media reports. At a hearing in the central family court in London this morning, Judge Lynn Roberts granted Vine a divorce decree on the grounds that the marriage had irretrievably broken down. Neither Vine nor Gove were present. Some papers have been briefed on what Lord Geidt, the PM’s independent adviser on ministerial standards, will reveal in his forthcoming report on the refurbishment of the Downing Street flat. Geidt has been considering whether he was misled by the PM when he conducted his initial investigation into the refurbishment of Downing Street flat. It was reported last week that Geidt will conclude Johnson did not break the ministerial code. But at the weekend the Sunday Times said the new Geidt report would be more critical than those reports implied. The Sun’s Harry Cole says Johnson has made a grovelling apology to Geidt. Cole reports: Boris Johnson has made a “humble and sincere” apology for the furore over his Downing St flat refurb. The Sun understands the PM has grovelled to No10 sleaze-buster Lord Geidt over missing text messages crucial to the probe ... The Sun understands Mr Johnson has blamed a security breach - resulting in him changing his mobile phone - for the inadvertent non-disclosure of a crucial WhatsApp exchange. But upon reviewing the new evidence, sources say Lord Geidt - though livid and “gravely concerned” - has concluded the exchange did not fundamentally alter his findings that Mr Johnson did not break the ministerial code but had behaved foolishly. And Harry Yorke has a similar story for the Telegraph. He says: The Telegraph understands that the prime minister has convinced Lord Geidt, the independent adviser on ministerial standards, that he did not mislead him over his personal involvement in the controversy. It is understood that Mr Johnson’s defence for failing to disclose a message between himself and a Tory donor who funded the works was that he had changed his mobile number. This meant that previous exchanges on his old device, including a crucial Whatsapp message which was later unearthed by the election watchdog, were not transferred over to his new one. Sebastian Payne at the FT says the full report will be out this afternoon. He quotes a Whitehall official saying Geidt’s “language about the PM’s conduct is coruscating, even if he accepts he was not willingly misled”. Earlier in the exchanges during business questions Pete Wishart, the SNP spokesperson on House of Commons matters, said that his estimate was that 50 MPs were now isolating with Covid. He urged Rees-Mogg to bring back hybrid proceedings (allowing MPs to participate in debates virtually) and proxy voting. And he contrasted what was happening in Westminster with practice in the Scottish parliament. He said: Yesterday was the Scottish parliament sat in an emergency session to discuss cases the Omicron crisis in Scotland. It was all virtual. All elected MSPs could participate and its sitting provided absolutely no risk whatsoever to the staff on the Holyrood estate. Yesterday this house also met for the first time after the Christmas recess. It was entirely in person in 19th century building with practically no social distancing measures in place. All 650 members could attend if they wanted to. And a good portion of them decided to come here to a packed chamber to listen to PMQs and a prime ministerial statement. Next week, of course, we will find out the true consequences of this and how many people were infected on this journey down to the Commons. In response, Rees-Mogg said: I am sorry that [Wishart] doesn’t like doing his job, that he wishes to enjoy himself sitting at home, and that he doesn’t want to do what members of parliament are expected to do, and turn up in the House of Commons. Peter Bone (Con) told Rees-Mogg that Labour was now adopting Conservative views, because they believe in lower taxation and leaving the EU. He asked if the government would adopt Conservative views too, and remove VAT on fuel bills. In response Rees-Mogg said that Conservatives believed in “fiscal good sense”. He said public services had to be paid for, because there was “no magic money tree”. He said it was easy for the opposition to call for specific tax cuts because it had no overall responsibility for funding services. But the government had to ensure the country can live within its means, he said. Apsana Begum (Lab) asks Rees-Mogg to congratulate the “Colston four”. And she asks about reports that the Home Office discussed the case with the Crown Prosecution Service and the local police. Rees-Mogg replies by saying that the jury system is “one of the great glories of this nation”. He says juries are free to come to a decision, based on the facts put before them, and he says that is one of the foundations of our liberty. Jacob Rees-Mogg is responding to Debbonaire. He says the idea that he has been converted to Labour thinking is “wishful thinking”. He commends Debbonaire for talking about “taxpayers’ money”, saying this is Tory language, because it reflects the Tory view that there is no government money, only people’s money. He also claims that Labour’s call for VAT on fuel bills to be cut shows that it has changed its view on Brexit. But he does not mention the health and social care levy, or deny the reports that he told cabinet yesterday it should be abandoned. Here is an extract from the FT’s story (paywall) about Rees-Mogg’s intervention yesterday. One government insider briefed on the cabinet meeting said Rees-Mogg felt that “finding savings would be more frugal and responsible” than raising taxes to fund improvements to health and social care. And here is an extract from the Times’ story (paywall). Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, told the cabinet that the rise should be shelved as inflation and energy bills are rising significantly. He also questioned the productivity of civil servants who are working from home and suggested that significant savings could be made by reducing the number of officials, a source said. In the Commons Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, has just delivered a statement about next week’s business. His Labour opposite number, Thangam Debbonaire, is responding. Referring to the overnight reports saying that Rees-Mogg (like Labour) is opposed to the government’s national insurance increase to fund a social care levy, Debbonaire suggests Rees-Mogg is “more socialist than he’s let on”. She jokes that, if he wants to cross the floor, there is room for him on the Labour benches. Rees-Mogg will respond in a moment. In his morning interviews Grant Shapps, the transport secretary, expressed concern about yesterday’s acquittal of the four people on trial for pulling down the statute of slave trader Edward Colston in Bristol. Shapps suggested the verdict exposed a loophole in the law that should be fixed. He told Times Radio: I don’t want to be seen to be commenting on an individual case, it had a jury, they made the decision, they would have seen all the facts. But as a broader point, I would say we’re not in a country where destroying public property can ever be acceptable. I’m aware they were tried under a particular piece of legislation, a particular aspect of that legislation, which the new police, crime, sentencing bill will provide other routes. We live in a democratic country. If you want to see things changed you can get them changed, you do that through the ballot box, or petitioning your local council, etc. You don’t do it by going out and causing criminal damage. We’ll always be on the side of the law and when necessary we will fix any loopholes in the law to make sure that’s always the case. Robert Jenrick, the former communities secretary, went further last night when he posted a tweet suggesting the verdict undermined the rule of law. That prompted this reponse form the lawyer and legal commentator David Allen Green. The Office for National Statistics has published its latest data on the prevalence of long Covid. The figures, which are in line with previous survey, suggest that 2% of the population - or 1.3 million people - had long Covid in early December, defined as symptoms lasting for more than four weeks. Some 70% of those (892,000 people) had had it for at least three months and 40% (506,000 people) had had it for at least a year, the ONS says. This is the first time the number of people suffering long Covid for more than a year, according to this long-running survey, has passed half a million. Grant Shapps, the transport secretary, was on interview duty for the government this morning. He said 24 hospital trusts have now declared critical incidents. He told Sky News: There are 137 trusts, there are 24 which are critical, it’s not entirely unusual for hospitals to go critical over the winter with things like the flu pandemic. But there are very real pressures which I absolutely recognise. Jeremy Hunt, the Conservative chair of the Commons health committee, has been talking about his committee’s report (see 9.40am) in interviews this morning. He told LBC that major staffing shortages across the NHS were not due to money but “finding the staff to spend the money on”. He explained: Right now, across the NHS, if you ask the people running hospitals, they will not say money is the big issue, it’s finding the staff to spend the money on. We have not just the Omicron staff absence issue but we have permanent staffing shortfalls in every major specialty now across the NHS. Good morning. One of the biggest issues worrying government at the moment is what is happening in the NHS. It is often presented as a simple question, will or will not the NHS be “overwhelmed”? (a binary framing for which the government itself is largely responsible, because it made this a key criterion for Covid alert levels), but, as we found out on Tuesday, Boris Johnson cannot define what the NHS being “overwhelmed” means, and that’s because there is no yes-or-no answer. Chris Hopson, chief executive of NHS Providers, made this point well in the course a long thread he posted on Twitter last night. The Hopson thread, which is well worth reading in full, starts here. But people will make a judgment about how well the NHS is doing, and whether the government is running it well, regardless of whether or not some notional tipping point has been reached, and a report (pdf) out this morning from the Conservative-dominated Commons health committee should make sobering reading for ministers. Its title is “Clearing the backlog caused by the pandemic”, and its key message is that this may prove impossible. It says that, partly because of Omicron, and partly because of long-term staffing problems (a particular obsession of Jeremy Hunt’s), the government’s plans to tackle the backlog are in jeopardy. This is from Hunt, the former Tory health secretary and committee chair, summing up his committee’s findings. The NHS faces an unquantifiable challenge in tackling a backlog of cases caused by the pandemic, with 5.8m patients waiting for planned care and estimates that the figure could double by 2025. However, our report finds that the government’s recovery plans risk being thrown off course by an entirely predictable staffing crisis. The current wave of Omicron is exacerbating the problem, but we already had a serious staffing crisis, with a burnt-out workforce, 93,000 NHS vacancies and no sign of any plan to address this. Far from tackling the backlog, the NHS will be able to deliver little more than day to day firefighting unless the government wakes up to the scale of the staffing crisis facing the NHS, and urgently develops a long-term plan to fix the issue. I will be focusing a lot more on Covid and the NHS today. And the other main worry for Johnson, of course, is the cost of living crisis. Overnight it was reported that Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, wanted the planned national insurance increase to be shelved. We will be hearing from Rees-Mogg himself in the Commons later. Here is the agenda for the day. 9.30am: The ONS publishes its latest data on long Covid. 10.10am: George Eustice, the environment secretary, gives a speech to the Oxford Farming Conference. 10.30am: Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, takes questions in the Commons on next week’s business. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. Around 11.30am: Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, makes a statement in the Commons about Russia. Around 12.30pm: Victoria Atkins, the Home Office minister, makes a statement to MPs about the Afghan resettlement scheme. 2pm: The UK Health Security Agency publishes its weekly Covid surveillance report. I will covering UK Covid developments in this blog today, but for wider coronavirus coverage, do read our global live blog. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comWhether millennials prefer to raise plants and pets over children for financial and environmental reasons or because they’re lazy and entitled has been hotly discussed in recent years. Now Pope Francis has waded in, saying that not having children is “selfish and diminishes us” and that people are replacing them with cats and dogs. Pet owners have reacted angrily to the comments, made during a general audience at the Vatican. They argue that animals have a lower environmental footprint than children, enable them to lead a life that is different but equally rewarding, and compensate for financial or biological difficulties in having children, rather than directly replacing them. On social media, people pointed out that the pope himself chose not to have children and said there was hypocrisy in such comments, coming from an institution which has grappled with a legacy of child sexual abuse. Guardian readers who responded to a call-out asking for their views were similarly critical of the pope’s comments, which were branded “out of touch” and “sexist”. Sophie Lusby, a 48-year old NHS manager in Belfast, said they were “really naive and insensitive” and failed to reflect that not everybody can or should have children. As a Catholic, she has struggled with feelings of shame about her inability to have children for medical reasons, given her religion’s emphasis on motherhood. “That’s what’s quite triggering about the pope’s words.” She added that although she has two pets, which are “great company when you live on your own”, she doesn’t see them as substitutes for children, and instead has found meaning in her relationships with her nephews, nieces, siblings and parents. “If Catholicism is about family, I’ve been very successful at being a great family member and I don’t need to be told off.” Estee Nagy, a 27-year-old jeweller from London, said that “having a child in today’s world is a luxury” because of lower earning power and a more challenging labour market. “It’s easier for those who were simply lucky and are rich or have more money than an average salary, but it gets harder when there isn’t enough.” Stef, who works in education, said that in her home town of Brighton “loads of people have dogs and treat them like kids”. She has taken her rescue dog, Boss, on holiday to 11 countries, including the Vatican, and feels that he is “part of the family”. “I don’t think anybody decides to have a dog instead of a child, you have a dog and you take care of the dog and it becomes like a child.” People’s feelings about their pets may reflect the immense psychological benefits of pet ownership, especially of cats and dogs, said Deborah Wells, a psychologist at Queen’s University, Belfast. Studies have shown that it results in increased companionship, feelings of self-worth and self-esteem and reduced depression, loneliness and isolation. Wells added that there was no evidence people were using pets as replacements for children, but rather the analogy applies in the sense that they are also dependents that need to be cared for, and many owners develop “an enormous bond of attachment”. Instead, the pope’s comments likely reflect the fact that birthrates have been declining in Europe over the past seven decades, especially in traditionally Catholic countries in the south, where there is a lack of government childcare support, gender roles are more entrenched and youth unemployment is high. While just 10% of European women born in the 1950s were child-free, that rose to 15% for women born in the 1970s. Demographers predict the proportion to increase for women born from the 1980s onwards, although not at as high a rate. The reasons for falling birthrates are far more complicated than personal choice. Francesca Fiori, a demographer at the University of St Andrews, said they include precarious employment, expensive housing, economic uncertainty and a lack of affordable childcare and flexible working arrangements. She added that decision-makers would do better to focus on addressing these issues rather than blaming people. Bernice Kuang, a fertility trends researcher at the University of Southampton, said the pope’s intervention may also be premature given that evidence suggests that people born in the 1980s and 1990s are not choosing not to have children, but are delaying childbirth, often until well into their 30s, although she noted that the climate crisis is increasingly an argument against child-rearing for these generations. “It’s not that humans’ desire to have families has plummeted, circumstances are terrible for young people.” Kuang added that although European societies may worry about fertility rates given their ageing populations, and the impact this could have on pensions, healthcare and the workforce, these can be solved through immigration as there are no problems with population replacement at a global level.On 7 June 2020, I was part of a group of protesters who pulled down a statue of the slave trader Edward Colston and threw it into the Bristol harbour. I have never felt and will never feel that what we did was wrong, and I have never thought I was a criminal. But it’s a beautiful thing that a jury has sat through all the evidence, and come to the same conclusion. I had a good feeling about the trial throughout, but I had to prepare for both outcomes – it could have gone either way. Our defence rested on the argument that we had indeed pulled down the statue during a Black Lives Matter protest, but that given Colston’s role in the Royal African Company, which enslaved tens of thousands and was responsible for the deaths of an estimated 19,000 people, this wasn’t a case of criminal damage. Obviously I don’t think that this verdict means we should start pulling down all the statues in the UK. Really, it’s not about statues at all: it’s about that statue, in this city, at this time. It really is a very particular backdrop, and the jury obviously came to an understanding of that nuance. The legacy of all the people who have protested against the statue and campaigned to end the “cult of Colston” in Bristol gave us legs to stand on – groups such as Countering Colston and Bristol Radical History Group. Without all those who have dug deep into history, we wouldn’t have stood a chance – our actions would have been seen as criminal damage by the jury. My barrister Blinne Ní Ghrálaigh said that jury trials are one of the backbones of our democracy, and of the legal system, because they allow for decisions like this. However, there already seems to have been a direct government response to the Colston statue toppling in the form of a clause in the new police, crime, sentencing and courts bill, which states that if you pull down a monument you can get up to 10 years in prison, as opposed to the previous three months maximum. The bill as a whole will allow police to shut down protests on the basis of noise or “serious annoyance”, and will make it easier to convict protesters. Even under our current laws people charged with rioting are facing time in prison that seems completely disproportionate to their actions. Our case has demonstrated the value and power of protest. One of the arguments made by our legal team was that the cultural and historical value of the statue has actually increased since it was taken down. And something they weren’t allowed to mention to the jury, but which an art valuer confirmed for us, was that its monetary value has increased by up to 50-fold since we pulled it down. In that sense, how can it be said that we damaged anything? That statue is a far more useful tool for history and learning than it ever was before, which negates any of the arguments made about us “erasing history”. You can’t erase history. What Colston and the myths around him have done is shroud history by deeming him – as the statue’s plaque says – “one of [Bristol’s] most virtuous and wise sons”. We are trying to shine a light in places people don’t want lights shining. I hope this outcome has given a platform to the people in Bristol who have been fighting this battle far longer than I have. The city has a clear duty now to reckon with its past and set up memorials or museums to the slave trade, and recognise that so much of the prosperity enjoyed today in the UK and Bristol comes off the back of historical atrocities. But Colston represents something even wider than that. Wealth disparity and inequality affects all races. You hear some counter-arguments to Black Lives Matter that the white working class lose out because Black British people get some kind of special treatment, but that’s just not the case. One of the main lessons from all this is to remember that just because someone else is struggling and you have empathy for their struggles, it doesn’t invalidate your own. We all need to have empathy for one another. This verdict is not about me, it’s not about Sage Willoughby or Milo Ponsford or Jake Skuse – the other members of the so-called Colston Four who stood trial with me. It’s about Bristol, and it’s a win for the people of Bristol. It’s another step along the way towards racial justice. Rhian Graham is a stage manager and facilitator and was one of four people who stood trial for the removal of the statue of slave trader Edward Colston in BristolMy friend Simon Lewty, who has died aged 80, was an artist who inscribed words and images on layers of tissue paper, creating a richly enigmatic body of work. Typically his paintings depicted surreal city chimneys, mandrake roots and figures that might have escaped from some infernal Punch and Judy show, floating amid arcane symbols and inscriptions of dreams. In the late 1980s and early 90s, when his works appeared like timeworn maps of hinterlands haunted by ancestral voices, the environmental charity Common Ground invited him to contribute to its nationwide Parish Maps project. At the turn of the millennium, as the figurative and cartographic elements of his work disappeared, rogue letters, runes, flecks and dashes of colour infiltrated great blocks of text. Simon was born in Sutton Coldfield, in the West Midlands, to Richard Lewty, a dental surgeon, and Marjorie (nee Lobb), who would later become a prolific author of Mills and Boon romances. Top of the class at Warwick school, he confounded his teachers’ predictions that he was destined for Oxford by opting to leave at 16 to enrol at the Mid-Warwickshire School of Art in Leamington Spa. He then went on to Hornsey Art College in London (1961–64), where he enjoyed conversations with the Marxist art historian Arnold Hauser and with characteristic independence criticised him for his neglect of the Middle Ages. Ranging from medieval graffiti to the Surrealists, Simon’s imaginative cosmos was taking shape, with Paul Klee, Giorgio de Chirico, Paul Nash and William Blake among his lodestars. In 1964 he returned to the Mid-Warwickshire to teach art and art history. Simon’s breakthrough came in the 80s. After resigning his teaching post to devote himself to his art, he was given solo shows at the Ikon Gallery, Birmingham, in 1984, and at the Serpentine in London the following year. These caught the eye of critics and soon his work was being acquired by the Arts Council, the British Museum and the V&amp;A, as well as by museums across the Midlands. Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery also invited him to select objects from its holdings to exhibit alongside his own paintings. With his reputation established, he was taken on by the art dealer Anne Berthoud and subsequently by Art First. For much of his adult life Simon lived and worked in the same house in Leamington Spa as his mother, and he cared for her in her last years. He never ventured abroad, but after Marjorie’s death in 2002 he regularly visited Swanage, attracted by memories of the “seaside surrealism” of Nash. Imagery of sea and shore now seeped into his work. A gifted writer, he also enjoyed fruitful collaborations with the poet Peter Larkin. The British Library’s Sound Archive recorded 50 hours of Simon’s recollections for its Artists’ Lives project. Following a remarkable recovery from a stroke in 2012, he continued to make drawings right up until his death. His only sibling, Deborah, predeceased him.Joan Didion was someone whom I had long worshipped as a writer. However, we became friends and colleagues when David Hare and the producer Scott Rudin invited me to take the solo part of Joan herself in the stage version of The Year of Magical Thinking. The book had been published in 2005, and David was planning to direct it as a play on Broadway. He and his stage designer, Bob Crowley, presented a series of backdrops over a wooden deck and a wooden chair. The combination of David’s humanism and witty stage expertise and Joan’s humour and perception, along with sudden variants of abstract backdrops falling with a thud to the deck, provided a compelling subtext for Joan’s narrative, which I shared with the audience. We performed it in New York in 2007 and the following year at the National Theatre in London.My father, Jack Clafferty, who has died aged 74, was the creator of a number of striking graphic images associated with the Troubles in Northern Ireland, most notably the familiar logo used by the Troops Out Movement, which featured a representation of a British soldier taking a club to the island of Ireland. Jack, who moved to London from Ireland in the mid-1960s, made his images – from the early 70s onwards – as a result of a keen interest in the political situation in the north of Ireland at the time, but particularly triggered by the introduction of internment in 1971 and Bloody Sunday in 1972. In 1973 he became a founder and key member of the Troops Out Movement and also played a leading role in the Anti-Internment League, helping to organise public meetings, pickets and events for both organisations while using his skills as a draughtsman to produce hand-drawn images that featured on badges, posters and in publications. Examples of his work can now be seen in the collections of the Linen Hall Library in Belfast and as far away as the Melbourne Museum in Australia. Jack was born in Buncrana in County Donegal, to Brigid (nee McEleney), a cook, and James Clafferty, a railway worker. The oldest of seven children, he attended Buncrana Technical school, where he showed an aptitude for technical drawing, leaving at 16 to work in a local builders’ merchants. At the age of 18, like many of his contemporaries, he emigrated to England, where he found work initially in a printing works before becoming a draughtsman with a series of London-based architectural firms, including Meers, Pring and Wager, and Pollard, Thomas and Edwards, working with the latter practice on the award-winning New Concordia Wharf, an early example of urban renewal in the London Docklands area. After a move to Newcastle under Lyme in Staffordshire in the late 80s he began to work for himself before retirement. Jack’s 1970 marriage to Anne Merryweather ended in divorce in 2004. He is survived by his mother, his children, me and Colm, and four siblings.The mere thought of Pep Guardiola and his Manchester City analysts sifting through footage of Swindon’s recent demolition of Northampton to prepare for an FA Cup third-round tie would have felt rather far-fetched when, in the midst of pre-season, the League Two club had only a handful of contracted players. To say they were operating on skeleton staff would be generous but these days the picture is markedly different and Swindon, too, will have done their homework when the teams meet on Friday. “I usually really enjoy watching them play … not so much this week,” grins their head coach, Ben Garner. When Garner was appointed two weeks before the season, there were only six available first-team players. Pre-season was repeatedly pushed back and so haphazard that no player had completed a full 90 minutes by the time they visited Scunthorpe on the opening day, a game that kicked off a new era. A takeover by the Australian businessman Clem Morfuni, who appointed Garner, has breathed life back into the Wiltshire club. Before then, it was doom and gloom. “The talk was: ‘Is the club even going to survive?’” says the midfielder Jack Payne. “Relegation is usually seen as the bottom and then things get better but things just carried on getting worse. There was a lot of negativity around the club, and you hear all of that, so for it to turn around as quickly as it has and now for there to be so much positivity is amazing.” For fans, a date with the Premier League champions promises to be an occasion to savour at a sold-out County Ground, after a testing couple of years. In July Swindon were rudderless: without a manager, chief executive, shirt sponsor or strength and conditioning coach. The remaining staff and players were awaiting outstanding wages. The goalkeeping coach, Steve Mildenhall, was in effect the last man standing and lumbered with sorting everything from sports science to logistics, assisted by the academy coach Lee Peacock, while the defender Mathieu Baudry helped organise training. Youth players and trialists made up the numbers. “The club was in a real mess and a lot of the players were sat at home thinking: ‘Will I be coming back in? Will I have to look for another club?’” says Ellis Iandolo, Swindon’s longest-serving player. “It was tough but once we found out about the takeover happening it was a matter of weeks before you could see a real change around the place. Training became exciting; you came in every day excited to see the new signings we were bringing in.” One of Morfuni’s first decisions was to appoint Rob Angus, former deputy chair of the club’s supporter trust, as chief executive. Angus juggled his role as a performance director at Nationwide for the first five weeks with getting a dozen new players, including the Wales winger Jonny Williams. There are still problems – they are contesting a winding-up petition and remain under an embargo that limits them to free transfers – but they are fifth in the league and primed to challenge for promotion. “We want to do well [against City], but I’d love to get three points at Mansfield on Tuesday night, which for me is a bigger game,” Garner says. If Swindon find themselves searching for evidence that City are fallible – the runaway Premier League leaders have won their past six games by an aggregate score of 21-4 – they need not look too far for inspiration. Swindon beat City in the Cup in 1910 and 1964, though Swindon’s heaviest defeat also came against City in this competition: 10-1 in 1930. “We’re certainly not going out there just trying to keep the score down,” Garner says. “We want to go out there and win the game and, as difficult as it may be, it’s not impossible.” Garner insists there are chinks in City’s armour but stresses his side must show courage to have any chance of an upset. “When we get the ball we need to make sure we are brave and not turning down forward passes,” says Iandolo. They can take comfort from the fright Cheltenham gave City in the fourth round last season when the former Swindon defender Ben Tozer’s long throw unsettled Guardiola’s side. Not that Garner is planning to unsettle City with such direct tactics. “It’s against what the game should be about,” he says. “I’m a purist. Slowing the game down, loading the ball up, and throwing it in the box are not things we will do. We are not going to change for one game, regardless of whom we are playing.” This week Garner suggested his skilful players make easy targets and need greater protection from referees, a gripe his City counterpart has previously voiced. It would have been easy to envisage him and Guardiola getting on swimmingly had they had the chance to share a post-match tipple, but Guardiola will miss the trip after testing positive for Covid, with Rodolfo Borrell taking charge. Swindon will not be rolling out the red carpet in any case. “If you start doing things for different managers, I think you’re being disrespectful to other managers within the game,” he says. “We’ll have the same post-match food and drinks as after every game.”Novak Djokovic’s family have said he is the victim of “a political agenda” aimed at “stomping on Serbia” as protesters in Belgrade called for his release and Serbia’s president insisted “the whole country” was behind him. The 34-year-old world tennis No 1, who was born in the Serb capital, is in detention in an immigration hotel in Melbourne pending a legal challenge to Australia’s decision on Wednesday to cancel a visa that would allow him to play in the Australian Open. Demonstrators gathered outside the Serb assembly on Thursday afternoon after a call for support from Djokovic’s family. The player’s father told a press conference that he could not be defeated “by anyone, not even the Australian government”. Djokovic was being “persecuted”, Srdjan Djokovic said. “They’re keeping him in captivity. They’re stomping all over him to stomp all over Serbia and the Serbian people. [Scott] Morrison [Australia’s prime minister] and his like have dared attack Novak to bring Serbia to its knees.” Australian officials have said the player, who has refused to reveal his Covid vaccination status but previously said he was opposed to vaccination, was refused entry because he failed to meet vaccination exemption requirements. But Srdjan said: “This has nothing to do with sports, this is a political agenda. Novak is the best player and the best athlete in the world, but several hundred million people from the west can’t stomach that.” Djokovic’s mother, Dijana, said he was being scapegoated and described the situation as scandalous. “Our Novak, our pride,” she said. “Novak is Serbia, and Serbia is Novak. They want to clip his wings, but we know how strong he is.” Displaying the nine Australian Open trophies Djokovic has won, the player’s father said Serbia was “a proud nation, a civilised nation, we have never attacked, just defended ourselves. That is what Novak is doing right now.” The Serbian president, Aleksandar Vučić, posted on Instagram that he had “told our Novak that the whole of Serbia is with him and [we] are doing everything to see the harassment of the world’s best tennis player is brought to an end. In line with all norms of international law, Serbia will fight for Novak, truth and justice.” Vučić said he had spoken to Djokovic twice and to the player’s father multiple times, and Serb ministers were in touch with their Australian counterparts. “All are asking just one thing: to let Novak move out from this horrific hotel into a rented home,” the president said. What was “not fair”, he said, was “this political witch-hunt everyone is taking part in – even the Australian prime minister. But I am afraid this type of political ranting will continue. They want to prove something else. When you can’t beat someone then you do these kind of things.” While pro-government media were strident in their support for the player, many Serbians were more divided on the issue. “This is all against Novak,” said Milan Klaric, from the city of Vršac, two hours north-east of the capital. “They don’t like him so they use every means they can against him. How come that he got a visa and then it was revoked? They are afraid of him.” However, Jelena Goricki, also from Vršac, said she was not concerned by the player’s problems. “I really love how he plays, I cheer him on,” she said. “But this? Sorry, but I got my jab. He does not have my support.” Coronavirus infection rates in Serbia, while still relatively low, have nearly trebled over the past two to three weeks. The country has so far fully vaccinated less than half of its population, compared with an average in the EU of 70%. Milivoje Pantovic is a reporter with N1 Television in BelgradeBill Bryden, who has died aged 79, was a terrific director and writer whose work was dominated by two governing ideas: a belief in ensemble and a passion for everything American. Both could be seen in his tenure as one of Peter Hall’s associates at the National Theatre from 1974 to 1985, where he directed Tony Harrison’s version of The Mysteries and numerous American plays including the world premiere of David Mamet’s Glengarry Glen Ross. As Hall shrewdly said in his autobiography, “Bill’s strengths are his obsessions” and “for him, work in the theatre has to be work among friends.” Bryden learned his craft as a director at the Belgrade, Coventry, and then at London’s Royal Court from 1967 to 1971. But it was in his native Scotland, at Edinburgh’s Royal Lyceum, that he first attracted attention. Growing up in Greenock, he was fascinated by his nation’s industrial history and in 1972 wrote and directed a stunning play, Willie Rough, about a shop-steward involved in socialist battles in the Clydeside shipyards. But, although it was that production that led to his invitation to join the National Theatre, it is difficult to overestimate the importance of his Greenock upbringing. It not only gave him a belief in the power of the collective but also, through thrice weekly visits to the movies, a preoccupation with America that, in 1980, prompted him to write the script for a Hollywood western, The Long Riders. It was his work for the National that marked him out as a first-rate director. He even survived an early disaster when, in 1976, Hall invited him to stage a Goldoni comedy, Il Campiello, to officially launch the Olivier theatre. Played in front of a distinctly unamused Queen, the production died a public death and Hall had to resist the board’s injunction to give Bryden the sack. His faith paid off a year later when, on a snowy Easter Saturday, Bryden staged The Crucifixion on the riverside terraces outside the National. That was to be the start of one of the great projects of postwar theatre. Growing incrementally, The Nativity and The Passion were eventually joined by Doomsday to form The Mysteries, which played in a single 12-hour day at the Cottesloe in 1985. Harrison’s alliterative text, Bill Dudley’s domesticated design employing dustbins and colanders and John Tams’s music, along with a cast that included Jack Shepherd, Karl Johnson and Brian Glover, were all crucial to the production’s success. But it was Bryden’s vision that made The Mysteries a genuinely communal experience, in which a predominantly secular audience was temporarily turned into awayday Christians. Bryden’s obsession with everything American also paid off in fine productions of Eugene O’Neill (The Long Voyage Home, Hughie, The Iceman Cometh), Arthur Miller (The Crucible) and David Mamet (American Buffalo and Glengarry Glen Ross). It was often said, with some justice, that Bryden was most at ease directing men. But he also understood perfectly the fear and panic that underlies the blue-streaked bluster of Mamet’s petty traders and vaunting salesmen. Bryden returned to his native Scotland to write and direct two epic pieces of popular theatre staged in the Harland &amp; Wolff shipyards in Glasgow’s Govan: The Ship (1990) and The Big Picnic (1994). If the characters were thinly drawn, both pieces created memorable effects: in the latter I remember the Angel of Death hovering over a battalion of gassed, maimed Glaswegian soldiers in the hell of the first world war. Bryden also directed for opera and cinema but his supreme gift, shown at its height in The Mysteries, was for creating a shared experience in which we, as members of the audience, became not just spectators but willing, enthusiastic participants.This weekend, Novak Djokovic should have been warming up for yet another grand slam. But instead the world No 1 tennis champion – and noted vaccine sceptic – is cooling his heels in an Australian quarantine hotel, while an international row rages over whether he should be kicked out of the country altogether. Djokovic had boasted on social media of securing an exemption, for medical reasons he has not explained, to the rules that all players in the Australian Open must be double-jabbed. But hours later he was stopped at the airport, his visa cancelled, and he was unceremoniously threatened with deportation. His lawyers are challenging that ruling, meaning the outcome of this particular tournament may now be determined in a court – rather than on one. Not since the actor Johnny Depp and his then wife, Amber Heard, flew their two dogs, Pistol and Boo, into the country by private jet without the necessary paperwork has the power of celebrity met the force of Australian biosecurity requirements with quite such explosive results. In fairness to Djokovic, this farce may not be entirely his fault. Someone somewhere, either in his camp or in Australian tennis, may have screwed up by allowing a situation to arise where the tournament’s biggest box office draw was seemingly given a free pass to compete in the country, but not actually to get there. Yet few tears will be shed for the man now inevitably known as “Novaxx” Djokovic. Around the world, patience with those who are wilfully unvaccinated is running out in the face of yet another viral surge. Just over a month ago, I wrote about how the mood might harden as intensive care beds filled with patients realising too late that they should have got the jab, while restrictions once again loomed over people who had done what was asked of them. Now that scenario is unfolding, with France’s President Macron playing to the gallery by vowing to do everything he can to “piss off” those who are unjabbed, while angry callers to British radio phone-ins demand anti-vaxxers be stripped of their right to NHS treatment if they get sick. Elsewhere in sport, the Premier League, facing a stubborn minority of unvaccinated top-flight footballers and fears of cancelled fixtures, has reportedly discussed making those who are unjabbed travel separately to games or eat their meals away from other players. It’s an uncomfortably divisive idea, stopping only just short of making them carry a bell and shout: “Unclean! Unclean!” But what if the alternative is double-jabbed players growing increasingly resentful at having to sit matches out because they’re isolating, after contact with infected teammates? Balancing the incontrovertible human right to refuse a vaccine against the rights of others not to be held hostage by that decision is the single biggest challenge of this stage of the pandemic, and that’s what makes Djokovic’s case resonate far beyond tennis. There is an undeniably ugly undercurrent to some of this hostility towards the unvaccinated, who are disproportionately likely to be poor, marginalised and from minority-ethnic backgrounds. Punishing people who often have deep-seated reasons not to trust the authorities for failing to get their jabs not only risks heaping discrimination upon discrimination, but represents a profound failure to understand why they didn’t want to comply in the first place, which makes it impossible to convince them to change their minds. But there’s nothing obviously marginalised about a millionaire sportsman arrogantly demanding the right to jet into a country suffering record infection rates in hopes of lifting yet another lucrative trophy. Australians have endured restrictions so draconian that thousands of them stranded abroad at the start of the pandemic weren’t even allowed back into their own country. Djokovic has less in common with an agonised British care worker, on minimum wage, facing the sack if they don’t get the jab, than with a frequently more middle-class form of anti-vaxxer who slips under the radar. He is a believer in “natural” healing who once suggested that polluted water could be cleansed by the power of positive thinking, insisting that science had proved “that molecules in the water react to our emotions”. He’s entitled to hold whatever wacky beliefs he likes, of course, but he doesn’t have a God-given right to escape the professional consequences of them, and still less does he have the right to impose consequences on others. The clout he wields as an international sportsman, meanwhile, makes it all the more important that he be seen to follow the rules. “One rule for them, another for the rest of us” remains the single most toxic charge of the pandemic, whether levelled against Downing Street aides tucking into convivial Christmas wine and cheese at a time when ordinary mortals weren’t even allowed to see their own parents, or against big-shot Hollywood names granted entry to Australia for film and TV work when most people were barely allowed to leave their own homes. It taps into a sense of grievance about elites getting away with things the little guy can’t that is arguably never far from the surface of politics, visibly inflamed by a pandemic in which too many powerful people have been caught ducking the rules so painfully obeyed by others. No wonder Scott Morrison, the Australian prime minister criticised for his own handling of the pandemic, leapt at the chance to declare that “rules are rules” and apply to everyone. Unlike tennis, fighting a pandemic is a team effort. If he doesn’t want to be booed off the next court he actually gets to play on, Djokovic would do well to remember that. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistMy father, James Armour, known as Jimmy, who has died aged 92, was a veterinary scientist and teacher who specialised in the diagnosis and treatment of parasitic diseases in animals. He was involved in the development of the “wonder drug” Ivermectin, used to treat worms, lice and ticks in animals and to eradicate African River Blindness in people. Jimmy was born in Basra, Iraq, to James Armour, who worked in shipping, and his wife, Margaret (nee Roy). The family came home to Scotland in 1935, settling in Troon. James attended Marr college and studied at Glasgow School of Veterinary Medicine, graduating in 1953. In the same year he went to Nigeria with the Colonial Vet Service, returning to the UK in 1960, joining Cooper Technical Bureau (later the Wellcome Trust). In 1963 he returned to Glasgow vet school as a researcher, becoming a lecturer in 1967, reader in 1972 and professor of parasitology in 1976. He established multidisciplinary teams to develop new methods of diagnosis and treatment of parasitic diseases and gained international recognition for his work. One of the highlights of his research collaborations was the development of the anti-parasitic drug Ivermectin, with colleagues at Merck, Sharp and Dohme. Jimmy was a leading consultant to MSD’s veterinary division for the development of new drugs. Ivermectin was discovered in 1975 and marketed for veterinary use in 1981, to treat parasitic diseases such as gut worms, lice and ticks in animals. Later it was shown to be effective in humans for the eradication of African River Blindness. It was the first veterinary drug to achieve £1bn in annual sales. Jimmy was also a gifted teacher and published extensively. He co-authored a textbook on veterinary parasitology, first published by Blackwell in 1987, and lectured and examined at universities across the world. In 1986 he was elected dean of Glasgow vet school. In 1988 the Riley Review of veterinary education recommended the closure of the school and Jimmy led a highly organised campaign to challenge and rebut Riley’s assumptions. The recommendations of the Riley Report were overturned and this victory was followed by a period of considerable expansion at the school. In 1991, he was appointed vice-principal of Glasgow University. He also held many external appointments including chairing the UK Veterinary Products Committee (1987-1996) and the board of the Moredun Animal Research Institute (2000-2004). He was knighted in 1995 for his contribution to veterinary science and veterinary education and retired the same year. Jimmy was also an outstanding golfer. In 1947 he won the British boys’ championship at Hoylake. He was later club champion at four different clubs. He represented Ayrshire 1947-52 and Hertfordshire 1960-63, captaining the Hertfordshire team that won the English Counties Championship in 1962/63. More recently he became captain, then president, of Royal Troon Golf Club, where he played regularly until 2019. Jimmy served as vice-president of the Royal Society of Edinburgh from 1997 to 2000. He had high principles and a humble and egalitarian outlook. He was passionate about education as the route to improving society. He is survived by three of his children, Linda, Fiona and me, from his marriage to Irene (nee Morris), who died in 1988, and by his second wife, Christine (nee Strickland), whom he married in 1992. Another son, Donald, died in 2016.I was surprised that the pope has joined the ranks of the hypocrites (Choosing pets over babies is ‘selfish and diminishes us’, says pope, 5 January). How can a celibate man berate anyone for not having children? Ian Caldwell Redbourn, Hertfordshire • Reading reports of recent PMQs, I wonder whether the Speaker might introduce a new Thursday session, prime minister’s corrections, where errors and “terminological inexactitudes” could be addressed to set the record straight. Ian Skidmore Welwyn, Hertfordshire • Thank you for your leader on literature (31 December). I am now rereading my youngest daughter’s The Dark Is Rising from the bookshelf in her old bedroom and she is rereading my copy of The Box of Delights, which she took with her when she left home. We will exchange volumes when we next meet. Jill Adams Moseley, Birmingham • Arwa Mahdawi’s article about the perils of flying with a baby (5 January) reminded me of boarding a plane with our two-year-old many years ago. He was offered a sweet “so your ears don’t pop”, whereupon, not unreasonably, he solemnly tried to stuff the sweet into his ear. Anna Cummin Minstead, Hampshire • In our prayers for the dead at my RC infant school (Letters, 5 January), I remember asking that the petrol light would shine upon them, may they rest in peace amen. Teresa Rodrigues Sandford, Dorset • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Melody Beard will forever rue the moment she took her youngest daughter to use the toilet and missed the statue of slave-trader Edward Colston being thrown into Bristol’s harbour. The 40-year-old had, like many on that day, joined protests in the city’s centre, along with her husband and two children. But at the moment on 7 June 2020 when the bronze statue was toppled, dragged to the harbourside and dumped in the grimy waters, she was away from the action, taking her daughter to the loo. On Thursday, the day after four anti-racism campaigners were cleared of criminal damage for their involvement in pulling down the statue and throwing it in the River Avon during a Black Lives Matter protest, Beard was glad to have witnessed most of the historic event. Beard, who has lived in the city for more than 10 years and runs a cafe in a community venue, said: “Obviously it was a situation of the moment – everyone was feeding off each other. “I don’t necessarily think we should just point to four people specifically, because there were many more people involved. “It started an international debate about why we put certain people on plinths, why are they important, why are they usually male and white, and not really relevant any more. “A lot of Bristolians, living in Bristol, feel very connected to the event. “My husband and I took our children, two little girls, and we missed the real action. We heard everyone cheering but because one of them needed to pee we had to go … we had to move on because she was desperate … so we were almost at that moment.” There was a supportive mood for the jury on a grey, drizzly Thursday in the city, a place known for its political activism, free spirit and creativity. Ashley, 28, who asked not to have his full name published as he works in the public sector, agreed with Beard’s view that there were many involved, not just the four standing trial. He said: “The powers that be had to pretty much appear to be doing something but the outcome was set in stone before it went to trial. Ultimately, it was the right thing for there to be an ‘all clear’ essentially. “For many, many years, people were advocating for something to be done [about the statue] and the powers that be didn’t do anything. “The fact people had to take it into their own hands was through [the authorities’] own making – to hold a few accountable for what was the actions of many would have been grossly wrong in my eyes and I think most agree with that.” Alagie Sowe, 33, said he did not think figures such as Colston should be celebrated with statues, but added: “It should be kept in a museum where people can see it and remember, so the history is there to be learned. If it was in a more appropriate place, people wouldn’t have felt they had to bring it down.” The statue was later taken out of the harbour and was put on display, on its side, in M Shed, the museum of Bristol, in an exhibition that ended on 3 January 2022. The statue is now in the museum’s adjoining L Shed, where it can be seen in pre-booked tours. But other citizens were less engaged. Otis McDonald, 35, who recently moved to Bristol from London, said: “To me, it wasn’t a very big deal. I get why they did it and I think it was the right thing to clear them. I didn’t follow the background. I was living in London at the time. “I didn’t follow it as closely as I should have done. Considering the current climate, the focus on the BLM movement, I can understand why they [reached the verdict].” Aisha Sheikh, 21, who was born in Kenya but moved to the UK when she was younger and has lived in the city for two years, said: “My dad always said to keep out of politics. I just live my life. “It’s not that I just keep out of it – if I had something to say about it I would, but I just don’t know that much about it. I saw the protests happening, but I’m just an observer.”My uncle David Young, who has died aged 100, spent his entire working life with the Moral Re-Armament (MRA) movement (now Initiatives of Change), an organisation that aims to promote peace, reconciliation and integrity in public life. David joined MRA in 1950, and two years later was sent to India to help out with a lengthy touring stage show that promoted the values of MRA, turning his hand to anything and everything backstage as well as arranging accommodation for the performers and becoming involved in general administration. As the tour drew to a close in late 1953, he volunteered to stay on in India in various roles, ushering in an itinerant life that later included work at the MRA’s European centre in Caux, Switzerland, its US base in Michigan, a six-month promotional tour of Canada, and further lengthy spells in India. David was born in Dundee to Charles Bowden Young, a lecturer in English at St Stephen’s College Delhi, in India, and Ruth, a doctor who later became principal of Lady Hardinge Medical College in Delhi. He was born in the UK when his mother came back for a short family visit, but grew up in India until the age of 10, when he was sent as a boarder to the Dragon school in Oxford and then Oundle school in Northamptonshire. Following an engineering apprenticeship in Manchester, David joined the Royal Engineers during the second world war, and thanks to his connections with India he served with the Bombay Sappers in Burma, where he was awarded the Military Cross for bravery after defusing an arsenal of explosives that the retreating Japanese had planted to block a tunnel in 1944. After the war he went to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, and on completing an engineering degree he began working for MRA in 1950. He married Margot Meekings in 1958, and the two of them almost immediately set off for India together, settling in Pune, where they both worked for the MRA. By 1963 David and Margot were running summer camps for young Indians under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi’s grandson Rajmohan Gandhi in a hill town south of Pune called Panchgani. This eventually led David to manage the construction of the MRA’s Asia Plateau training centre there, which opened in early 1968. Later, he and Margot went with the MRA to Chennai before moving back to the UK in the mid-1970s to be near David’s elderly mother. They eventually retired to Brighton, near where Margot had grown up. Even in retirement David remained committed to the MRA, and as late as 2017 he was organising inter-faith sessions in Brighton between Christians and Muslims.He returned to India aged 96 to attend the 50th anniversary of Asia Plateau in 2018; and again in 2020 for an anniversary celebration of the Bombay Sappers in Pune, where he was the oldest attendee. Margot died in 2018.I was disappointed on reading Ammar Kalia’s piece (‘I saw a big set of white teeth coming towards me’: the people who survived terrifying wild animal attacks, 4 January) to see no deeper reflection on what we might learn from these experiences. This could have been aided by reference to the Australian philosopher Val Plumwood’s reflections on surviving a crocodile attack, The Eye of the Crocodile. After being rolled three times she was released from its jaws and, with appalling injuries, managed to escape. Plumwood wrote that the encounter made her realise that “we, too, are food … as I looked into the eye of the crocodile, I realised my own vulnerability as an edible, animal being”. She argues that our dominant story, that humans are different from, and higher than, other creatures “has encouraged us to eliminate from our lives any animals that are disagreeable, inconvenient or dangerous”. To see ourselves as prey, she concludes, is key to reimagining ourselves “as members of a larger earth community of radical equality, mutual nurturance and support”. Peter Reason Emeritus professor, University of Bath • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Your editorial (31 December) refers to the imminent publication of the white paper on levelling up. It discusses the promotion of the mayoral model beyond city regions, and levelling up regions and areas that have been neglected for decades. The problem with this is that the UK does not have regional authorities to do the job. In their absence who is going to identify the key issues that need to be addressed and respond to them effectively? Who is going to quantify the resources needed and how to spend them? Whose business is it going to be to ensure enduring success? One of the costs of Brexit has been the loss of EU regional funds. The EU gave these, over the heads of governments, directly to Europe’s regional authorities because otherwise they would just go into national treasuries. Regions need to be able to produce and cost their own plans for levelling up and negotiate these with the government, not the other way round. Look no further for exemplars of how UK local government needs to be reformed than the successful Scottish regional authorities that existed for 20 years before the advent of the Scottish parliament. Roger Read Former secretary general, Metrex, the network of European metropolitan regions and areas • Your editorial omits one key role of national government in relation to devolution – that of creating, as far as possible, a level playing field. For many years, when local authorities had the power to fix rates and to spend the money locally, there was a rate equalisation grant from central government, calculated on the local authority’s level of financial capacity. Now, with central government controlling tightly so much of what a council can raise and spend, there is very little municipal independence. This has led to cynical cuts in central funding of over 40%, with the blame for cuts in services falling mainly on poverty-stricken local councils. Devolution will potentially level up a divided country if, and only if, it is accompanied by devolved regional financial powers, with the national government’s sole role being to provide a grant to assist the poorer regions to level up to a national average of financial capacity. Michael Meadowcroft Leeds • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.John Vidal’s list (It’s the great green reset: 10 things Britain can do now to save the planet, 3 January) seems very achievable, but I would like to add one more to accelerate change: climate income. First, introduce a carbon tax across all industries to price emissions into the market, closing a huge economic loophole. By gradually increasing the tax, we not only incentivise lower emissions on the supply side, but we also drive demand for low-carbon alternatives. Second, redistribute the revenue equally to all citizens. This protects the most vulnerable consumers, who already have smaller carbon footprints, from fuel poverty. The wealthiest people with the biggest carbon footprints would see their costs rise, but for the majority, costs would be neutral. Third, introduce carbon border adjustments. This policy would prevent emissions being transferred offshore, but also protect many UK businesses, especially our vibrant small business community, from competitors in countries without a carbon tax. This policy would help drive many of the others at a time when we need real urgency. Darrin Charlesworth Citizens’ Climate Lobby UK • There is one additional action that would make achieving John Vidal’s wishlist much easier: start a serious conversation about how we make money. Money is probably the most powerful tool ever invented by humans, but the way we account for its use is leading us to destruction. By steadfastly refusing to acknowledge the environmental cost of our activities and by treating the future as less valuable than today, we have built a complex economic system whose primary incentive is to destroy the living world. The old way of doing things may have been practical when the human population was small, but it is not appropriate for today’s population and level of technological development. Rather than continue to argue about how we should share money (fossil fuel companies or renewable energy, meat farmers or vegetable growers), a deep reset of what constitutes profit would give us the chance to overhaul the economy so that it rewards activities that nourish the future. Then, maybe humanity will have one. Harold Forbes Wareham, Dorset • John Vidal fails to mention the one thing above all others that needs to be addressed if we are truly to save the planet, and that is the relentless rise in world population. As many academic papers demonstrate, in terms of the steps that an individual can take to limit their contribution to global heating, a voluntary limitation of family size is by far the most effective. Peter Alsbury London • I agree with everything John Vidal proposes, but know that not a single one of these things will happen with this government in power. At the beginning of the pandemic, I, like many others, thought it was time to rethink how we live and how our society could change its priorities. How wrong we were. At the age of 76, I will not be around to experience the worst of what is in store, but my grandchildren certainly will be. Please can someone tell me how I can regain any sense of optimism or positive feelings about the future? Sue Mullen London • The caption on the main image in this article was amended on 7 January 2022. Pennington Flash is in Leigh, not Wigan. • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Dozens of protesters and at least 12 police officers have died in ongoing violence in Kazakhstan, authorities have claimed, as “peacekeepers” from a Russian-led military alliance arrived in the country at the request of the embattled president, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev. Witnesses in Almaty, Kazakhstan’s largest city, described scenes of chaos on Thursday, with government buildings being stormed or set on fire and widespread looting. Many of those demonstrating said the protests had begun peacefully earlier in the week, and turned violent after a heavy-handed government response. The interior ministry said 2,298 people had been arrested during the unrest, while the police spokesperson Saltanat Azirbek told the state news channel Khabar-24 that “dozens of attackers were liquidated”. There were also reports of about 400 people in hospital. City officials in Almaty said 748 officers from police and the national guard had been injured and 18 killed, one of whom they claimed had been found beheaded. It was not immediately possible to verify the figures, but video footage showed violent clashes between protesters and authorities in a number of cities. A local journalist, Ardak Bukeeva, who spent Thursday speaking with protesters in central Almaty, said demonstrators who stormed the presidential residence in the city told her dozens of people had been killed during the assault. Many protesters said they had been prompted to come out earlier in the week as a result of long-simmering frustrations with the political and economic situation in the country, Bukeeva said. However, on Wednesday, the situation turned violent, with some claiming provocateurs had arrived to deliberately cause trouble, and others noting that police were almost entirely absent from the city centre. Irina Mednikova, a civil society activist in Almaty, said she saw large pools of blood in the grass around the presidential residence on Thursday morning, and an absence of security forces or police. “The residence was completely burned. The gates had been rammed open with cars or tractors, all the glass was broken, and inside there was smoke and a terrible smell of burning,” she said. Internet and mobile phone reception was down in most of the country for much of Thursday, with only state television being available to most Kazakhs to receive news about the protests. Rumours spread by word of mouth, and it was difficult to verify claims. Later on Thursday, news agencies reported new gunfire in Almaty and military vehicles on the move in the city. State television claimed an “anti-terrorist operation” was under way. “The terrorists are using civilians, including women, as human shields. The police forces are trying their best to ensure the security of city residents,” Khabar 24 told its viewers. On Thursday evening authorities claimed they had all government buildings in Almaty under control. Events have escalated quickly since the protests started over a rise in fuel prices in the west of the country over the weekend. They quickly spread, and by Tuesday thousands of people had taken to the streets in Almaty. Valeria Ibraeva, an art historian who watched the protests from her window overlooking one of Almaty’s main thoroughfares, said on Tuesday the crowds were “friendly and smiling, without aggression and with lots of hope”. By Wednesday, however, there were attempts to overturn a bus on the street, and widespread looting of shops, she said. On Wednesday morning, Tokayev declared a state of emergency and accepted the resignation of the government. He also said he was replacing Nursultan Nazarbayev, who ran the country from its independence in 1991 until 2019, as head of the security council. These moves failed to quell the unrest, and late on Wednesday Tokayev appealed for intervention from the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) – an alliance made up of Russia, Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan. The request was approved and Russian paratroopers arrived in Kazakhstan on Thursday. The decision to intervene came just hours after Vladimir Putin’s spokesperson said there should be no foreign interference in Kazakhstan. The Russian defence ministry published images of Russian troops boarding military aircraft to Kazakhstan. The force will total around 2,500 people, the CSTO secretariat said late on Thursday. The Russian MP Leonid Kalashnikov told Interfax the troops would stay “for as long as the president of Kazakhstan believes it necessary”. He said they would mainly be engaged in protecting “infrastructure”. While it is clear the protests have been accompanied by violence and looting, there is no evidence that foreign-trained “terrorists” are involved, as Tokayev has claimed. It is also striking that Tokayev felt he could not rely on Kazakhstan’s extensive security resources alone to put down the revolt, and suggests he may have felt unable to count on the loyalty of his forces. Radio Azattyq, the Kazakh service of Radio Liberty, reported unrest in cities across the country. In Aktobe, protesters had got together to defend the airport and railway station, insisting they did not want violence and demanding negotiations with authorities. In other cities there were burned-out cars, a shutdown in public infrastructure and panic as people could not withdraw money from banks and found their cards did not work after the banking system closed down. In the town of Taldykorgan, protesters pulled down a monument to Nazarbayev on Wednesday. The former president, who has the official title of leader of the nation, has not been seen in public since the protests began, and there were rumours on Thursday he and his family may have fled the country. Western countries, which were already on high alert over a potential Russian attack on Ukraine, looked on with unease, aware there was little they could do to influence events in Kazakhstan. The British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said: “Any forces deployed must have a clear mission and act proportionately in any use of force to defend the legitimate security interests in Kazakhstan.” The US secretary of state, Anthony Blinken, talked to his Kazakhstani counterpart, Mukhtar Tileuberdi, and “advocated for a peaceful, rights-respecting resolution to the crisis”, according to a state department readout of the call. Additional reporting by Yevgeniya PlakhinaMassive coordinated sanctions threatened against Russia if it launches military action against Ukraine will hit the high-level Russian elite and its ability to carry out financial transactions, Liz Truss, the UK foreign secretary, told MPs on Thursday, as she warned the west could not afford to be seen to reward Moscow in crucial talks next week. Her remarks appear indirectly to confirm that if Russia mounts an incursion into Ukraine it could be excluded from Swift, the messaging network used by 11,000 banks in 200 countries to make cross-border payments. The US and its Nato allies have said repeatedly it has a package of massive sanctions ready to be launched if Russia presses ahead with an invasion, but has refused to spell out details in public. Truss said: “The UK is working with our partners on these sanctions, including high-impact measures targeting the Russian financial sector and individuals.” She also disclosed she will travel to Ukraine next month. But her carefully acquired “Iron Lady” image was undermined as she repeatedly came under cross-party pressure about lax anti-money laundering laws in the UK, including the failure to establish a public register of beneficial ownership of property in the UK or in UK overseas territories. Chris Bryant, a Labour member of the foreign affairs select committee, said it was “inexplicable and entirely hypocritical” that the government was so slow to clean up the banking system. Kevan Jones, a member of the Intelligence and Security Committee, said only one recommendation of the committee’s landmark report concerning Russian influence in the UK had been implemented by the government, concerning a register of interests in the Lords. Truss said 25 Russian nationals have been subject to UK sanctions and the UK will continue to review this legislation. Liberal Democrat MPs called for a windfall tax on Gazprom, the hugely profitable Russia-based gas company which has its trading arm in the UK. Despite the divisions over London’s role in enabling the Russian elite, the shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy, said the UK parliament was united in its condemnation of Russia’s intimidation of Ukraine. He said: “this is a moment of acute danger” and added Russia’s demands “are completely incompatible with the sovereignty of Nato allies and the independence of Ukraine”. Truss was making a Commons statement before a Nato foreign ministers’ meeting on Friday, a final conference among western nations before they hold a string of meetings with Russia next week, including a bilateral meeting between the US and Russia on future security relations on Monday. Truss said these meetings were “absolutely critical for peace and security in Europe”, adding they were in her view about insisting Russia abide by its past commitments concerning Ukraine’s sovereignty. Truss has been leading the calls in Europe to take a tough line with Russia, insisting it is vital that the west does not succumb to the false Russian narrative that Nato is an offensive alliance or a threat to Moscow. She argued it would be wrong to remove from Ukraine the right to join Nato, saying: “The UK remains supportive of Ukraine’s Nato membership aspirations in line with the 2008 Bucharest summit declaration.” She added: “There is no justification whatsoever for Russia’s bellicose stance towards Ukraine. It is unprovoked and it is part of a wider pattern of behaviour by the Kremlin, reliant on disinformation and mistrust to seek to gain an upper hand.” UK diplomats are still evaluating the significance for Ukraine of the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, sending troops to quell protests in Kazakhstan, a move that leaves Russia exposed militarily on two fronts. She also urged Germany to end its strategic dependence on Russian gas, symbolised by the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia to Germany, saying it was part of a wider problem of the west’s dependence on the resources of autocrats. In Washington the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said he could not envisage gas ever flowing through Nord Stream 2 if Russia invaded Ukraine. He was speaking alongside the German foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, an opponent of the pipeline who has to navigate support for the project from the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz.Here, at last, was the Joe Biden that anyone on vigil for America’s teetering democracy had been waiting for. In historic National Statuary Hall at the US Capitol, a year to the day after it was overrun by an authoritarian mob, the US president gave his clearest dissection of “the big lie” and his clearest denunciation of his predecessor, Donald Trump. It cannot have been easy for a man who spent 36 years in the Senate, sometimes reaching across the aisle to unsavoury characters, who speaks of bipartisanship with cloying nostalgia and who ran for the White House as an apostle of national unity. Biden could have used Thursday’s anniversary to offer olive branches, finding comfort in the traditional role as head of state as an excuse to rise above political battles of the day. His instinct may have been to be as apolitical and anodyne as a monarch. But this was the moment that the commander-in-chief realised the clear and present danger posed to American democracy by one of its major parties and former leader gone rogue. The alarmed voices of fellow Democrats, activists, journalists and historians about the state of emergency finally seemed to have got through to him. He understood that platitudes and prayers for a miraculous Kumbaya moment will no longer do. You cannot reason with extremists whose premise about a stolen election and the insurrection being the will of the people – wrapped up in the cult of Trump – is fundamentally irrational. You cannot debate Fox News or fascism-curious Facebook users. Instead, the threat must be looked squarely in the eye. “We must be absolutely clear about what is true and what is a lie,” Biden said, his voice at times trembling with anger. “Here’s the truth: a former president of the United States of America has created and spread a web of lies about the 2020 election. He’s done so because he values power over principle.” He never mentioned the name “Trump” but he did refer to the “former president” often. In a remark that would have stung at Mar-a-Lago, Biden said: “He’s not just a former president; he’s a defeated former president.” He also noted: “You can’t love your country only when you win.” In a 25-minute speech that sounded like campaign-trail Biden, he recalled how the Confederate flag, symbol of the pro-slavery south in the civil war, had been brandished in the halls of the Capitol for the first time a year ago. “We are in a battle for the soul of America,” he acknowledged. “I did not seek this fight, brought to this Capitol … But I will not shrink from it either. I will stand in this breach, I will defend this nation. I will allow no one to place a dagger at the throat of this democracy.” It was a bracing call to action from a president accused of spending too much of his first year in office cutting deals with Republicans, for example on new roads and bridges, rather than throwing himself into the arena in a bare-knuckle fight over voting rights. It was also clear evidence that Barack Obama’s celebrated 2004 convention speech – “There is not a liberal America and a conservative America – there is the United States of America” – no longer meets the moment. It would be as naive as claiming that America no longer sees race. But will it make a difference? Most Republicans, including leaders Mitch McConnell and Kevin McCarthy, are not even in town. Rightwing media dismissed the speech as divisive. Trump was quick to issue a statement that said Biden “used my name today to try to further divide America. This political theater is all just a distraction from the fact Biden has completely and totally failed.” With divisions having only calcified since 6 January, that is likely to be the Republican message going forward. But now, at least, they know they have a fight on their hands. Biden is no longer standing by amid the slow-motion coup and white nationalist backlash now taking place. “The way you have to heal, you have to recognise the extent of the wound,” he told reporters at the Capitol just after his speech. “This is serious stuff … You’ve gotta face it. That’s what great nations do, they face the truth, deal with it, and move on.”Peter Bogdanovich, Oscar-nominated writer and director, has died at the age of 82. The film-maker, whose many credits included The Last Picture Show, What’s Up Doc? and Paper Moon, died of natural causes according to his daughter Antonia Bogdanovich. Bogdanovich started his career as both a film programmer and a critic, writing articles for Esquire. After moving to Los Angeles and striking up a friendship with director Roger Corman, he secured his first directing gigs, making the sci-fi picture Voyage to the Planet of Prehistoric Women, which he chose to have his name removed from, and in 1968 Targets, a breakout crime thriller. In this time he also became close friends with Orson Welles. His next film was 1971’s The Last Picture Show, starring Jeff Bridges, Cybill Shepherd and Cloris Leachman, a rapturously received drama that earned eight Oscar nominations and won two awards. It was also a surprise commercial hit, making $29m from a $1.3m budget. Upon its 50th anniversary, the Guardian’s Scott Tobias referred to it as an “elegiac masterpiece”. “I was moved by the reviews,” he said to the New York Times in 1971. “The picture seems to have brought a melancholy poetry out of the critics by which I feel quite flattered. All the reviews were strangely personal. I suspect most of the critics are of an age to have grown up at the time of the movie.” His next film was screwball comedy What’s Up Doc? starring Barbra Streisand and Ryan O’Neal, a hit that became the third highest-grossing film of 1972. It was later included on the American Film Institute’s list of the 100 greatest comedies of all time. The 70s also saw him reunite with O’Neal for Paper Moon, a comedy that saw the actor’s daughter Tatum O’Neal win an Oscar for best supporting actress. He turned down The Godfather, The Exorcist and Chinatown. “I was hot,” he admitted to Vulture in 2019. His later films included Mask, starring Cher, and The Cat’s Meow, starring Kirsten Dunst. He also had a recurring acting role in The Sopranos and had a small role in both Kill Bill films after living in Quentin Tarantino’s guesthouse for a year. In 2010, he joined the University of North Carolina School of the arts as part of the directing faculty and in 2014 made his last narrative film, the comedy She’s Funny That Way starring Jennifer Aniston and Owen Wilson. In 2018, he released his final film, the Buster Keaton documentary The Great Buster: A Celebration. Tributes have started to emerge from the industry. Francis Ford Coppola released a statement to Deadline to say he was “devastated” at the news. “He was a wonderful and great artist,” he wrote. “I’ll never forgot attending a premiere for The Last Picture Show. I remember at its end, the audience leaped up all around me bursting into applause lasting easily 15 minutes. I’ll never forget although I felt I had never myself experienced a reaction like that, that Peter and his film deserved it. May he sleep in bliss for eternity, enjoying the thrill of our applause forever.” On Instagram, Tatum O’Neal paid tribute with an emotional post. “Peter was my heaven &amp; earth,” she wrote. “A father figure. A friend. From ‘Paper Moon’ to ‘Nickelodeon’ he always made me feel safe. I love you, Peter.” Guillermo del Toro also tweeted: “He was a dear friend and a champion of Cinema. He birthed masterpieces as a director and was a most genial human. He single-handedly interviewed and enshrined the lives and work of more classic filmmakers than almost anyone else in his generation.” Bogdanovich is survived by his two children Antonia and Sashy.The acting boss of the Gambling Commission is to be given the job on a permanent basis, the Guardian understands, signalling government approval for his vow to crack down on gambling companies’ “recidivist behaviours” before a landmark industry review. Andrew Rhodes became acting chief executive of the regulator in June 2021, after the sudden resignation of Neil McArthur. Rhodes has since hinted at plans to take a sterner approach, in line with expected reforms of gambling legislation, due to be unveiled in a government white paper early this year. During a speech last month, Rhodes said the commission would take a hard line with companies that transgressed the conditions of their licence more than once, promising to crack down on “recidivist behaviours towards compliance”. He also said that the industry had “overstated” its repeated warnings that punters would be driven towards the black market if regulatory reforms were too draconian. “We are not going to be deflected away from that mission, in some sort of race to the bottom because someone else is worse,” said Rhodes. “That’s the whole point of having a regulated market.” The Guardian understands that Rhodes’ tone has been well received within the Gambling Commission and in government, with the culture minister, Nadine Dorries, expected to confirm his permanent appointment imminently, on a salary of £150,000. Rhodes will oversee two of the most important moments in the Gambling Commission’s history, the government gambling review and the fiercely-fought competition for the fourth national lottery licence. Rhodes is a former director of operations at the Department for Work and Pensions and also served as chief operating officer of the Food Standards Agency. He was also chief operating officer of Swansea University, his alma mater, and chair of the community trust at Swansea City football club. In 2020, Swansea City became the highest-profile club in the UK to drop a betting company as its sponsor, amid a broader campaign to disentangle gambling from football. The Guardian has approached DCMS and the Gambling Commission for comment.One in five parents give their children pocket money by bank transfer, a survey has found, with youngsters in the UK set for a pay rise from their families this year. Children’s average weekly “salaries” are to increase from £6.97 to £7.58, a jump which is almost twice the rate of inflation, according to a poll by Barclays that surveyed parents of children under 16. While most parents are sticking to giving out cash, typically in exchange for help around the home, more than one in five (22%) opt for bank transfer. Household chores including washing the car, looking after younger siblings and cleaning the bathroom tend to reap the highest rewards, the survey showed. It also found that sweets and chocolate are the most popular way for children to spend their earnings. More than two-fifths (44%) of children decide to put the money towards a later purchase and more than half of adult respondents (53%) said their child is good at managing money. Children’s early experiences with handling money can shape their financial behaviour as adults, according to the study published by the government’s MoneyHelper service. By the age of seven, the University of Cambridge research found, most children understand the value of money, delaying gratification and the idea that poor choices now can affect their future. Gillean Dooney, head of families at Barclays, said: “If your kids are happy to do their bit around the house, pocket money is a really good way of teaching them the value of money at an early age.” Barclays’ research found many parents start giving their child a small amount when they turn seven. “Many of the parents we surveyed said that this was one of the biggest motivators behind giving pocket money to their children,” she added. Dooney recommended creating a visual savings plan with key milestones that children could track and tick off along the way. Other banks have also rolled out services in recent months to encourage families to talk about finances early. In October, NatWest acquired the London-based children’s pocket money app RoosterMoney, which is designed to get parents and children to practise budgeting skills together.Robbie Dunne has seven days to appeal against a finding that he subjected his fellow rider Bryony Frost to a prolonged and deliberate campaign of bullying and harassment following the publication on Thursday of the three-person panel’s written reasons for their decision. Dunne was banned from riding for 18 months, with the final three months suspended, following a six-day hearing of the case by the British Horseracing Authority’s independent disciplinary panel in December, 14 months after Frost lodged a formal complaint with the regulator over her treatment by Dunne. The hearing heard evidence that Frost had been subjected to physical, verbal and online bullying by Dunne, including deliberate intimidation during races and a “promise” by Dunne to Frost that “I am going to hurt you” after a race at Southwell in September 2020, which Frost understood to be a “genuine threat”. While the charges against Dunne related to events between February and September last year, Frost also told the panel that she remembered Dunne “opening his towel up and shaking himself in front of me” when she was an amateur in the early stages of her career. Her claim that Dunne had been abusive to other riders was supported by Hannah Welch, a former amateur jockey, who gave “compelling” and “entirely believable” evidence that he had reduced her to tears with verbal abuse after a race in November 2018. The panel’s written reasons make it clear that while its decision was made on the balance of probability, its members “were not troubled by any borderline decision on either guilt or sanction” and were satisfied that “this was deliberate, unwarranted targeting of a colleague over a considerable period of time. “The matters proved were consecutive, occurred over six months, as time went by deepening in spitefulness, and consequently the words and acts achieving the increasingly chilling effect upon the victim which Mr Dunne intended”. Frost, the panel felt, was a “truthful, careful and compelling witness” whose “account of her treatment … was clear, consistent, credible and unshaken by cross examination.” Dunne, by contrast, was found to be “an unreliable witness”, and “the sweep of his denials, criticisms and reasoning meant that his evidence was unbalanced and at times, difficult to follow.” The panel also rejected Dunne’s “specific criticism of Ms Frost’s riding”, adding that “even if there was force in that criticism this would not justify his conduct in any of the incidents we considered”. The panel also highlights the extent to which its members believed other jockeys and weighing room staff allowed Dunne’s actions to go unchallenged. “We reminded ourselves, in his favour,” it says, “that some at least of the facts found involved Mr Dunne operating within a culture approbated by his peers. Observers observed without intervention. If this is the weighing room culture, then it is out of step in equal opportunity race-riding.” In particular, the panel highlights evidence given by Frost and Dunne’s fellow riders concerning incidents of verbal abuse at Stratford and Southwell in July and September 2021 respectively. At Stratford, the panel heard what it described as “compelling evidence” from a fence attendant that Dunne had unleashed a “barrage” of abuse at Frost shortly after a race, and that he was “shocked at the nature and ferocity” of the insults used. However, the riders Adam Wedge and Lorcan Murtagh, who were closer to the incident than the witness, said in statements to the hearing that they had heard “nothing out of the ordinary”. Similar statements from riders including Tom Scudamore, who suggested that a confrontation at Southwell in which Dunne threatened to “put [Frost] through a wing [of a fence]” was “no different from what he would see or hear every third day” were also addressed. “None regarded the altercation as other than the traditional workings of the weighing room,” the panel say. “The evidence that other senior jockeys of standing heard nothing over and above a regular spat … concerned us.” In a postscript to its finding, the panel says that it “had to consider the culture, as it was often described, amongst the community of professional jockeys or in the weighing room”. It concludes: “As these reasons show, we had some concerns about it.. Our role was to inquire into the conduct of Mr Dunne. It is for others to reflect upon more general matters. We confine ourselves to recording our concern arising out of the specific facts of this particular case.”A juror who sat at the trial of Ghislaine Maxwell last month and has now told reporters he was sexually abused as a child has retained a lawyer, the trial judge said on Thursday. A second juror has also said they too discussed the experience of being sexually abused as a child during deliberations, the New York Times reported. The unidentified first juror’s public interviews led defense lawyers in the case to say they will request a new trial. US district judge Alison Nathan asked them to formally do so by 19 January. In an order on Thursday, Judge Nathan said the juror’s retained lawyer, Todd Spodek, had informed her that the juror did not want the court to appoint a lawyer for him as she had offered. Spodek is well known in the New York legal world, including representing Anna Sorokin, who once posed as a foreign heiress to infiltrate Manhattan’s elite social circles. Spodek did not immediately return a request for comment. The revelations by the juror in interviews published by two British publications this week threatened to upend the guilty verdicts returned against Maxwell just seven days ago on sex trafficking and conspiracy charges, among others. In another potential complication, a second juror described in an interview with The New York Times having been sexually abused as a child. This juror, who requested anonymity, said that they, too, had discussed the experience during deliberations and that the revelation had appeared to help shape the jury’s discussions. Maxwell, the daughter of the late press baron Robert Maxwell, was found guilty of sex trafficking in her Manhattan federal court trial last Wednesday afternoon. Ghislaine Maxwell, 60, was arrested in July 2020 and has been in custody ever since, despite repeated arguments from her lawyers that she was being mistreated behind bars in federal detention in Brooklyn, and would not try to flee if released on bail. She was charged with involvement in the crimes of her ex-boyfriend and financier, the late Jeffrey Epstein, who was a convicted sex offender and killed himself in a New York jail in 2019 as he was awaiting trial on further sex abuse charges involving girls as young as 14. The verdict against Maxwell was unanimous. She faces up to 65 years in prison, with the date of her sentencing yet to be announced. In the interviews the juror gave, the panelist said he revealed to other jurors during weeklong deliberations that he was sexually abused as a child, and he said the information helped him convince some jurors that a victim’s imperfect memory of sexual abuse does not mean it did not happen. Memories and how they relate to sexual abuse victims were a contentious point among attorneys during the trial as each side summoned a memory expert to testify. During deliberations, the jury requested transcripts of the testimony by the defense’s memory expert, who said memories can be corroded over time by outside influences and general decay. In the end, the jurors concluded unanimously that Maxwell was guilty of recruiting teenage girls between 1994 and 2004 for Epstein to sexually abuse. After she read the verdicts out in court, Nathan then asked jurors publicly whether they were unanimous and a microphone was passed from juror to juror, who all agreed that it was. Jurors were told they were free to express themselves freely and the man in question gave media interviews. On Wednesday, Maxwell’s lawyers called for a retrial after it was announced that the prosecutors in the case had asked Nathan to investigate the juror’s remarks. “Assuming the accuracy of the reporting, the juror asserted that he ‘flew through’ the prospective juror questionnaire and does not recall being asked whether he had been a victim of sexual abuse, but stated that ‘he would have answered honestly’. Based on the foregoing, the government believes the court should conduct an inquiry,” the prosecutors wrote to Nathan. The juror’s claim that he did not recall being asked about sexual abuse has spurred questions, given that prospective jurors were given a questionnaire which directly asked them about this topic, and the court will now be examining this aspect. Prosecutors asked for a hearing. Separately, the civil case is continuing between Britain’s Prince Andrew and a victim of Epstein, Virginia Giuffre, who claims she was coerced by Maxwell and Epstein into having sex against her will with Andrew, who is also the Duke of York and the second son of Queen Elizabeth. Andrew has denied all the allegations against him and is trying to persuade the New York judge in the case to dismiss Giuffre’s lawsuit. Giuffre was not a witness in Maxwell’s trial.The acquittal of the Colston Four raises questions about new laws imposing 10-year jail terms for the toppling of statues, legal experts have said. On Wednesday, three men and a woman who helped pull down a monument to the slave trader Edward Colston at a 2020 Black Lives Matter protest were found not guilty by a jury after they successfully argued they had a lawful excuse. After the verdicts, the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, was one of several MPs who condemned “destroying public property”. He said powers in the new police, crime, sentencing and courts bill would close a “potential loophole” that limits the prosecution of people who damage memorials. The bill, which is currently going through parliament, would let courts consider the “emotional or wider distress” and increase the maximum sentence to 10 years’ imprisonment regardless of the cost of damage. Some experts, however, said such prosecutions, when heard in front of jurors at crown court, could be destined to fail. Prof Tom Lewis, the director of the Centre for Rights and Justice at Nottingham Trent University, said the bill “will make the trial of those accused of damage to monuments possible only in the crown court, before a jury”. He said: “There is a certain irony in the fact that if the [Colston] defendants had been tried before a magistrate, they may well have been convicted. But in electing to trial by their peers – a right rooted in Magna Carta itself – they secured an acquittal.” The verdict in Bristol, where the statue had stood, sent a “powerful signal” to Boris Johnson and the home secretary, Priti Patel, who had condemned the toppling of Colston and were ushering through the bill, Lewis said. Adam Wagner, a human rights barrister at Doughty Street Chambers, said the verdict was a warning to ministers that the bill would lead to exactly the kinds of outcomes they did not want. “The current policing bill is criminalising peaceful protest,” he said. “What’s going to end up happening is that you are going to have more and more juries acquitting on the basis that they just don’t think it’s right to send someone to prison or give them a criminal record for peaceful protesting, and you’ll have more evidence in these trials of political motives.” But not all lawyers agreed. Zehrah Hasan, a barrister at Garden Court Law and a campaigner with the Black Protest Legal Support, said: “I don’t think we can use this victory as a way to say the courtroom and the law will always make it fair or lead to a just outcome … when obviously there is evidence of discrimination within the jury system, particularly against black and brown people.” At a press conference after the verdict, Raj Chada, who represented two of the Colston Four and has also acted for Extinction Rebellion activists, insisted the verdict did not set a precedent and did not mean people could take the law into their own hands. “[The defendants] had a number of defences, but broadly they have a lawful excuse as to why they committed the acts that they did,” Chada said. “Those valid excuses included their right to free speech, their right to conscience, and that a conviction would be disproportionate interference with those rights. And that they were preventing a crime – it was a criminal offence to keep that statue up because it was so offensive. It is really beyond belief it was up for so long.” The prime minister said people should not “go around seeking retrospectively to change our history”, adding: “It’s like some person trying to edit their Wikipedia entry - it’s wrong.” Robert Buckland, the Tory MP and former justice secretary, told the BBC he thought the jury’s decision was perverse. “I think anybody watching those scenes cannot fail to be disturbed at the very least, and appalled by what happened,” Buckland said. “I don’t think we want to see our crown courts becoming political playgrounds – they’re not places for politics, they’re places for the law to be applied and for the evidence to be assessed.” Jake Skuse, Rhian Graham, Milo Ponsford and Sage Willoughby were cleared after arguing their actions were justified by the offence caused by the presence of the statue in Bristol, the south-west’s most multicultural city.The Home Office has been accused of failing to prioritise the most vulnerable people in Afghanistan after admitting that some of the first people to be accepted under a resettlement scheme are already living in the UK. The Afghan Citizens Resettlement Scheme (ACRS), first announced in August to resettle up to 20,000 people over four years, was designed to offer sanctuary to “vulnerable people, including women and girls at risk, and members of minority groups at risk” after the fall of Kabul to the Taliban. Victoria Atkins told the House of Commons on Thursday the scheme had now opened, with “the first to be resettled … already evacuated and in the UK”. “We are supporting those British nationals who have been assisted by the government to the UK, as well as their families, because we recognise that they experienced the same trauma and have the same needs as their Afghan neighbours fleeing Kabul alongside them,” she said. Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, questioned why the government was counting UK nationals on a scheme meant to prioritise those trapped in Afghanistan. “Clearly British nationals and their families should get support, but why are they being counted in the resettlement scheme? “She [Atkins] will know there is huge concern about rumours that government departments have been trading people and trying to shunt people around in order to reduce the number of people who will be supported, and she will understand how deeply shameful that would be if it were true,” she said. Enver Solomon, the chief executive of the Refugee Council, said he was “very concerned” that the government could be limiting the numbers given access to the scheme by including those already in the UK. “The announcement made today only goes as far as confirming that people in neighbouring countries will be able to access the scheme from the spring and that the pathway for people still in Afghanistan will be limited to a small cohort of people in the first year, leaving thousands of extremely vulnerable people in great danger,” he said. Ministers are also facing claims that women, girls, and religious and other minorities are no longer being prioritised after Atkins implied they would not be among the first tranche of evacuees admitted in to the UK. Atkins, the minister in charge of Afghan re-settlement, said two new safe routes to help Afghans escape to Britain were also due to be opened through the ACRS in coming months. The first will open “from the spring”, according to Atkins, and will involve the UN high commissioner for refugees recommending people in “need of resettlement” to the UK. The second new route, managed by the Foreign Office, will “work with international partners and NGOs” to expand it to others in need. Atkins said it would include “those who are particularly vulnerable, such as women and girls at risk and members of minority groups”. Tim Farron, the Liberal Democrat MP and the party’s former leader, said her words appeared to downgrade a promise to prioritise women and girls. “This represents a total betrayal of people in grave danger. The ministers responsible for this callous decision – which will cost lives – should hang their heads in shame,” he said. Zoe Gardner, policy manager at the Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants, said the scheme presented by Atkins was ill-defined. “Over almost six months, we’ve seen this government repeatedly kick the can down the road when it comes to resettlement, and abandon the Afghan people. Even now the confusion and lack of planning is clear,” she said. The ACRS was originally announced in August, when a statement from Boris Johnson and Priti Patel said: “Priority will be given to women and girls, and religious and other minorities, who are most at risk of human rights abuses and dehumanising treatment by the Taliban.” A Home Office spokesperson said it would be “completely wrong” to suggest that women, children and minorities would not be supported at every stage of the ACRS. “The government has already evacuated thousands of women and girls from Afghanistan – for example female judges, women’s rights activists and a girls football team. Women and girls are being immediately prioritised for resettlement through the ACRS. “As each ACRS pathway opens, those at most risk, including women and children and minorities will continue to be prioritised. The UNCHR will refer refugees most at risk to the Afghan Citizens Resettlement Scheme, including women and girls as per their vulnerability criteria,” the spokesperson said.Conservative MPs told the prime minister that expanding existing support schemes would not be enough to help consumers hit by significant price hikes, as Downing Street ruled out delaying a tax rise this April. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, said on Thursday that the Treasury was examining ways of mitigating the impact of soaring energy prices on consumers when the price cap is reviewed in February. The effect of the new cap will be felt from April, the same month the 1.25 percentage point rise in national insurance will come in. But a number of senior Tories told the Guardian that measures such as expanding the warm homes discount for vulnerable families would do nothing to help the majority of their constituents – saying mailbags were “filling up” with concerns. MPs have repeated calls for a VAT cut on energy bills and the removal of environmental levies – even if it meant paying for the beneficiaries out of direct taxation. Craig Mackinlay – chair of the Net Zero scrutiny group of Tory MPs who say they are concerned about the cost and effectiveness of the government’s environmental measures – said that would “smoothen the immediate load on people … I think that would be a better system, perhaps only temporarily until we get more stability in the international energy market.” Robert Halfon, chair of the education select committee, said there should be other tax cuts for the lower paid to ease the burden, including minimising green levies when energy prices rise. “I’m not a climate denier, I believe we need to act,” he said. “But we have a cost of living crisis at the moment – people in my constituency are struggling to feed their families, only just making ends meet but not eligible for these other schemes.” MPs have said privately that Boris Johnson could face serious rebellions into the spring as they signal their discontent. “It will be a big one – this is bread and butter politics,” said one MP. “Why would people vote Conservative if they can’t feed and clothe their families? Labour are not stupid, they talk about it week after week.” Johnson’s spokesperson said there were no plans to delay the 1.25 percentage point rise in national insurance, which is expected to raise £12bn. Jacob Rees-Mogg, the House of Commons leader, is understood to have asked Sunak during Wednesday’s cabinet meeting to reconsider the increase. “I think it’s important not to lose sight of what the national insurance measure seeks to achieve,” the spokesperson said. “We know that one of the public’s main priorities … is the backlog in our NHS. That’s their priority and that’s what we will deliver on. “In the longer term, it will also tackle another fundamental issue left aside for too long, which is the unfairness in our current social care system. “Those are two key priorities that need to be funded. We’re doing that in a fair and progressive way. And that’s why we are taking this approach.” The Treasury is understood to be examining targeted measures to help vulnerable consumers with higher bills, such as extending the warm homes discount, but Sunak is thought to be sceptical of cutting VAT. Speaking at a vaccination centre in Haywards Heath, the chancellor said there were a number of measures already in place. “Of course I understand people’s anxiety and concern about energy bills in particular,” he said. “Of course we’re always listening, making sure the policy we’ve got will support people in the way we want it to, and that’s what our track record over the last year or two shows.” For example, he said, the government had increased the national living wage in the spring and reduced the universal credit taper rate, as well as helped towards bills for pensioners and vulnerable families. But Rees-Mogg’s intervention is likely to reignite debate in the party over the national insurance rise. Before Christmas, Lord Frost resigned from the cabinet citing high taxation, as well as Covid policy. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said the tax decision had been taken and would go ahead. “We’ve made our decisions. We have a collective responsibility,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. During questions in the Commons, the shadow Commons leader, Thangam Debbonaire, teased Rees-Mogg about his intervention, saying scrapping the tax was “something we have been calling for since it was announced … I wonder – is he about to cross the floor?” Rees-Mogg did not respond directly but said Labour’s call to end VAT on fuel was only possible because of Brexit. “If we were still in the megalithic state that she used to so campaign for … we would not be able to cut VAT on fuel.”Britain’s first wave of coronavirus raised the risk of death by more than 40% for most adults regardless of their underlying health and other factors, research suggests. Scientists examined medical records for nearly 10 million people aged 40 and over and found that the risk of dying rose on average to 1.43 times that of pre-pandemic rates as the virus spread between March and May 2020. The finding means that Covid amplified people’s pre-existing risks by a similar amount, leading those most vulnerable before the pandemic to bear the brunt of the deaths. “Covid-19 seems to have multiplied the death rate by a similar amount for most adults in the UK,” said Dr Helen Strongman, an epidemiologist on the study at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. “It really exploits any frailty or health or demographic risk factor. It picks on people who are already at risk of ill health or death more than other people in the population.” The researchers compared relative rates of all-cause mortality before and during the first wave, taking into account the impact of 50 different medical conditions and other characteristics, such as where people lived, their body mass index and ethnicity. While the first wave of Covid multiplied the risk of death by a similar amount for most people, there were stark exceptions. Mortality rates for those with dementia and learning disabilities rose from three times higher than background levels to five times higher. Meanwhile, the death rates for people of colour and people living in London, which were lower than those of white people and people living outside the capital respectively before the pandemic, increased during the first wave. Strongman said the work, which is published in Plos Medicine, reinforced the importance of protecting the most vulnerable. “No one is completely detached from someone who is frail or in poorer health and therefore at higher risk,” she said. In a separate UK study, researchers found that countries with high levels of trust generally fared better than others at bringing Covid infections and deaths down from their peak levels. As the Covid pandemic took off, countries brought in measures to tackle rising infections and deaths, with many resorting to lockdowns. The measures quickly brought down such levels in some countries, but not in others. “Even if they’re the same measures, they’re not always being obeyed to thge same degree in different places,” said Prof Tim Lenton, the director of the global systems institute at the University of Exeter and a co-author of the study. The research, published in Scientific Reports, looked at more than 150 countries’ resilience to Covid – the rate at which daily cases or deaths fell from peak levels – in 2020. It also explored the stringency of government measures in the countries, based on the Oxford Covid-19 government response trackers, and levels of trust using the World Values Survey. The results show higher resilience to Covid in countries where the stringency of government interventions increased from a low background level in the face of a new wave of Covid, and the level of trust in each other was high – in other words there was a strong “social contract”. Lenton said that in every country where trust is about 40% or higher the peaks were reduced to very low levels of cases and deaths, including in the UK, where trust is near that threshold. “The UK is not a roaring success … and yet once we had managed to peak-out and we got on the decline curve, we actually are a case where we seem to have just enough trust to have really successfully brought the waves down,” he told the Guardian. “Success with this awful pandemic appears to be more hinging on trust in each other than trust in government, which is probably a damn good thing given where we’re at with trust in government,” he added. Stephen Reicher, a member of the Sage subcommittee on behavioural science and a professor of psychology at the University of St Andrews, said the findings fit with evidence that a sense of community identity is a key determinant of adherence to measures such as mask wearing, testing and social distancing. “People, even if they don’t feel personally at great risk, are doing it for ‘us’. And a sense of shared identity – of ‘us-ness’ – is a critical antecedent of trust,” he said. • This article was amended on 12 January 2022 to clarify the description of the main findings.As grim as the crisis in Kazakhstan already appears, it could soon look much worse. Authorities reported on Thursday that dozens of protesters and at least 12 members of the police and security forces were dead. With the internet largely blocked and other communications severely hampered, and with reports of gunfire in Almaty, the country’s largest city, the true toll may be much higher. At least 2,000 protesters have been arrested. After days of largely peaceful demonstrations across the vast country, government buildings have been stormed or set on fire in two cities and witnesses in Almaty have reported looting. “Peacekeeping troops” from a Russian-led military alliance have arrived. The unrest was sparked when the cost of liquefied petroleum gas almost doubled after the authorities lifted price caps – and soon spiralled. Modest concessions did not address the deeper grievances: corruption in a nation rich in oil, where many still struggle to get by while the elite cream off the cash, and the authoritarianism of a post-Soviet state that has never held a free and fair election. The protesters’ numbers and cries of “Old man, out!” have seen off Nursultan Nazarbayev, who led from independence until 2019 and then remained a powerful force behind his chosen successor, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev. Mr Tokayev has now removed his predecessor as head of the country’s security council and replaced his government with an interim administration, but shows no sign of addressing more fundamental demands for political reform. The lack of protest leaders with whom he might negotiate is the inevitable outcome of the regime’s intolerance of opposition. Mr Tokayev, without offering evidence, blames “foreign-trained terrorist gangs” for the unrest, seeking to justify a punitive response. But while force may crush protests, it can only magnify the underlying anger. Calling on the Collective Security Treaty Organization is a particularly risky move – possibly suggesting that Mr Tokayev is shaken by reports of security personnel going over to the side of the protesters, or that he is worried about other parts of the elite. As well as tacitly conceding his weakness, calling in Moscow’s help is likely to alienate many in a country that prided itself on its “multi-vector” foreign policy. The alliance of post-Soviet states has not intervened in a crisis before, but Russia (like Kazakhstan’s other powerful neighbour China) wants stability on its borders and does not want street protests to overthrow another government in the region. The west has limited influence, but is not without leverage. Large sums of Kazakh money are sequestered in London (where “British professional service providers enable post-Soviet elites to launder their money and reputations”, a stinging Chatham House report noted last month). Anti-corruption campaigners have rightly urged that as the rich and well-connected flee, law enforcement agencies, financial institutions and service providers should be watching carefully and reporting, freezing and seizing assets as appropriate. The US, EU and UK should also do their utmost to urge the leadership to respect protesters’ rights.If the Tory party could be summed up in a word, it would be power. The Conservatives have dominated the 19th, 20th and – so far – 21st centuries. Their most successful leaders have anticipated the national mood and shaped their party to profit from it. Boris Johnson won the last election by betting the right way on Brexit. But there is a fundamental disagreement at the heart of the Tory party as to what the future UK economy outside the EU should look like. This question urgently needs an answer, not least as the country looks past the pandemic. In the next six months Britain will almost certainly face a cost-of-living crisis. High inflation may go even higher before it ebbs away. Mr Johnson is in denial about this problem while people face going cold and hungry in their homes. Prices are driven higher by global energy costs, set by cartels such as Opec or gas producers such as Russia. However, the price at which electricity and gas is supplied to the UK’s companies and households could be capped and a windfall tax on oil companies used to reimburse suppliers. State intervention could help ordinary households – but ministers say that this would be at the expense of “this country’s reputation as a hub of international capital and investment”. The government could also permanently reduce bills for the long term by insulating homes. A bold move would be to redesign the electricity market so that gas no longer sets the price, and instead, as the government’s former adviser Michael Grubb suggested, “direct consumer access to cheaper, low-carbon electricity”. Yet nothing is done as the prime minister is hemmed in by a growing anti-green bloc of backbench MPs determined to stop a net zero transformation of the economy from taking place. When the pandemic started, the competition watchdog asked ministers for price-gouging powers. Instead of being able to effectively penalise offenders, the regulator has had to rely mostly on the limited competition and consumer laws. Many firms are putting up prices because they can. Banks, housebuilders and oil companies have all reported bumper profits in recent months while many voters have sunk into debt. For all the talk of a big-government faction in his party, Mr Johnson won’t step in to help hard-pressed families. Britain is experiencing not an unemployment crisis but a participation crisis. There are a million fewer workers than there would have been had the previous trend of more people entering the labour market continued. Some of that is down to Brexit, but mostly it is because workers, especially low-paid ones, are dropping out – unable to get to the jobs they want because of inadequate transport or a lack of affordable childcare. Gathering dust on the government’s shelves is a report with a host of sensible suggestions to deal with this festering problem. Mr Johnson seems incapable of resolving the tensions that he created to win the last election so convincingly. He seems uninterested that people can’t afford the basics in life. A decade of Tory rule has reduced the infrastructure of people’s lives so that it can barely support them. Instead of solutions, Britain has to endure the pin-striped populism of Jacob Rees-Mogg, who disguises his agenda of keeping wealth untaxed with a call to bestow a tax cut on workers, an unsubtle jab at cabinet rival Rishi Sunak. A tax rise that wouldn’t contribute to a cost-of-living crisis would be equalising capital gains with income tax. But no one in cabinet would agitate for that. Mr Johnson sold voters on the idea that he was going to create a high-wage economy using the market’s ability to root out inefficiency. But he has not delivered. Meanwhile the country is lurching from crisis to crisis with no plan to fix the root cause of our problems.The Guardian has been awarded investigation and journalist of the decade in relation to articles on offshore finance and the Windrush scandal. The awards were made by the media industry publication Press Gazette to mark 10 years of its British Journalism Awards ceremony. Past attendees and newsletter subscribers were asked to vote. Amelia Gentleman was named journalist of the decade after she exposed the Windrush scandal. Her reporting showed how people legally resident in the UK were losing access to benefits, being made homeless and facing detention or deportation. The scandal – which often affected individuals who had come to the UK from the Caribbean as children but lacked paperwork – led to the resignation of the home secretary, Amber Rudd. Press Gazette’s judges said: “Amelia’s work exposing the scandalous treatment of Windrush immigrants was astonishing. It set the agenda for weeks and brought down a home secretary (even though the policy came straight from Mrs [Theresa] May). The detail and the case studies were brilliant and everyone followed this story up.” Investigation of the decade went to the Guardian and BBC for their joint work on the Panama Papers, an enormous leak of data from the secretive offshore law firm Mossack Fonseca, which was shared through the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists. Press Gazette’s verdict said: “The Guardian revealed secret billion-dollar deals linked to Vladimir Putin and David Cameron’s links to a secret offshore fund. This was another vast investigation by the Guardian which shone a light in some of the darkest corners of international finance.” The Guardian’s work on the HSBC Files, which revealed the bank’s use of tax havens to avoid paying tax, was also nominated for investigation of the decade. Scoop of the decade went to the Times for its work exposing sexual misconduct by Oxfam workers in Haiti. The Guardian was also nominated in this category for its reporting on Dominic Cummings breaching lockdown restrictions to drive to Barnard Castle during the first pandemic lockdown.The special House committee investigating the 6 January 2021 insurrection by extremist supporters of then-president Donald Trump are hoping to secure the cooperation of the former vice-president, Mike Pence, who certified Joe Biden’s election victory despite pressure from the White House and the violent mob that broke into the US Capitol. Congresswoman Liz Cheney, deputy chair of the bipartisan panel, called Pence a hero for standing up to Donald Trump’s efforts to “overthrow the will of the people” that day and said that the committee is “looking forward” to working with him. “We look forward to continuing the cooperation we’ve had from members of the former vice-president’s team and look forward to his cooperation,” Cheney said in an interview with the NBC Today show on Thursday morning. She said: “Former vice-president Pence was a hero on 6 January. He refused the pressures of the former president, he did his duty and the nation should be very grateful for the actions he took that day.” The panel is chaired by the Democratic congressman Bennie Thompson of Mississippi, who told CNN: “We came perilously close to losing our democracy” when thousands of supporters of Trump, egged on by the then-president in the dying days of his one-term presidency, charged the US Capitol on 6 January last year trying to stop members of Congress, who had to flee, from officially certifying Biden’s election victory in November 2020. The election result was certified hours later after the Capitol had been cleared, with the official act being presided over by Pence, in the vice-president’s role as president of the Senate. Cheney, the Republican congresswoman representing Wyoming, and the daughter of former vice-president Dick Cheney, who served in the George W Bush administration, spoke of Trump putting Pence under pressure to refuse to certify Biden’s victory and of the then-president’s failure to demand that the mob leave the Capitol even as he watched the violent insurrection on live television at the White House. Asked if the panel was considering recommending criminal charges against Trump, Cheney said: “Certainly we will be looking at that, there are important questions in front of the committee such as whether the action or inaction of former president Trump attempted to obstruct an official proceeding of Congress, attempted to delay the count of electoral votes.” She added: “We also know that it was a supreme dereliction of duty, the president of the US refuses to take action to stop a violent assault on the Congress, to stop a violent assault on any of the co-equal branches of government, that’s clearly a dereliction of duty.” Trump has asked the US supreme court to block the release by the National Archives to the committee of relevant materials relating to his conduct on 6 January last year and in the run-up to that event, the most serious assault on the US Capitol since the war of 1812. Trump claims he is protected by executive privilege because he was president at the time, a claim rejected by the Biden White House and lower courts. Cheney said: “We will not let the former president hide behind these phony claims of privilege and we will get to the bottom of … everything that was going on that day.” Asked if the US came close to the results of the valid presidential election being overthrown, Cheney said the country “came very close”. “Our institutions held but they only held because of people who were willing to stand up against the pressure from former president Trump, people in his own Department of Justice … elected officials at the state level who stood up to him and the law enforcement officers here at the Capitol. We need to recognize how important it is … that it never happens again.” She warned that the “threat continues”. “Too many in my own party are embracing that former president, are looking the other way, are minimizing the danger … That’s how democracies die. We simply cannot let that happen,” she said. Meanwhile, in an interview for the New York Times podcast, Cheney confirmed an anecdote from January 6 last year, when she encountered congressman Jim Jordan, a fellow Republican but a far-right loyalist of Trump who had been pushing the lie that Biden did not win the election, on the House floor. Jordan had been standing in the aisle as lawmakers were being escorted away from the encroaching mob, and he said to Cheney, while reaching out to her, the Times relayed: “We need to get the ladies away from the aisle. Let me help you.” To which she sharply replied, having pushed his proffered hand away, the Times reported and Cheney affirmed: “Get away from me. You fucking did this.”Women of the Movement, an ABC anthology series on the often overlooked or underappreciated women of the American civil rights movement, opens with tears of agony – that of a young Mamie Till (Broadway star Adrienne Warren), a black woman whose labor pains are dismissed by a white nurse in a sterile 1941 hospital. It’s indicative of the road ahead, for a series following the brutal, racist murder of Mamie’s son, Emmett, by two white men in Mississippi, 1955, through Mamie’s grief-fueled activism and the eventual acquittal of his killers. But Women of the Movement, crucially, begins with the joy of life: first infant Emmett, cherished by his mother, then the teenager whose killing inflamed the country. This first of a six-part installment, created by Marissa Jo Cerar (The Handmaid’s Tale) and executive produced by Jay Z and Will Smith, jumps from 1941 to the summer of 1955 in Chicago, where Mamie lives with Emmett (Cedric Joe), a charming, soft-hearted boy believably on the cusp of childhood and adolescence, in relative comfort. The series proceeds with the strict chronology and sign-posting of a network procedural. Emmett, hungry for adventure, wants to visit his great-uncle Mose (Glynn Turman) in the Mississippi Delta rather than hang with his mom and her doting boyfriend Gene (Ray Fisher); Mamie is hesitant, fearful of Emmett’s naivety regarding the customs of the deep Jim Crow south, but she relents. They poignantly hug goodbye at the train station. Pilot director Gina Prince-Bythewood plays the fateful encounter between Emmett and grocery cashier Carolyn Bryant (Julia McDermott), a white woman, ambiguously enough to reflect existing question marks – we don’t see what Emmett says to her, there is a wolf-whistle but it’s unclear who it’s from or to – while remaining crystal clear on the dynamics: Emmett, playful and kind, acting innocently; Carolyn, bound by a code of hatred and fear, reacting ominously in anger. By the end of the first episode, Emmett has been snatched from his bed by Carolyn’s husband Roy (Carter Jenkins) and his half-brother, JW Milam (Chris Coy) and taken away in a truck, never to be seen alive again. The remaining five episodes play as a combination of network procedural and educational biopic (with attendant on-the-nose dialogue and production values), focusing on Mamie’s frantic search for her son, insistence that his mutilated body not be hidden from the public, and refusal to let the presumed injustice of the south carry the day without a fight. “Let the people see what they did to my boy,” she famously said upon viewing his unrecognizably beaten face, a line Warren, who at times plays Mamie with a theater actor’s overemphasis, casts with a deep reserve of resilience. At its best, Women of the Movement provocatively explores a chapter of American history most don’t know enough about with sensitivity, faithfulness and care not to exploit trauma. Directors Julie Dash, Tina Mabry and Kasi Lemmons emphasize the constant presence of the clicking camera flash and throng of reporters surrounding Mamie, a hounding familiar to modern viewers but perhaps not to this story. The series is strongest when embedded in the daunting, thorny work of activism with such real-life figures as Medgar Evers (Tongayi Chirisa), TRM Howard (Alex Désert), Simeon Booker (Miles Fowler), and Ruby Hurley (Leslie Silva), the NAACP’s south-east chapter head whose nascent friendship with Mamie, as one of the few female leaders, would’ve made a fascinating dual pole to the series. Instead, its perspective unsuccessfully veers into the white southerners who conduct the trial in Mississippi, with a particularly unsure handling of the killers (who confessed to the murder in a 1956 interview, a year after their acquittal). At times, we’re privy to the Bryants’ private lives – when Roy confronts Carolyn about the store encounter, when JW suggests to Roy they go after the N-word who did “all that talk at the store”, when Carolyn frets about what to wear and say the day of her testimony – moments which barely (and comfortably) humanize them and which Mamie couldn’t possibly know. There’s a version of this story which digs into the Bryants’ hatred and draws deep enough characterizations to prevent viewers from dismissing them as simply bigoted villains from a different era. But that feels beyond the scope and interest of this show, which is supposed to center Mamie and I wish it had kept the murderers to within her perspective – contemptuous, hateful figures she sees in the press and in the courtroom, devoid of empathy or regret. Cutting down on the mechanics of a trial with a foregone conclusion, the bulk of the series’ middle, could have opened space for some of the show’s more intriguing elements: the generational divide between Mamie and her mother Alma (Tonya Pinkins); the pressure the NAACP puts on Mamie, a private citizen reeling from unimaginable tragedy, to speak publicly; tensions between the witnesses of the Till kidnapping and murder, poor Mississippi sharecroppers with every reason to fear any attention, and the activists and lawyers seeking justice. These are reasons to trust the creators’ vision, even if it frustratingly strays from the woman at the center in its first outing. Women of the Movement starts on ABC on 6 January with a UK date to be announcedPeter Bogdanovich was the blazing night-sky comet of the New Hollywood generation whose trajectory got knocked off course a little, by personal tragedy and the contingencies of show business, but kept hurtling onwards with brilliant work and passionate cinephilia to the very end. His first four hits, Targets (1968), The Last Picture Show (1971), What’s Up Doc? (1972) and Paper Moon (1973) were somehow both thrillingly and authentically modern and yet also instantly belonged to the classic pantheon. With the touch of restless young genius, he seemed to reinvent pulp crime, the western, the road movie and the screwball comedy – in short order. I remember Bogdanovich in 2018, frail and unwell as he then reportedly was, dominating the Venice Film Festival with two important movies showing there: his superb documentary about Buster Keaton (whose reputation and importance he typically boosted for the 21st century) and his edited, “salvaged” account of Orson Welles’s lost, sprawling movie The Other Side Of The Wind, in which Bogdanovich himself starred, satirising the trauma of the Hollywood old guard in having the baton prised from their grasp by the young Turks. And Bogdanovich sat at Welles’s feet, the way Truffaut sat at Hitchcock’s, and perhaps consciously assumed the mantle of the sorcerer’s apprentice, although learned the way all Welles’s associates learned, how capricious and hurtful Welles could be. But in his later years, taking a creative comfort in well-crafted comedy in the classic Hollywood style, he found himself being supported and bankrolled by younger proteges like Wes Anderson and Noah Baumbach who were as awestruck by Bogdanovich as he himself once was of John Ford and Howard Hawks. I myself met him only once, at a lunch in London’s Soho to launch his very good and underrated film The Cat’s Meow in 2004, about the mysterious true-crime “Hollywood Babylon” story about the death of a film mogul aboard WR Hearst’s yacht in 1924. He was elegant, smart – a great lover of London – and very funny on the subject of being recognised for his TV acting role as the therapist of Dr Jennifer Melfi in HBO’s The Sopranos and therefore the psychoanalytical grandfather of Tony Soprano himself. Targets was a fascinatingly strange, experimental, underrated and misunderstood work which absorbed the defiant energy of countercultural cinema, with the pulp violence of Gun Crazy or In Cold Blood or Reservoir Dogs. In one plot strand, the horror icon Boris Karloff plays something like himself; in the other plot, a kid becomes obsessed with guns and creating some real horror. The simple association was elegant, ingenious, equal to the meta-horror playfulness that became fashionable 30 years later. The Last Picture Show is a glorious and authentic American film, set in a windblown Texan town where the town’s dying movie theatre (even in 1971, there was agonising about the death of movie theatres, when terrestrial television and televised sports were the supposed culprits) is showing Howard Hawks’s Red River as its final film. A young kid has an affair with a melancholy older woman – magnificently played by Cloris Leachman. Cybill Shepherd (with whom Bogdanovich was to fall in love) is unforgettably stylish. There is much small-town gossip and sexual tension, culminating in a quite extraordinary nude swimming scene, staggering for its calm candour, beyond eroticism, and quite unequalled by anything before or since. In Paper Moon (another piece of Americana in black-and-white) Bogdanovich gave us one of the greatest odd couples in history and the most poignant adult-child turn since Charlie Chaplin and Jackie Coogan. Ryan O’Neal and his real-life daughter Tatum O’Neal are the daddy-daughter grifter team drifting across the Depression-era midwest tricking people out of their money with cons long and short and revealing only their own self-deception and hollowed-out lives. Bogdanovich elicited an eerily good performance from Tatum in particular. Bogdanovich gave his love of comedy free play in What’s Up Doc? with Ryan O’Neal and Barbra Streisand, those quintessential 70s movie stars, and showed that he could construct and control the energies of comedy (as difficult as anything he had done up until then, but less likely to be critically approved, although this film did very well.) The low point of Bogdanovich’s life came with the murder of the actor Dorothy Stratten, who was starring in his film They All Laughed (1981) with whom Bogdanovich was in a relationship, by the man to whom she was married, but separated. Bogdanovich all but ruined himself financially finishing the film which was not surprisingly tainted in the public mind by its grim history, and Bogdanovich found himself criticised for being a part of the misogynist macho culture of movie-making of which Stratten was the victim, a sentiment not entirely mollified by the fact that Bogdanovich married Stratten’s sister Louise who became his producing partner. Bogdanovich found his comeback – though perhaps nothing like the streak of pure inspiration with which he began his career – in 1985, with the bold and heartfelt emotional drama, pointedly entitled Mask, which gave Cher a chance to prove that she was an excellent actor. It was based on the true story of a boy with a challenging craniofacial disorder. Cher played his mother, toughly confronting those who can’t appreciate her son’s inner intelligence and humanity and Eric Stoltz played the boy himself in makeup (in 2022, there would be much more of a debate about appropriate casting). Though plagued with financial worries for a very great deal of the 80s and 90s, Bodganovich kept teaching and writing and working, making an amiable stab in his mid-70s at farce with his She’s Funny that Way. But his late masterpiece was The Great Buster: A Celebration in 2018, his inspired tribute to Keaton and The Other Side Of The Wind, which almost deserves now to be considered a co-creation with Welles’s spirit. Bogdanovich was a native cinema genius, who in his heyday made great films as easily as breathing.A deputy district attorney from California who regularly spoke out against vaccine mandates has died of complications from Covid-19. Kelly Ernby, 46, a prosecutor from Orange county, southern California, who recently ran for the state assembly, died after contracting the virus, her family and friends have said. According to Ernby’s husband, Axel Mattias Ernby, Kelly Ernby was unvaccinated at the time of her death. “She was NOT vaccinated. That’s the problem,” Axel Ernby said on social media posts. A month before her death, Kelly Ernby spoke out against vaccine mandates at a rally outside Irvine city hall. The protest was organized by chapters of Turning Point USA, a conservative youth organization, representing members at California State University, Fullerton and University of California Irvine. “There’s nothing that matters more than our freedoms right now,” Ernby said, according to the Daily Titan, a student newspaper. On her personal Facebook, Ernby also spoke out against Covid vaccine mandates, writing in August that “the vaccine is not the cure to Covid, and mandates won’t work”. Before the pandemic, Ernby also denounced vaccine mandates. At an online town hall in 2019, Ernby said she opposed a new state law that would tighten vaccine rules for California school children. “My fundamental belief is that government should be very small and I don’t believe in mandates,” said Ernby then. “I don’t think that the government should be involved in mandating what vaccines people are taking,” she said. “I think that’s a decision between doctors and their patients … If the government is going to mandate vaccines, what else are they going to mandate?” News of Ernby’s death has gained widespread attention online, underscoring tensions between those who oppose vaccine mandates as a form of government overreach and others who see it as critical protection against Covid and the way to end the pandemic. Among the posted condolences to Ernby’s friends and families, some online commenters blamed Ernby for her own death and posted replies about Ernby’s anti-vaccine-mandate stance. Ernby lived in Huntington Beach, California, an hour outside of Los Angeles, where a number of anti vaccine-mandate rallies have taken place. She had worked in the district attorney’s office since 2011 and specialized in environmental and consumer law, according to a statement posted by the Orangecounty district attorney, Todd Spitzer. “Kelly was an incredibly vibrant and passionate attorney who cared deeply about the work that we do as prosecutors – and deeply about the community we all fight so hard to protect,” said Spitzer in the statement following Ernby’s death. In 2019, Ernby ran for the California state assembly and lost in the 2020 primary to fellow Republican politician Diane Dixon. Ernby later was elected as an Orange county GOP central committee member in 2020 but died halfway through her four-year term. Vaccine mandates have continued to receive pushback, despite soaring cases of the Omicron variant. The Mayo Clinic, the non-profit medical center, fired about 700 out of 70,000 employees who refused to comply with the mandatory vaccination policy, reported NBC news. Employees were told to receive their first dose of the vaccine by Monday or get a medical or religious exemption. Staff who had already received their first jab were told to not delay getting their second shot. “While Mayo Clinic is saddened to lose valuable employees, we need to take all steps necessary to keep our patients, workforce, visitors and communities safe,” said the clinic in a statement, also confirming that 99% of Mayo Clinic employees across all locations complied with the mandate.On the day Christopher Geidt issued his findings on the refurbishment of the Downing Street flat, John Crace imagines the key exchanges that didn’t make it into the report … From the prime minister to David Brownlow, 29 November 2020 Hi David, Can you get a bend on and give me the cash? The Downing Street flat is a complete tip. Just imagine the state that Theresa May left it in. The kitchen looks like something fitted by Peter Jones. I need an answer soonest. Boris From Lord Brownlow to the prime minister, 29 November 2020 Dear prime minister, It would have been nice if you could have used the word “please”. Are you sure the place is really that bad? I’ve checked the price of the wallpaper and it’s £840 a roll, which seems a bit steep. Plus, it’s totally hideous. I don’t mind stumping up but I don’t want to get taken for a ride. Sincerely yours, David From the prime minister to Brownlow, 29 November 2020 Hi David, You seem to have misunderstood your role. The whole point of you is that you do get taken for a ride and in exchange you get a new honour every now and again. You’re already a lord; what more do you want? So can we just get on with it? Carrie has already given Lulu Lytle her instructions and I just need to confirm the money is in place. Not mine, obviously, because I’m struggling to get by on £160,000 a year these days and the alimony payments on the kids are crippling. Besides, I’ve never really paid for anything and I’m not intending to start now I’m prime minister. Boris From Brownlow to the prime minister, 29 November 2020 Dear prime minister, You are quite right. I was forgetting my place. Your taste in soft furnishings is impeccable. I will authorise the payments forthwith. Yours sincerely, David From the prime minister to Brownlow, 29 November 2020 So where’s the money? You said it would come immediately. Can you add on another grand? Dilyn’s just chewed his way through the electrics. From Brownlow to the prime minister, 29 November 2020 Dear prime minister, It will be in your account within the next hour. I am sorry it has taken so long. Yours sincerely, David From the prime minister to Brownlow, 29 November 2020 That’s ideal. Now, you’re sure no one will know that the money has come from you? That may not be such a good look if anyone finds out. Get this right and I promise to think about your idea for a Great Exhibition 2. From Brownlow to the prime minister, 29 November 2020 Dear prime minister, I’m sorry for the delay. No one will ever find out where the money comes from because I am in the process of setting up a blind trust. Once that’s up and running you’ll be in the clear. And thank you so, so much for considering my Great Exhibition plan. It’s been an honour to serve you again. Grovellingly yours, David From the prime minister to Carrie Johnson, 29 November 2020 All sorted. Though I did have to go along with his pathetic Great Exhibition fantasy. Bozza xx From Geidt to the prime minister, 2 December 2021 Dear prime minister, The above WhatsApp exchange has just been passed to me. It completely refutes your previous assurances to me that you had no idea where the money for the unnecessary Downing Street refurbishments came from. Not only does this make you look like a liar, it makes me look like a complete idiot for having exonerated you earlier in the year. Do you have any ideas on how we can resolve the matter in a way that causes least damage to us both? Yours sincerely, Lord Geidt From the prime minister to Geidt, 10 December 2021 Dear Lord Geidt, I am sorry to have taken so long to reply and for putting us both in this awkward situation. I have been going back through my diaries and I think what must have happened is that Dilyn ate my phone so I never passed on the old messages to you. My mistake, old boy. But don’t worry, it will be no big deal. Boris. From Geidt to the prime minister, 10 December 2021 Dear prime minister, Is that really the best you can come up with? No one’s going to fall for that. Please have another think. Yours sincerely, Lord Geidt From the prime minister to Geidt, 19 December 2021 Dear Christopher, We seem to be in this together. So, here’s what happened. I had to change my phone because my mobile number had been posted on Popbitch. And what with all the hassle of transferring data to my new burner, I completely forgot to pass on my earlier message exchanges with Brownlow. From Geidt to the prime minister, 19 December 2021 Dear prime minister, Do you really think that’s any better? Everyone knows that all messages in a WhatsApp chain get transferred on to a new phone. And even if they didn’t, will anyone believe that you just happened to forget that someone had just forked out a six-figure sum to bail you out? It’s all right for you. Everyone knows you’re a liar so they won’t expect any more from you. But I’ve got a reputation to protect. Any suggestions? Yours sincerely, Lord Geidt From the prime minister to Geidt, 5 January 2022 Dear Christopher, I really think you are making a fuss about nothing. Donnez-moi un break. From Geidt to the prime minister, 5 January 2022 Dear prime minister, So here’s what’s going to happen. I’m obviously not going to find you in breach of the ministerial code even though you obviously are. Us chaps have got to stick together after all. But I am going to have to severely reprimand you and make it clear I have grave doubts about your evidence but have elected to take your word. Jesus, I can’t believe I’m writing this shit. Everyone knows not to believe a word you say. And in return – preferably after you’ve brushed your toddler haircut – you’re going to say you humbly and sincerely apologise. Yours sincerely, Lord Geidt From the prime minister to Geidt, 5 January 2022 Top stuff, Christopher. Any chance you could take over the investigation into the Downing Street parties? I’ve got Sue Gray breathing down my neck.A new academic study has claimed that playing fantasy football can lead to a decline in mental health, that worsens significantly the more time you spend playing. In what is claimed to be the first of its kind, research conducted by Nottingham Trent University, and published in the journal Human Behavior and Emerging Technologies, looked at the mental health and wellbeing of fantasy players, an popular activity with more than seven million active players on the Premier League’s fantasy game alone. A survey was taken by 1,995 individuals that recorded their engagement with the game – time spent playing, researching and thinking about fantasy football – and the effect it had on their mood, social adjustment and habits. Whereas about a quarter of respondents (24.6%) said playing caused them to experience at least a mild low mood, that number almost doubled among heavy users. A mild low mood or greater was reported by 44% of those who spent more than 45 minutes playing, more than 60 minutes researching and more than 120 minutes thinking about fantasy football a day. Of those surveyed 20.8% spent more than 45 minutes a day playing; 34% of heavy users said the game caused them at least mild anxiety (compared with 20% of all players) and 37% said it disrupted their lives, causing what the researchers called “functional impairment”. This was considerably more than double the 14% of all players who acknowledged such an effect. Fantasy football is popular across the world, with the survey’s respondents coming from 96 countries. As well as a broad number of games and leagues to choose from there is a massive ecosystem of supporting content that offers advice on how to play, from podcasts to websites and countless social media accounts. Researchers found that the involvement of social media added a “myriad of complex cognitive and social psychological processes that may negatively impact one’s mental health”. They also drew a comparison with video games, observing that in fantasy football there is a relative lack of control over outcomes – with points scored dictated by what occurs on a real-life pitch – something which has been identified as a risk factor in mental health. The average age of those who contributed to the study was 33 and almost 96% of respondents were male. “Fantasy football is unwinnable for the vast majority that play and it is possible that the more a person is invested the more negatively impacted they will be when they ‘lose’,” said Dr Luke Wilkins, the lead researcher in the study and an expert in sport and exercise psychology in Nottingham Trent University’s School of Science and Technology. “Our study highlights the general positives that the game can bring, but also warns of the potential negatives, and provides justification for the idea that more should be done to monitor the amount of time being dedicated to playing fantasy football.” Researchers are carrying out further work focusing on a group of high-engaged fantasy football players and tracking the mental health of players over the course of a Premier League season.Boris Johnson has been accused of corruption after it emerged that he sought funds for his flat refurbishment from a Conservative donor while promising to consider plans for a mystery “great exhibition”. The prime minister is facing fresh questions after newly published WhatsApp messages with the Tory peer David Brownlow show Johnson called parts of his Downing Street residence a “tip” and asked for “approvals” so his decor designer, Lulu Lytle, could “get on with it” in November 2020. He signed off the message by saying: “Ps am on the great exhibition plan Will revert.” Lord Brownlow replied: “Of course, get Lulu to call me and we’ll get it sorted ASAP! Thanks for thinking about GE2.” On Thursday, Johnson was forced to make a “humble and sincere” apology for the texts not being given to his independent ethics adviser during an initial inquiry last spring. The first Great Exhibition was held in Hyde Park in 1851. Plans for a “Great Exhibition 2.0” were discussed by Brownlow and the then culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, weeks after the WhatsApp exchanges, official records show. Asked what the great exhibition plan Johnson had referred to was, his spokesperson said it was an “idea that wasn’t taken forward”. He added that instead “Festival UK” – formerly known as the Festival of Brexit – would be going ahead in 2022 but could not explain the difference between that event and the great exhibition plan. On 18 January 2021 Brownlow held a meeting with Dowden at the Royal Albert Hall “to discuss plans for Great Exhibition 2.0”. A government source indicated it was a “private initiative” from the Royal Albert Hall, of which Brownlow is a trustee according to his register of interests. Several events similar to a “Great Exhibition 2.0” have been considered by the government. Originally conceived by Theresa May’s administration as a “Festival of Brexit”, then “Festival 2022”, the government-backed £120m event was given the green light by Johnson and will go ahead this year under the name “Unboxed”. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, said it appeared Brownlow had access to Johnson and Dowden “because he was paying” for the refurbishments. She said if true, it would constitute “corruption, plain and simple”, and added: “No one should be able to buy access or exchange wallpaper for festivals.” The Liberal Democrats’ chief whip, Wendy Chamberlain, said: “It stinks of the worst kind of Conservative cronyism, with Boris Johnson seemingly happy to scratch his lord donor’s back to get his flat spruced up in return.” The WhatsApp messages were published as part of letters exchanged by Johnson and his independent ethics adviser, Christopher Geidt. For a second time, Lord Geidt found that the prime minister did not break the ministerial code over the payments for the Downing Street flat refurbishment, but Johnson was criticised for acting “unwisely”. The prime minister apologised for the texts not being handed to Geidt last spring, saying he had not remembered them and did not have access to his phone due to “security issues” – thought to relate to when his mobile number was discovered online. In thinly veiled frustration, Geidt said the saga “shook my confidence” and added that if he had seen the evidence when writing his first report, he may not have ruled that Johnson tried to make the correct declaration and seek advice at the first opportunity. While Johnson initially told Geidt he did not know Brownlow was funding £58,000 of renovations to the No 11 residence until “immediately prior to media reports”, the full details of the prime minister’s direct request for funds were published on Thursday. The WhatsApp messages revealed an “intimacy” between Johnson and Brownlow, said Sir Alistair Graham, a former chair of the committee on standards in public life. He told the Guardian: “It shows he was well aware of what was going on in Downing Street. It raises the question about how Johnson wouldn’t have known he was providing real cash for the refurbishment. “It would certainly provide an incentive for his idea, getting close to the prime minister in order to get it off the ground, by helping him with his refurbishment. It adds to the unsavoury nature of the whole exercise.” No 10 denied there was anything untoward about Brownlow’s meeting with Dowden and stressed the peer had acted with integrity since first being approached to chair the Downing Street trust. A spokesperson said it was normal for ministers to meet stakeholders and hear proposals put to them, adding: “In line with normal practice this idea was referred to the relevant department, considered and ultimately not taken forward by the government.” Brownlow was contacted for comment. The ‘missing exchange’ 29 November 2020, 12.59pm Boris Johnson: Hi David I am afraid parts of our flat are still a bit of a tip and am keen to allow Lulu Lytle to get on with it. Can I possibly ask her to get in touch with you for approvals ? Many thanks and all best Boris Ps am on the great exhibition plan Will revert. 29 November 2020, 3.44pm David Brownlow: Afternoon Prime Minister, I hope you’re both well Sorry for the delay I was out for a walk and didn’t have my ‘work’ phone with me. Of course, get Lulu to call me and we’ll get it sorted ASAP ! Thanks for thinking about GE2 Best wishes David 29 November 2020, 4.10pm David Brownlow: I should have said, as the Trust isn’t set up yet (will be in January) approval is a doddle as it’s only me and I know where the £ will come from, so as soon as Lulu calls we can crack on – DavidDavid Brownlow, the Tory peer who originally funded Boris Johnson’s flat refurbishment, was a keen backer of plans for a new Great Exhibition. The first Great Exhibition, in 1851, was the brainchild of Queen Victoria’s husband, Prince Albert, and took place in a huge “crystal palace” in Hyde Park, displaying 100,000 objects over more than 10 miles. It was intended to showcase cutting-edge technology and creativity from across Britain and the empire, and from other foreign nations, including folding pianos, printing presses and early versions of bicycles. Brownlow, a trustee of the Royal Albert Hall, was inspired to create a new version of the event jointly with the London venue. Downing Street said Brownlow’s idea was referred to the culture department and he met the then secretary of state, Oliver Dowden, at the Royal Albert Hall to discuss the proposal in January 2021. It came when Brownlow was in the midst of setting up the Downing Street Trust, the vehicle designed to fund the pricy refurbishment of Boris and Carrie Johnson’s No 11 Downing Street flat. But No 10 said it decided to proceed with Festival UK instead, an event in which Brownlow is not involved. Its first incarnation was as the Festival of Brexit, proposed under Theresa May and becoming a Johnson 2019 manifesto pledge. In the manifesto, the Conservative party said: “The Festival of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in 2022 – a national celebration which coincides with the Birmingham Commonwealth Games – will encourage our leading arts and cultural organisations, universities, research institutes and businesses to come together to inspire the next generation in British innovation and creativity.” That now has yet another iteration, Unboxed, comprising a number of projects across the UK with free events, installations and online experiences. It is part of what No 10 calls its year of celebration, which includes the Birmingham 2022 Commonwealth Games and the Queen’s platinum jubilee. Plans for a Great Exhibition 2 may yet surface as a private endeavour. For now, Brownlow is honorary vice-president of the Windsor Platinum Jubilee Celebrations.If Richard Arnold studies the history of Ed Woodward, his soon-to-be predecessor as Manchester United’s most powerful executive, he will comprehend how the close season may be the sole chance to make his tenure a success. Nine summers ago Woodward appointed David Moyes as United manager after Sir Alex Ferguson’s retirement and never truly recovered. Moyes lasted 34 Premier League games of a six-year contract before being sacked and Woodward’s failed search for the right manager extended across the next seven years, as Louis van Gaal, José Mourinho and Ole Gunnar Solskjær came and went without delivering a 21st title, before an interim manager, Ralf Rangnick, was brought in to allow the club to regroup. When they did this the gun was fired on the head-hunting process for a fifth permanent United incumbent since Ferguson departed. Candidates may include Mauricio Pochettino and Brendan Rodgers but, simply, Arnold has to get the decision right. Do so, appoint a man who can make United challengers again, and all the ire Woodward suffered from disaffected fans will evaporate. Fail and Arnold will be branded as a second Woodward, his first managerial appointment will have to be removed and the pressure regarding the second will increase. Woodward believes Arnold has learned from witnessing his time in charge. Yet United can operate as a top-heavy structure, so whether Arnold can delegate more than he, Woodward and Joel Glazer, the executive co-chairman, have previously done will be vital. This, it is understood, is his aim: to give more autonomy to departmental leaders when superseding Woodward as CEO on 1 February. Arnold, who attended Bristol University like Woodward, joined United in 2007, rising to group operations manager in 2013. When discussing his candidacy for the top job, the 50-year-old informed United’s board he intended to sharpen strategy and advocate greater consultancy, while making clear the tough decisions will be made. Arnold and Woodward were drivers of United’s first football director and technical director appointments – John Murtough and Darren Fletcher respectively – a move which indicates he understands the importance of an overriding structure. Although Arnold will remain heavily involved in United’s lucrative commercial operation, Murtough and the manager will report to him. But Arnold intends to leave the football operation to them. Do so and he will, indeed, have learned from Woodward, whose downfall beyond bad management and player recruitment lay in a failure of optics: for too long a perception was allowed that he was heavily involved in all decisions regarding on-field strategy. Arnold, who is said to be data-driven and has a mixed popularity within the club, is about to strap himself into the “hell of a ride” that is leading United: the characterisation offered by Woodward, to friends, regarding a global behemoth which is also a soap opera and cultural institution. On taking over in 2013 Woodward’s task was made more challenging after Ferguson ended a glittering 26-and-a-half-year reign, having to not only replace an all-time great but drag a club geared solely to Ferguson into the 21st century. Woodward believes his legacy might have been different had Ferguson stayed on for another year. But he did not and thus Arnold had a ringside seat as Woodward went through his quartet of failed managers and a slew of scattergun signings that included Ángel Di María, Bastian Schweinsteiger, Daley Blind and Radamel Falcao. Woodward, to his credit, acknowledged these twin faultlines and tried to eradicate them. But, as United have a caretaker manager in the ongoing search for the magic candidate, the first remains. So, too, does the second: the team are 22 points behind the leader, Manchester City, which is approximately their average finishing margin to the champions of all campaigns since Ferguson left. Woodward believes if City’s Pep Guardiola or Liverpool’s Jürgen Klopp had been hired they would have led United to a title. Arnold, who previously worked at PricewaterhouseCoopers and in the technology industry, is responsible along with Woodward for United’s admirable policy of not raising season ticket prices for a decade. He is chair of the club’s fans’ forum, too. But unless there is a serious upturn on the pitch, he will be labelled another money man of the owners, the Glazers, who is unable to feel the invigorating pull of the game and United’s proud place in it. In 2012 Arnold said: “We don’t sign players to sell shirts. We are reliant on 25 players and they are all massive stars. We have 25 George Clooneys.” The citing of a super-rich A-list Hollywood actor was unfortunate because it suggested United were in the business of lucrative paydays rather than focusing on silverware. “We have 25 Gary Nevilles” might have been more apt. With Solskjær’s replacement of Mourinho as permanent manager in March 2019 came Woodward’s much-trumpeted strategy of a “cultural reboot”. This included having players with an “X-factor”, “attacking football”, respecting the club’s “history” and “winning”. Having to undertake this exercise, though, illustrates how lost United had become. And, really, only the final element should form a core philosophy: winning – with the league championship the priority. It is what Ferguson, Sir Matt Busby and Ernest Mangnall did when creating United’s rich heritage. As Woodward heads for the exit, he claims responsibility for an overhaul of the academy, scouting and player recruitment, rating United’s football operation as only 10% away from the finished article. Given the game’s constant churn and evolution, the missing tenth may never be achieved. Arnold’s mission, then, is simple: sign the manager who can finally take United out of the post-Ferguson era and into one defined by that next, and thus far, elusive title.Good morning. Novak Djokovic awaits his Australian Open fate in a Melbourne immigration hotel. New South Wales hospitals are anticipating Covid-related admissions to triple. And deadly protests in Kazakhstan has hampered the bitcoin network. Novak Djokovic is awaiting his Australian Open fate in a Melbourne immigration hotel as he mounts a legal challenge against Australia’s decision to cancel his visa. Djokovic’s lawyers succeeded in a bid to stop him from being deported on Thursday with a full hearing in the federal court now scheduled for Monday. The tennis champion spent eight hours detained at Melbourne airport overnight before Australian Border Force officials announced he had been denied entry into the country on Thursday morning. They cited a failure to meet Australia’s Covid vaccination exemption requirements. Djokovic’s wrangling with authorities over entering Australia has inadvertently highlighted a different plight: those of the refugees and asylum seekers stuck for months, and years, at the Park Hotel which has been described by detainees as a “torture cell”. The Serbian president has accused Australia of “maltreatment” of the tennis star and Djokovic’s family said he is the victim of “a political agenda” aimed at “stomping on Serbia”. Dozens of protesters and at least 12 police officers have died during the ongoing violence in Kazakhstan, authorities claimed, as “peacekeepers” from a Russian-led military alliance arrived in the country at the request of the embattled president, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev. The protests were sparked by rising fuel prices in the west of the country but quickly spread to encompass other regions and turned into a general protest against corruption, poverty and inequality. Protesters are angry with Tokayev and benefactor Nursultan Nazarbayev, who ruled Kazakhstan between independence in 1991 and 2019 and has remained powerful behind the scenes. The unrest in Kazakhstan – which is the world’s second-largest centre for bitcoin mining – has led to an internet blackout, significantly hampering the global computing power of the bitcoin network. Today marks the one year anniversary of the insurrection at the US Capitol when extremist Donald Trump supporters tried to overturn the official certification of Joe Biden’s presidential election victory. Biden on Thursday forcefully denounced Trump for spreading a “web of lies” about the legitimacy of the 2020 election in a desperate attempt to cling to power. Meanwhile, the special House committee investigating the 6 January 2021 insurrection are hoping to secure the cooperation of Mike Pence, the former vice-president, who certified Joe Biden’s election victory despite pressure from the White House and the violent mob that broke into the US Capitol. Australia NSW hospitals are preparing for Covid-related admissions to triple as cases of the virus soar, forcing further cuts or delays in care that could have long-lasting health impacts, doctors and medical experts say. Covid cases have spread to remote parts of northern Australia for the first time – just days before the expected onset of the wet season that will cut road access to large swathes of the Cape York’s Indigenous communities for months. General practitioners say they are being given a “laughable” supply of vaccine for the rollout to children, warning they will struggle to inoculate them ahead of the return to school in February. Archived advice shows that health officials were warning federal and state governments about Covid testing overburden almost a year ago. They warned that widespread community transmission could see testing sites overwhelmed by demand and “alternative testing methods”, including rapid antigen testing, could help alleviate pressure. Norfolk Island is experiencing its first Covid outbreak of the pandemic, with spiralling case numbers having already forced more than 10% of the population into isolation and raising concerns about the local health system’s reliance on medical evacuations. The world France’s data privacy watchdog has fined Google and Facebook a combined €210m ($AU331m) for hampering users’ ability to stop the companies tracking their online activity by making it difficult for them to refuse cookies. The Spanish government has distanced itself from minister Alberto Garzón, after he told the Guardian that factory farming is damaging the environment and leading to the export of poor-quality meat. French MPs have passed the government’s controversial vaccine pass bill, which requires people to be fully vaccinated to enjoy social, sporting and cultural activities. It follows Macron’s pledge to ‘piss off’ those without jabs. Recommended reads When the drilling platform in the Gulf of Mexico exploded in 2010, Stephen Stone escaped with his life. But in the years that followed, he came to feel deeply betrayed by the industry he had once trusted. “I didn’t think the industry was this bad,” he said. “It just kind of takes some hope from humanity, shatters your illusions a little bit.” Director Matthew Walker’s irresistibly fun and jaunty documentary I’m Wanita follows an artist you’ve most likely never heard of, but after a viewing will probably never forget: Wanita Bahtiyar, Australia’s self-professed “queen of honky tonk”, country music singer and longtime sex worker. This film shows us life dreams do not have to disappear as youth fades. Are you beset by poisonous comparisons? Try to covet what you already have, writes advice columnist Eleanor Gordon Smith, instead of feeling shame at what you lack. “Set aside some time to look at your life like an envious outsider peeping in,” she writes. “Ask what else people would say of you while thinking ‘I wish I were more like that’.” Listen This is a replay of an episode looking at one of 2021’s landmark cases. In May last year, Australia’s Fair Work Commission ruled that Deliveroo rider Diego Franco was an employee, not a contractor. The case could have ramifications for the wider gig economy, where the use of contractors has led to widespread job insecurity, and workers are subjected to dangerous conditions. Reporter Naaman Zhou explains how the case unfolded and how, in the face of increasing pressure to give workers better rights, some companies are changing the way they operate. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Leaving Stuart Broad out of two of the first three Ashes Tests was a poor bit of judgment that will come to define this tour. Media roundup The NSW government is preparing to reintroduce some Covid restrictions, including closing nightclubs, banning singing and dancing in pubs and cancelling major events, the Sydney Morning Herald reports. The Northern Territory has entered a snap lockout and introduced a vaccine pass system, according to the ABC. Here is what you need to know. And if you’ve read this far … Here’s three quick steps to saving thousands in super fees. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.A mother who was “fixated” on suicide for more than a decade fatally drugged her two young daughters before killing herself, an inquest has heard. Tiffany Stevens, from Bolton, had feared 18-month-old Darcey Stevens and three-year-old Casey-Lea Taylor would be put into care after her death, the inquest heard. The 27-year-old gave her children lethal substances before taking a cocktail of drugs in the murder-suicide at the family home in Little Lever on 21 January 2019. Their bodies were not discovered for about a week. Stevens had spent five years in care herself as a child and endured a “traumatic” upbringing after her father died of a drug overdose when she was five, Bolton coroner’s court was told. Stevens’s mother, Bobby-Jo, said her daughter was fixated on suicide from the age of 17. “For Tiffany, she was going into another dimension and she would live on. She just thought the world was corrupt and bad, no matter how much we tried to reason with her,” she said. Dr Adrian West, a forensic clinical psychologist, told the inquest that online searches relating to suicide methods were found on Stevens’s phone. He said she had written that she was sorry for what was going to happen but she was unable to get over her past and had a mistrust of social services. Stevens took an overdose when she was 19 and went on be referred for mental health treatment on at least eight separate occasions between August 2011 and April 2017. However, she failed to attend the appointments. She had a history of self-harm and had been diagnosed as having traits of a borderline personality disorder, the inquest heard. While both children were known to social services, the inquest heard there were no grounds for the local authority to apply for Darcey and Casey-Lea to be removed from Stevens’s care The bodies of Stevens and Casey-Lea were discovered under a duvet on a mattress in the living room, while Darcey was found in her pram near the front door of the property. The assistant coroner for West Manchester, Peter Sigee, concluded that the two children were unlawfully killed without suffering. He concluded that Stevens was of sound mind when she took her daughters’ lives and her actions would have constituted an offence of murder. He added: “This has been one of the saddest cases I have heard.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.An SUV filled with 10 bodies was left outside the office of a Mexican state governor in a public square lit up with holiday decorations, officials said on Thursday. The bodies were crammed into a Mazda SUV left before dawn near a Christmas tree in the main plaza of the state capital of Zacatecas. The state governor, David Monreal, said in a video filmed at the plaza that the vehicle contained bodies of people with apparent signs of beating and bruising. “They came to leave them here in front of the palace,” he said, referring to his offices in a centuries-old building at the Plaza de Armas of the city, also called Zacatecas. The federal public safety department said a man drove the truck into the plaza, then exited the vehicle and walked away down an alley. Monreal said security has been a major challenge in Zacatecas and that he would bring down the violence. “Bit by bit we will recover our peace. What we received was a cursed inheritance,” he said. Zacatecas has become one of the most violent regions of the country due to turf wars among rival gangs. In 2021, the state registered 1,050 murders, about 260 more than in 2020, according to official data. The state is a key transit point for drugs, especially the powerful synthetic painkiller fentanyl, moving north to the US border. Once dominated by the defunct Zetas cartel, Zacatecas is being fought over by a dizzying number of cartels. Those jockeying for turf include the Sinaloa, Jalisco, Gulf and North-east cartels as well as remnants of the Zetas who call themselves “Talibans”. President Andrés Manuel López Obrador has been unable to significantly reduce homicides in Mexico. There were 31,615 killings in the first 11 months of 2021, a decline of just 3.6% from the 32,814 in 2020.• An article published on 30 December said: “The UK reduced its quarantine period from 10 to seven days last week if people test negative by lateral flow.” This was true at the time only for England, not the whole of the UK (NHS England will create up to 4,000 emergency beds, p7 from p1). • A technical problem meant that the nine-letter word solution to the Word wheel of 30 December was missing from the following day’s edition (31 December, G2, p12). The solution was NARRATIVE. • Other recently amended articles include: Ministers must act now on NHS staffing crisis, health chiefs warn Two years of coronavirus: how pandemic unfolded around the world More than 40% in US do not believe Biden legitimately won election – poll ‘Thematically richer than the Bible’: what I learned at the first annual Boss Baby symposium Cornelius Kersten, the speed skater who has ended Team GB’s long wait Wild birds can be killed to protect game birds in England – new guidance A picture in time: the Tasman Bridge disaster UK travel industry urges ministers to drop international Covid tests Drax dropped from index of green energy firms amid biomass doubts Pittsburgh New Year’s Day meteor explosion equivalent to 30 tonnes of TNT, says Nasa Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.